hi there
I guess I'm on my son isn't here tonight
so I'm doing this in my relatively
technologically clueless manner there's
one thing I've noticed about getting
older
I have kept up with computer technology
pretty well I would say but I do find
maybe because of the demands on me in
the last year maybe I'm not stupider
it's possible
so anyways hi everyone nice to see you
here looks like I've got the chat
working is everything working looks like
it all right so I'm going to start with
some questions that people sent me
anyways thank you for all be for all you
you for being here by the way it's very
much appreciated it's quite remarkable
as far as I'm concerned that you tuned
in to listen to me talk with you I
definitely do appreciate it so I'm going
to start with some of the questions that
people sent me earlier and I'll keep an
eye on the chat YouTube chat as well so
hopefully the audio is good what about
that how's the audio there guys
so now Adam W Patterson asked me a
question that got 410 votes he said I am
a web software developer are you hiring
or can I volunteer for anything I can
build anything I can automate things I
could simply be an assistant of sorts
thank you for your time well what I
would like to say about that is first
Thank You Adam it's much appreciated and
a lot of people have volunteered their
time to me and their and their
technological expertise and as much as
I'd like to make use of it that simple
truth of the matter is that I'm
sufficiently overwhelmed by the
complexity of my life at the moment that
it's very difficult to undertake a new
collaborative project with anyone I mean
generally speaking before all this
political what would you call it before
all these political events overtook my
life I was already scheduled probably
about six months to a year
you know all my time was already eaten
up and of course the addition of
everything that's happened in the last
year - that has occupied my time to a
degree that is was is really somewhat
unimaginable and so I just can't take on
additional help which is so strange
because you think that help is help and
that it would save time but you know
it's very difficult to enter into a
collaborative relationship with someone
and especially if you want to give them
credit and do things properly so at the
moment I'm afraid that I can't entertain
any such offers even though I'd like to
and there may come a time in the future
especially when I'm hopefully starting
to work more on this online university
project I've got a few projects to
finish up before that the new
personality test which we've just about
dawdled bugs worked out of and also the
high school version of the Future
authoring program are all we're all set
up long before any of this happened so I
have to clear them out before I can
concentrate on a new project and I
finished a book over the last couple of
years - called twelve rules for life an
antidote to chaos which is now available
by the way if you're interested on
Amazon for pre-order and so anyways this
is my round about way of saying thank
you very much but I can't accept more
help at the moment because my time is
too restricted to make proper use of it
so um plays Noren how to use the results
in the new personality test for progress
in life try to compensate some sites
that that received fewer points well at
the risk of sounding self-serving that's
actually why we developed the self
authoring suite was to help people
improve their let's say performance and
mental health now we don't have direct
evidence that will that will improve
personality but I suspect that that
evidence would take a very long time to
accumulate what we do know is that the
self Arthur and suite especially the
future Arthur ensuite helps people helps
University students for example stay
enrolled in university increases
the probability of that by about 25% and
increases grade point average by about
the same and there's good theoretical
reasons for assuming that writing is a
good way of writing about yourself and
about your past and about your future is
a good way of catalyzing personality
transformation because it appears that
personality the human psyche is
organized at the highest level of
abstraction using something like self
narrative and a well-developed narrative
makes a frame for your life and helps
you stabilize your negative emotions and
also experience more positive emotion
because you only experience positive
emotion relationship to a goal and that
can make goal-directed activity a lot
more rewarding so you know it's a lot
easier to engage in activities that
aren't intrinsically rewarding if
they're linked to something that you
really find important and so I would say
if you want to work on your personality
well the first thing you have to do is
figure out who it is that you want to be
and then you have to make a plan and
maybe you have to clean up your past as
well and the self authoring suite was
designed you know quite carefully in
order to help people do that with a
relative minimum of effort not that it's
easy because it's not but a relative
minimum minimum of effort compared to
other technologies let's say and like
like long term psychotherapy and to make
it cost-effective as well so okay so
mm-hmm another question
voted out 77 votes Australia is holding
a plebiscite on whether to legalize gay
marriage I'm against the yes campaign
but only because it's backed by cultural
Marxists I'm curious to hear your views
on gay marriage
well I would be against a to of was
backed by cultural Marxists because it
isn't clear to me that it will satisfy
the ever increasing what would you call
demand for an assault on traditional
modes of being now with regards to gay
marriage specifically that's a really
tough one for me because you know I can
imagine
I can't do anything really other than
spoke platitudes about it I suppose
unfortunately you know if if the marital
vows are taken seriously then it seems
to me that it's a means whereby gay
people could be integrated more
thoroughly into standard society and
that's probably a good thing and maybe
that would decrease promiscuity which is
a public health problem although
obviously that's not limited to gay
people
although gay men tend to be more
promiscuous than average probably
because there's no women to bind them
with regards to their sexual activity
the problem is is that it does seem to
me to be part of a wedge and it isn't
obvious to me that that legalizing gay
marriage has done anything to decrease
the demands that the radical left
neo-marxist types are placing on
traditional society so those are my
views I know they're confused you know
because I'm in favor of extending the
bounds of traditional relationships to
people who wouldn't be involved in a
traditional long term relationship but
I'm concerned about the undermining of
traditional modes of being including
marriage which you know has technically
and and historically being a union
between a man and a woman fundamentally
for the purpose of raising children in a
stable and and an optimal and stable
environment so and marriage has already
taken a fair bit of damage over the last
few decades you know poor people are
increasingly less likely to be married
and that's really not good for them as
far as I'm concerned
hi I'm currently going through a hard
time as a first-time mom with a nine
month old I feel depressed and anxious
and I'm highly neurotic and volatile can
you suggest anything to help me be a
better mom well you know lots of people
have a hard time with their nine months
old I guess the first question would be
are you getting enough sleep do you have
enough help
are you eating enough especially in the
morning you know and you're gonna feel
highly neurotic and volatile too
some degree because well you've been
through quite a physiological trauma and
it's very demanding to have a newborn
baby so the best thing I could say not
knowing you is to make sure that you
have people around that you can talk to
about your baby and that you can and and
that you can take a break when you need
to and have someone spell you I mean
that's often the role that a husband
plays in the first year of a baby's life
is that he can he's supposed to watch
the mother to make sure that she doesn't
get overwhelmed by the demands of the
baby and so I would hope that you're
able to ask for support when you need it
and not to be afraid of asking for
support especially to get arrest and to
get something to eat because that's
really important especially in the
morning other than that I can't tell you
anything really specific unfortunately
given that I don't know anything about
the specifics of your situation if it
gets out of hand you know what you
should go the other thing I should say
is if it gets out of hand you should go
speak with your with your doctor with a
professional because you might have
postpartum depression there's some
dispute about whether that exists and as
an independent diagnostic entity but you
can certainly be physiologically
stressed and if you have a
predisposition to depression then that
kind of physiological stress and sleep
disruption can bring it on
so I would say if it really gets out of
hand don't hesitate to go talk to
someone professional you know it's it
may be necessary to do that because you
don't want to fall too far down the hall
that's for sure so Emma jovanovich says
dr. Peterson I want to thank you because
this isn't a question for what you do
I'm a 22 year old girl and your videos
are helping me so much with figuring my
life out you are alone or helping me be
braver every day well I'm really happy
about that you know what I like your
emphasis on bravery you know because one
of the things that we've learned as
clinicians say is that when you help
people overcome anxiety it isn't that
you make them less anxious necessarily
although I think you can do that to some
degree by having people confront some of
the demons in their past but instead of
making them less anxious you make them
braver and that's not
the same thing right because there's
lots of reason to be anxious the world's
full of uncertainty and fear and reasons
for fear and reasons for pain but to be
braver means to confront those
voluntarily and that's really a good
thing
when will the next Bible lecture occur
October 24th will be three of them
before the end of December and I want to
keep them going into the future they
they've been quite successful I would
say and I would like to go through the
whole book although that would probably
take me the rest of my life but I do
really think it's necessary because it
is the case that the specific narratives
and the meta-narrative that are that are
embedded in the biblical stories and its
surrounding literature are at the
fundament of Western culture and we need
to reconnect with that in order to make
sure that that our culture stays strong
and I don't think it's particularly
strong right now and that's a very bad
that's a very bad thing for everyone it
leads to nihilism and despair and and in
an ability to plan for a meaningful
future and cynicism and all of those
things and that's especially bad for
young people because when you're young
and your life is ahead of you it's the
last the last time that you need to be
nihilistic and cynical it's definitely
not good so
dart pyar 2 says how can you dispute the
theory that Jesus is just a rewrite of
the sun-god myth well I wouldn't
necessarily dispute that theory although
I would dispute the just I mean the
strange things about the biblical
stories and let's say about the New
Testament stories is that they echo
across multiple levels of analysis and
so there is an astrological element to
the Christ story that Jung wrote about a
fair bit in a book called ion which is a
very terrifying book and there are
echoes of the myths of the Sun God and
but the funny thing is and this is one
of the things I can't really understand
about the biblical stories is that they
manifest themselves at multiple levels
of interpretation simultaneously and you
could say that that's merely a
consequence of continual historical
reworking and I suppose that could be
the case but the fact that they manifest
themselves as a personal story and as a
cosmic story and as a historical story
and as a mythological story and that it
all works at the same time strikes me as
as pointing to something that's really
somewhat beyond our current level of
understanding
I can't elaborate on that a lot because
it would take us into places that I
really would rather not go but I do
believe that like there's something
synchronous using Jung's terminology
about the about death and resurrection
story and the synchronous element is is
associated with the fact that the story
echoes across so many levels of analysis
and my sense is that when something
echoes across many levels of analysis
that means that it's approaching
something like a very deep truth so I
know that isn't normally how we go about
determining what constitutes truth but
we don't know everything about how to
determine what constitutes truth yet and
there are many things that we have yet
to figure out and that's certainly one
of them as far as I'm concerned so there
is a sun-god myth element certainly and
parallels between Christ and Horus for
example but that doesn't mean you can
just say it's just a rewrite
I don't think that the I don't think
that that's historically or a
psychologically accurate
have you watched Rick and Morty no I
haven't many people have told me to
watch Rick and Morty although they said
it's very dark and well that doesn't
bother me so much I suppose although I'm
plenty dark perhaps without adding to it
so but I would like to watch it and I
probably will so I would love for you to
do come and do a talk in Montreal well
you never know that might happen I've
been talking to God saw the both doubt a
fair bit you know he's coming to Toronto
November 11th
so we can do the talk that was shut down
by Ryerson back in August so I'm looking
forward to that so what's the best way
to stop drinking alcohol and start doing
my best in my psychology degree it's
affecting my study but I can do very
well if I stop I'm 26
well Paul what I would say is I think
you should do the future authoring
program and you should really
concentrate there's a section in it that
helps you determine what your positive
view of your future would be but another
section that helps you determine what
would happen in your life if your
negative habits got out of control and
one of the things that can really help
you control your alcohol intake is to
really really think through what you're
giving up and where you could be in five
years if you don't get it under control
and proclivity to alcoholism can be a
really vicious thing you know lots of
people get dragged down into the mud by
alcohol excessive alcohol intake
especially if they're sensitive to the
opiate response that alcohol can produce
you could tell that if you when you
drink you know you get alert and let's
say more enthusiastic and energetic and
then you don't want to stop drinking
that's a that's definitely a bad sign
with regards to developing alcoholism so
I would say you need to figure out
something that's that's more important
to you than drinking and also think
through very hard the negative
consequences of continuing it you're at
about the age 26 where you should stop I
mean guys who are going to stop
generally starts slow down pretty pretty
intensely around that age you know get
also treating your psychology studying
as a full-time job can also be helpful
so you know get up at 8:00 morning or
7:30 in the morning and start hitting
the books by 9:00 and put in a 6 to 8
hour date and then even if you do keep
drinking at least you're moving forward
so that's what I can say about are you a
science fiction fan you reference
timeline Starship Troopers in a lecture
and your ideas often remind me of
Harry's Elton's plan from ASA mobs
Foundation series hey well when I was a
kid which is quite a long time ago now I
lived in this town called Fairview
Alberta which was a town of about 3,000
people way too held North 350 miles
northwest of Edmonton and I have this
neighbor across the street across the
alley actually and he had a huge
science-fiction library it must have
been I don't know five thousand books
there 1970s 1960s and 1970s classics
like Heinlein them and Asimov and he
would let me go over there and take like
20 books at a time and I was reading
about a book a day at that point and I
read science fiction like mad probably
till I was about 19 or so and maybe a
little younger than that and then turned
more to classic literature when I got to
college and and also partly as a
consequence of some lessons that the
local library had taught me about what
to read so I was a science fiction fan
I haven't read science fiction for a
very long time although I was pretty
happy with it when I was a kid so
richard van Koppen says yes I have agra
phobia and would love to hear about
anxiety well that's a that's a rough
thing to have egg reform yeah so Agra
phobics get increasingly isolated and
afraid of things outside of their domain
of familiarity and often what happens
with Agra phobia is that people who
develop it or afraid of two things
they're afraid that something is going
to go dreadfully wrong with their health
especially with regards to their heart
so they start to become afraid that
maybe they'll have a heart attack and
that they'll die in public far from a
hospital and that they'll make a fool of
themselves while they're doing it or
well that well they think they're dying
and so it's a combination of two fears
and one is fear of mortality and the
other is fear of social judgment and you
might think about those as the two main
categories of fear that possess people
because one is associated well obviously
with mortality and death and the other
is associated with exclusion from the
group which of course can lead to
mortality and death and so the Agra
phobics get the worst of both worlds
it's often a disease of middle-aged
women but not always and they're often
people who've been somewhat dependent in
their previous lives and then undergo
some traumatic event like a divorce or
the death of someone close and and at
the same time are perhaps experiencing
heart palpitations that are associated
with menopause that brings ideas of
mortality to mind and that can trigger a
panic attack which is very what would
you call it unpleasant experience to say
the least
and then that fear of panic attacks
starts making people avoid and that's
when Agra phobia develops out of anxiety
disorders with panic attacks so you go
out and maybe you go to a mall and maybe
you're in a crowd and maybe you start
thinking about well your heart beat and
about the fact that someone close to you
has died and maybe then you become aware
of your heartbeat and you start to panic
because you feel that maybe it's the
beat is irregular or or that or that you
can't detect it as well as you usually
can and then that makes your heart
accelerate because it makes you afraid
and then you get more more what would
you call sensitive to that and that
makes your heart rate beat even foul
and then you panic you want to get to
the hospital to get checked out to make
sure that you're all right and then you
make your fatal mistake which is that
you avoid going back to the mall and
then you go to the grocery store and the
same thing happens and then you start to
avoid going to the grocery store then
you start to avoid avoiding the subway
or taxis or crowds or anywhere you might
get trapped and wouldn't be able to get
to a hospital soon you end up avoiding
everything and that's when your life
really starts to become a living hell so
the basic way to treat a agoraphobia
there's two ways and one is to develop
some control over breathing to do
progressive relaxation and the way you
do that is that you start with your you
start by concentrating on your toes and
your feet and then your ankles and then
your shins and your knees you move all
the way up your body and let the tension
flow out of your muscles and regulate
your breathing calmly and carefully so
that you can learn to relax and then you
go out you go out voluntarily and start
to confront the things you're afraid of
so for example if you're afraid of the
mall maybe you go to the parking lot and
you look at the mall and then you walk
close to the door and you look inside
you know and then you go home because
that's enough for one day but you do
progressive exposure and that's the base
one of the basic rules of psychotherapy
is that if you're afraid of something
you progressively and voluntarily expose
yourself to it and that generally it's
the voluntary exposure that's curative
right accidental exposure can make you
worse but voluntary exposure can be
curative and that's sort of associated
with the myth of the hero and the dragon
you know the hero is the person who goes
out voluntarily to confront the dragon
and overcome it and get the treasure so
if you voluntarily expose yourself to
things you're afraid of like no more
than you can tolerate then you'll find
that you get braver and you learn that
you can tolerate the fear and that can
chase the Agra phobia back but it's very
important to do it on a regular basis
and if you have a agoraphobia a
full-fledged Agra phobia you should
probably consult professional help
because it's a very tricky condition and
it can be very can really impair you
badly so that's what I would recommend
hi JP I'm wondering how the computer
program that rates university courses as
worthwhile or not is coming along well
it isn't rating them as worthwhile it's
rating them as postmodern neo-marxist or
not and it's actually fully developed I
was going to launch it and I didn't I
didn't design it somebody volunteered to
design it and presented it to me and it
seems to work very well I was going to
launch it at the end of August so that
this year's University students can
benefit from it but there was the
Charlottesville event and then I got
busy and I also wasn't feeling great and
so I just didn't hit the window of time
properly but I hope to be able to launch
it for the January incoming class to do
a video about what's wrong with the
university system the many things that
are wrong with the university system and
to launch the website at the same time I
also had people suggest to me that maybe
it wasn't a good idea that it would
increase polarization but I've thought
about that for about a month and a half
and I think that the benefit to the
consumer so that would be the informed
student outweighs any danger of
polarization
besides that something has to be done
because the situation in the
universities is really ridiculous so
alright so let's see what else we've got
here in the chat room DVS sk8er 3 that's
quite a mouthful says I'm studying to be
a teacher but I'm also an introvert
could this be a big problem
can I still be a successful teacher
actually what seems to predict success
of teaching best is intelligence and
conscientiousness that's the data so far
so if you're conscientious then you'll
probably be fine
I mean extra introverts have a harder
time speaking in front of groups but you
can learn to do that you know an
introvert can become a very successful
public speaker may not enjoy it the same
way that an extrovert might but that
doesn't mean that you can't learn those
skills and what I would recommend for an
introvert is the same thing that I do
when I'm lecturing is I never talk to
the whole group
doesn't matter how big the crowd is I'm
always picking out individuals in the
group and talking specifically to them
so I'll make a point to an individual
and I watch their face and see if
they're nodding and understanding right
because that way you make contact with
the entire audience and then you know
I'll talk to someone for about 15
seconds or so I don't want to put them
on the spot too much and then I shift my
attention to someone else and I sort of
pinpoint around the room that keeps
everybody in the room focused on what
I'm saying because each person reflects
the entire crowd back to you and so I
would say if you're an introvert or if
you want to speak in public in general
forget about the damn crowd it doesn't
exist speak to people one at one at a
time and an introvert can do that just
fine so you know that's where your
strength would be and I would say you're
much more likely to be unsuccessful as a
teacher if you don't work hard at it and
if you're not interested in and so if
you're an introvert I wouldn't worry
about that I don't think that that'll be
the biggest problem that you'll face so
cut Knicks are overrated says ditch your
barber well I actually like my barber
quite a bit but his haircuts a little
shorter than I'm accustomed to and
there's some reasons for that but what
can I say
how hair grows back and I'll be just as
beautiful as I was before in no time so
I guess that's how that is see now
Richard van Copeland says my haircuts
looking fresh so who's that Knicks are
overrated take that yeah so
would you consider having a discussion
with Thomas solo that's Sam Dugan Dugan
Dugan probably yeah I definitely
considered I I'm thinking hard about
reaching out to him I I have some
discussions coming up that you might be
interested in so I'm going to talk on
charcoal willings podcast and he was the
leader of the Navy SEALs team in Ramadan
and he's quite the tough character I met
him down in San Diego a while back a
month ago or so and that was very
interesting I have a video already
prepared
that's an interview with ayaan Hirsi Ali
it was done by Skype and needs some
editing and so that's been a bit delayed
I interviewed or discussed I had a
discussion with Nina paling who's a
great animator you guys should look her
up that's Nina Paley she animated a lot
of the Old Testament and set it to music
and I think her animations are
unbelievably beautiful and the mean she
has great musical taste
they're illegal videos basically she's
making an illegal movie but anyways I
really like your stuff I also had a
discussion with Claire lemon who runs
quill at which is a new news magazine
online which i think has got real
promise and we had a good discussion and
let's see is that it I think that's it
and you probably know or maybe you don't
I just finished a discussion with
Camille Paglia and we went down there I
took a film crew down there to
Philadelphia and met her at her
University and we talked for a couple of
hours and that was really interesting
she's quite the fireball that woman
and unbelievably verbally fluent and
sharp and so I finally met someone who
could talk more than me and and that's
probably good so but I really enjoyed
speaking with her and I think about a
hundred thousand people have watched
that now in a day so that's pretty good
so we talked about post-modernism and
malaise that confronts the modern
University and all of those sorts of
things so Robin Dionne says do you ever
miss Montreal hey I was just in Montreal
I went there to saw saw a band called
Half Moon Run which I bound I would
highly recommend they were playing with
the Montreal Symphony Orchestra and I
got invited to meet one of the singers
and also go in now and see the concert
which was excellent and yeah I'd miss
Montreal Montreal is a great city for
you Americans who are listening should
go visit Montreal man it's a cool place
spend a week there in the summer it's
it's a really good city in every way so
yeah so
it seems we are bound to repeat history
and what as old becomes new again why is
it that we can't seem to find
equilibrium within a society ideas begin
with good intentions but lead towards
the extreme yeah well the reason we
can't find equilibrium is because the
environment that we live in isn't an
equilibrium and so I I kind of imagine
it this way it's like we're we're
traversing the back of a giant this is
obviously a symbolic reference of the
giant serpent and it's it weaves back
and forth and you don't know at any
moment which way it's gonna curve and
turn and so sometimes it turns to the
right and sometimes it turns to the left
and what that means politically is that
sometimes we have to turn to the right
and sometimes we have to turn to the
left and we don't know exactly when
those what would you call we don't know
exactly how to time that and so what we
all have to do is keep our eyes open and
tell the truth and discuss things with
each other especially with people who
have political beliefs that are
different than us so that we can ensure
that we haven't tilted too far one way
or the other and that's why I'm an
advocate of free speech or one of the
many reasons I'm an advocate of free
speech is because it's the continual
dialogue between people of different
temperamental types that keeps us
oriented as close as we can to the
center of the Serpent's back and so
there is no permanent equilibrium
there's only the equilibrium that's
produced by continual negotiation and a
democracy is a formalized negotiation
and so and and and it's free speech that
keeps it healthy and alive so there's no
permanent equivalent equilibrium state
except death no and it's always
negotiation in relationships to like if
you have an intimate relationship or a
familial relationship or even a
friendship there's no final equilibrium
state you have to communicate with each
other honestly all the time and keep the
relationship moving to adjust the
environment that the relationship is
operating in that's how it stays alive
in an intimate long-term intimate
relationship like a marriage it's a
continual it takes continual effort I
mean it's worthwhile effort and and that
but you have to be conscious and awake
to keep your relationship alive
and you have to be communicating all the
time well maybe not all the time because
you can over communicate too but so well
so that's why we can't reach a state of
permanent equilibrium okay let's go back
to the previously submitted questions
how can I overcome my fear of driving on
freeways well one of the things you
could do this is Ellis is do a fair bit
of imagining driving on freeways and try
to make the imagining as realistic as
possible but then the other thing you
can do is again it's graduated exposure
if you're afraid of driving go drive
with someone you trust in a parking lot
on Sunday morning when there's no one
there and then drive around the block
and a street that isn't busy and then go
to the slightly busier Street and then
go to a slightly busier Street and then
find a highway that's like I'm just a
two-lane er so that you know you could
practice merging and that sort of thing
you got to build a plan say with 20
degrees of difficulty with the highest
degree of difficulty maybe being merging
onto a busy four-lane highway and you
could go at night and practice merging
onto the busy highway because it won't
be busy at night so I would say what you
do is you break it down into small steps
and then practice each step until you're
bored with the step and when you're
bored with it that means you're no
longer anxious about it and don't quit
you know like stick at it because it's
really useful to overcome a fear and
once you've identified a fear then
you've identified something to overcome
that can definitely make you stronger so
like good luck with it and get
professional like take a driving course
if you need to as well and find someone
to work with it isn't gonna make you
nervous and isn't gonna harass you but
don't quit it's really important to
overcome a fear like that
no I just picked something I shouldn't
have clicked actually I'm pretty happy
with myself my son isn't here as I
mentioned I'm still not like destroying
this completely although I may have done
it now No
see that's what happens when you brag
because now all I've got is one question
from pigeonhole and not all of them
let's see
got it pack back to chart was the trick
so hey I'm actually managing this up too
badly so let's see here some more
questions from that from the YouTube
people
dr. Peterson I'm really hoping you can
share your thoughts on the biggest
shooting yeah well what I would do is
recommend the biblical lecture I did on
Cain and Abel I would say because I
think that that's a good summary of the
state of mind that somebody has to be in
in order to do what was done at Las
Vegas so you have to be very very
embittered by life in order to do that
sort of thing and you have to be
searching for revenge I would say and
it's not you know you might think well
it's only revenge on other people
because you've developed hatred for
people but it's deeper than that it's
not just hatred for people I would say
it's hatred for being itself and the
desire to take revenge on being for the
outrage of the tragedy and suffering
that's associated with being and maybe
the tragedy and suffering that's been
part parcel of your own life and that
makes you embittered and then past
embittered becomes outraged and past
outrage becomes well homicidal or even
genocidal and that's a terrible state of
mind to be in it's a hellish state I
believe that the best way to
conceptualize the state of mind that
someone has to be in in order to do
something like the Columbine shootings
for example or what happened in Las
Vegas is that you're really and now you
have to speak about it religious
languages you're really out for revenge
against God for the outrage of creation
that's what it looks like to me and
that's a state of mind that's truly
hellish and you can get there by
brooding long enough now it's also
possible I mean this guy didn't have any
previous history criminal history or
anything like that he's pretty old so
you know there's also all also the
possibility of some kind of neurological
pathology that that might be
characteristic of him you know some
degenerative neurological disease there
was a kid years ago at the University of
Texas and Austin who climbed up on the
tower there and shot a number of people
with a high-powered rifle and he had a
fast growing tumor on his hypothalamus
and had reported like these being
overcome with extreme feelings of rage
and so that's another possibility but
I would say the embitterment hypothesis
is the strongest one I would also say
too I noticed the Steven Pinker tweeted
this today is that one of the ways of
controlling this sort of thing would be
for the press to agree not for there to
be a blanket agreement not to publicize
the name or any other identity markers
of the people who do the shooting
because there's also this really what
would you call it arrogance it's a kind
of arrogance and pride last-ditch
arrogance and pride that that is
associated with the fantasies that drive
this sort of behavior and the fantasy is
something like well after I do this
everyone will sure know though who the
hell I was you know even though maybe I
was ignored or unhappy when I was alive
after I'm dead everybody's gonna know
who I was and what I did then you know
so there's this underground desire for
fame I guess its notoriety but notoriety
might be preferable to being ignored and
so you know there's a lot of talk about
gun control and that's understandable
especially with regards to automatic
rifles hmm although I also understand
why the people who are gun owners are
afraid of allowing what they regard is
one of their fundamental rights to be
infringed upon but it would certainly be
useful if we stopped giving people who
do this sort of thing hundred million
dollars worth of free publicity and all
the notoriety they can manage so you
know that's another way of thinking
about controlling it so
and Tonio Silva says you need a break
have a glass of wine relax yeah well I
was just up and I have this little cabin
up north of Toronto about three hours
north that my wife bought with some
money that her dad left her gave her
actually he's still alive and I was up
there this weekend and it was relaxing I
was working a bit on this new
personality scale and on the palea video
but I I did relax a bit and I'm actually
feeling a lot better than I was for the
last Q&A so the mornings are still rough
but by this time of night I'm feeling
vaguely human so thank God for that
because it was pretty brutal so anyhow
Franklin says fans are cancer for the
authentic individual well huh that's a
tough one you know I mean cancer no that
that's too that's too dramatic I mean I
guess that what you're pointing out is
the danger of Fame and I can certainly
appreciate that I can't say that I'm
particularly comfortable with it which
might seem to be rather hypocritical as
it isn't like I've shied away from
exposing my views in public but I felt
that I was driven to that by necessity
and also by my desire to educate people
however I would say despite the fact
that I'm somewhat uncomfortable with it
I think that's mostly because of the
responsibility you know and I've been
terrified for a whole year that I'd say
something you know unforgivably stupid
and you know demolish myself in public
and and you know feel guilty and
horrible about that for the rest of my
life and so far I'd be fortunate there's
been some close calls but I've been
fortunate but you know now when I go
places people often recognize me even at
this little town we went up to this
weekend there were two
well that came up to me in parking lot
and we're excited to beat me and you
know the vast majority of encounters all
of the encounters I have with people in
public have been really wonderful I have
to say that they people have been
extremely friendly and you know
sometimes they're a bit starstruck which
I find strange I can see the projection
you know so it's it's unsettling for me
although I'm not judging anybody for it
it's just a strange thing to observe but
you know I can't complain about the fact
that people are are are are positively
predisposed to what I'm doing I mean
it's such a privilege I can't imagine
what it would be like to be hated
publicly I think that would just kill me
I really think that but um so I mean
it's it's I suppose there's the
possibility of having that sort of thing
go to your head and it's it and I mean
that happens to people but I think I've
said this before maybe on the Q&A so I
have a pretty sensible family and I have
a pretty what would you say I have a
pretty good sense of my limitations I
would say let's we could even call it an
acute sense and so I'm not particularly
worried that this is going to go to my
head in some way that that would you
know inflate my ego or something like
that huh I mean I think one of the
things I have noticed is that I might be
a little less patient with people when
I'm speaking because I'm more used to
that more use to that might be good for
me to be listened to and so I have to
watch that but I'm pretty I've always
been pretty noisy and talkative and so
that's probably something that's plagued
me or being a characteristic of me ever
since I was a little tiny kid I mean I
used to talk all the time when I was a
little little little guy I mean I think
my cousin Eric ponen he probably listens
to this he used to call me motormouth
and that was about exactly right I was
like a miniature Camille Paglia so
anyways I can't complain about having
let's say fansite people have been
unbelievably good to me and I'm really
grateful for that so
what is the best way to find a routine
when you're diagnosed bipolar well I
would say a couple of things the first
is try to set your sleep-wake cycle
stabili so pick a time in the morning to
get up that's the most important thing
just get up at the same time every
morning and that might be difficult both
when you're manic and when you're
depressed but the closer you can stick
to that the better and I would also say
try to stabilize when you go to bed and
maybe a little later rather than a
little earlier because you don't want to
be laying there flipping around like a
like a fish trying to go to sleep you
want to stabilize your sleep weight
routines because bipolar disorder is in
part a circadian rhythm disorder and so
anything that destabilizes your
circadian rhythms is going to increase
the probability that you'll have an
episode and that includes flying I do
believe that at Gatwick Airport there's
a name in England there's a special team
that deals with people whose mania has
been triggered by the overnight flight
so and then the other thing I would say
is stabilise the times you eat because
these basic biological rhythms eating
and sleeping in particular are part of
what stabilize your nervous system and
if you have bipolar disorder then you're
likely to be very susceptible to
destabilize destabilize routine
routinized activities routinize your
life to the degree that that's possible
and I would say the other thing you
could do is use a calendar you know and
like a Google Calendar or whatever
whatever calendar and I would say that's
a good thing for everyone who's
listening to think about so want to plan
out your days and your weeks and you
don't plan a prison right you use the
calendar to design the days that you
would like to have and so part of that's
going to be responsibility obviously
because you have to keep up with your
responsibilities or they overwhelm you
and they multiply like hydras and but
you need to plan for things that you
really want to do as well and the
calendar can really be your friend and I
would say of all the things that you can
do them organize yourself and routinize
yourself learning to use a calendar is
probably among the foremost and
doesn't matter if takes you a year to
get good at it you know I mean you've
got the rest of your life then to
benefit from that and you should make
friends with a calendar like I said and
don't treat it like a prison but it's
really important to to stabilize
yourself as much as possible so
periphery Pete says I fell asleep
listening to you look like battery are
you gonna change it
alright looks like everything was okay
again I use it reflex camera on my and
it has a battery and no electrical
plugin so I'm afraid I'm at the mercy as
above its batteries a very high quality
camera though so I think it's worth
worth the trouble
anyways periphery Pete said I fell
asleep listening to you which you know
that doesn't sound so good so that
part's not so good but this part is good
the next day my sixty filterless
cigarettes a day habit disappeared not
sure what you said but thank you
Claire X hey well if you can figure out
what you were listening to maybe I can
make a tape of things to listen to by
Jordan Peterson while you're falling
asleep to fix your cigarette habit but
anyways I think that's great don't don't
start again or if you do make sure you
quit again I'm really glad to hear that
and I've never had that particular
talent pointed out to me before so
that's pretty interesting and comical so
do you believe there's a strong
undercurrent of Gnosticism in our
country Gnosticism by the way is the
doctrine heretical doctrine from a
classical Christian perspective that you
can attain religious insight through
understanding that's that's an
oversimplified view but things like the
Sacred Feminine and hatred of the
created world God that's a complicated
question I think there's an undercurrent
of wannabe Gnosticism in our country you
know I think that people believe they
can come to religious enlightenment
through understanding but that they're
generally less willing to do the work
that would be necessary to do that then
then is in fact necessary it takes an
awful lot of study like it took me years
of reading you to really start to
understand what he was talking about 10
you know you could think about young as
agnostic but most people who talk about
young haven't read anything he wrote
well that's true often of the things
that people talk about in general but I
mean I think there is a place for
understanding it religious belief or
other otherwise I wouldn't be doing this
biblical lecture series but I think it's
pseudo Gnosticism fundamentally and it's
people putting forward ill-considered
opinions in the place of solid religious
symbolic doctrine and i think that's a
big problem I think it's part of what
makes us weak and I think we are at the
moment meet in our foundations as a
civilization so
I have trouble regulating my emotions I
have a suspicion it's to do with the
fact that I'm 19th percentile and
openness conscientiousness and
neuroticism and second percentile in the
agreeable Ness and extraversion
any tips on dealing with that yeah well
if you're really high in openness and
you're really high in neuroticism that
could be a rough combination the
conscientiousness should actually help
with that although it might make you a
bit perfectionistic the problem with
being high and openness which is
creativity and interest in ideas and
high in neuroticism which is tendency
towards anxiety and emotional pain is
that like open people like to break open
boxes conceptual boxes and see what's
inside like Pandora's box but people are
high in neuroticism are are more likely
to respond negatively to complexity and
uncertainty and if you're an open person
and you're always thinking up new things
you tend to saw off the branch that
you're sitting on on a regular basis and
that can be pretty destabilizing any
tips on dealing with that well I would
repeat what I said earlier I think that
one of the things that you do if you're
high in anxiety is to stabilize your
sleep-wake cycles so get up at the same
time go to bed at the same time and eat
at the same time make sure that you eat
breakfast and a big breakfast too that's
heavy on fat and protein because if
you're hungry and then you stress
yourself especially if you're high in
neuroticism you destabilize your your
insulin production system and it won't
be stabilized till you go to sleep again
so I would say like two things one is
have a big breakfast and then also if
you're feeling particularly anxious try
eating something not carbohydrates and
see if that helps because you you might
be somewhat permanently dysregulated in
your insulin stress related insulin
production that would be worth trying I
would also say that you should shield
yourself to some degree from news
sources and sources of bad news
especially Kotak catastrophic news
because most of it isn't news
the repetition of things that we already
know full well and there's reason to
protect yourself from an onslaught of
negative information especially when
it's not really necessary for you I mean
I don't think you should bury your head
in the sand but constant exposure to the
catastrophes of the world especially
when there's nothing that you can do
about those catastrophes even
hypothetically is something that can
really destabilize people I often tell
people in my clinical practice which
isn't operating right now by the way to
shield themselves from news reports
because it's just too much if you're
depressed and anxious it's just not
something that you need it's not helpful
to you second percentile in
agreeableness and extraversion well you
know one of the things that you can do
is hear that low and agreeableness that
shouldn't dis regulate your emotions but
it might interfere with your
relationships with other people you know
because you might be a little bit harder
to you might take other people's
feelings into consideration less than
might be good for you one of the things
that people who are low and
agreeableness can do is to try to think
of things they could do for other people
and make that a practice you know like
maybe once a week you could consciously
do someone a favor or give someone a
gift something like that and practice
being what would you call it
compassionate and polite you know
that'll expand your personality rather
than transforming it so then maybe you
could have the advantages of being
disagreeable which means you're tough
minded and skeptical and competitive and
and though those can all be really good
things but it would be nice to be able
to leave them out a little bit with some
with the ability to take other people's
perspectives a bit more and to take them
into account and then you know if your
relationships improve that can also
improve your emotional stability because
one of the ways that people regulate
their anxiety is by having people around
them that they get along with because
you know with you if you upset people
then they upset you and especially if
you're hired neuroticism and that can
increase your anxiety and your
so Mithridates says should I hide my
anti femme anti feminism I presume as
our study university to become a nurse
well look you shouldn't make unnecessary
enemies and you probably shouldn't mouth
your opinion more than necessary but I
think you risk damaging your soul under
certain circumstances when you don't say
what you think so I wouldn't hide it
because I think it's dangerous to hide
it and you also won't find out find the
other people that you listen to but I
would say be prudent
you know don't falsify your opinions
when you're writing that's a big mistake
don't falsify your opinions when you're
speaking you can always choose not to
speak you know but if you feel that you
would be doing damage to your integrity
then you have to say what you have to
say do it carefully and and prepare for
the consequences you know probably
prepare beforehand I would say so
I think the hiding is a bad idea like I
said but don't make unnecessary enemies
you know because there's just no utility
in that how important do you believe the
American right is the American right to
bear arms and maintain militias is it
equivalent to the right to free speech
well I don't think anything is
equivalent to the right to free speech
or the responsibility for free speech
how important do I believe that that
right is Jesus that's a tough question
you know my dad's a hunter he has to
under grateful something like that
they're all single shots because he
believes a naming carefully the culture
I come from which is north western
Canada is a rural culture a hunting
culture and people take their guns
seriously there and it is definitely
part of their lifestyle I mean my dad's
hunted his whole life and we ate wild
meat almost all the time I was growing
up I think that the right to bear arms
is one of the markers of a free society
I don't think it's reasonable that only
the police and the army should be
allowed to be dangerous
having said that well I think I'll just
leave it at that I mean I feel obligated
in some sense to go farther especially
with regards to what happened in Las
Vegas but it seems to me that most of
what happens after these mass shootings
is that the event gets absolutely
politicized and people take their
standard positions and there's no moving
either side and that's too bad but
I think that it's unfortunate to use an
event like the Las Vegas event or the
Columbine shootings to make political
capital and I think that's usually what
happens and so I'm not going to do that
I think it's an important right I
believe that the individual should be
allowed or even encouraged to be
dangerous but controlled you know so
along with that right is a
responsibility and and I guess maybe
from the NRA there should be more
discussion of responsibility is that
possible that seems to me to be
reasonable so
any advice for a person with intense
chronic pain that wants to become who
wants to become a oh sorry it's switched
on me oh there we go
Crayola sheep says any advice for a
person with intense chronic pain who
wants to become a contributing member of
society specifically having the
self-discipline to push through pain to
take care of responsibilities well the
first thing I would say is that if you
have intense chronic pain then my heart
goes out to you because that's really
awful and so I think that you can cut
yourself a break I think the fact that
you want to become or continue being a
contributing member to society of
society as a testament to your fortitude
I guess the first thing I would ask you
is if your pain has been reasonably
managed you probably know this and I'm
not giving you any medical advice
because I can't but you might want to
note that there are antidepressants that
are quite effective as long-term pain
medications and you may already know
that but if you don't then you should
check that out because they're not
addictive and they can be a very
effective adjunct I would also say that
the literature on chronic pain tends to
indicate that more activity is better
than less and that and that's partly
because when you get engaged in
something that's meaningful let's say
and important to you that that activates
the dopaminergic system the same system
that cocaine activates and that can
produce a fairly pronounced analgesic
effect so I would say everything that
you can do to get yourself occupied with
things that you regard is important and
worthwhile is actually probably going to
help you manage your pain better it
looks like inactivity is a bad is bad
generally speaking for chronic pain I
mean obviously that's not the case if
the sort of activity that you're engaged
in is of the type that will aggravate an
underlying chronic physiological
condition but I would say make a plan
make a daily plan make a weekly plan
make it you know push yourself a little
bit farther than you can go comfortably
on a weekly basis and see how far you
can get any
here that's because what's your choice I
mean you're laying there suffering is
not preferable to doing things and
suffering not generally so I would say
like more power to you for trying and
but but also do keep in mind that
activity meaningful activity is a good
analgesic so Eric Butler says sheesh
Canadians never get it well I don't know
we get it sometimes Eric come on now you
know give us a break we're just
Canadians we're freezing to death half
the time so you know we do pretty well
given the fact that every day here in
the winter is the equivalent of the
national catastrophe in the u.s. so
anyways Betsey Kirkland says if the
Second Amendment is taken away there
will be nothing to protect your freedom
of speech that is how important is yes
well that is certainly the argument that
people who are motivated to protect the
second Amendment make and I'm not going
to oppose that so
freedom of speech is not licensed to
bully yes actually it is
that is exactly what it is that that's
cleat zero two zero three freedom of
speech is license to bully its license
to offend its license to disrupt it's
all sorts of things that are unpleasant
and upsetting and that doesn't mean that
you should go around bullying or being
disruptive or upsetting that isn't the
same thing but that is exactly what it
is so I'm afraid please zero two zero
three you were wrong now then you say
use of discretion and thought well yes
of course without that's perfectly
reasonable advice and that is what
people should do but you know what
constitutes discretion is often
something that has to be discussed and I
would say that the threat to freedom of
speech is is being put forward very
strongly by people who say things well
it's not as it's not the same as the
license to bullying and bullying by the
way generally speaking is a is a
sequence of physical actions when it's
verbal bullying which also can occur
then that has to be put in a somewhat
different category if you're interested
in bullying there's a great book and
seriously interested in it there's a
great book by a guy named Dan always
called bullying I think that's what it's
called what we know and what we can do
about it Dan always and if you you know
if you're actually concerned about that
sort of thing you could read that book
and see if there are places that you
could put what he advises in schools for
example into practice
Eric Young asked what moment triggered
your obsession with the topics outlined
in the biblical series and mouse well
that's a good question I actually don't
know the answer that I wouldn't say it
was a moment I know that from the time I
was about 16 till the time that I was 24
so I had recurrent nightmares about
nuclear war and so that was certainly
part of it and they were very vivid and
very realistic and so and certainly my
reading especially about the Holocaust
also and then later Solzhenitsyn's
accounts of the Gulag Archipelago for
example the horrors there that was also
a major contributor it was my concern
about the Cold War I would say that was
really the trigger in general because I
wanted to understand I took a political
science degree first and looked at it
from a political perspective but most of
my professors by the time I was in my
third or fourth year insisted that the
reason that people fought the reasons
that people thought were economic and I
never did believe that because well
people fight about the things they value
but it isn't obvious like why people
value the things they value you know so
it's a psychological issue as far as I'm
concerned with a known an economic issue
and so it was my discomfort
dissatisfaction with the standard
political science viewpoint or economic
viewpoint combined with this strange
obsession I had about the Cold War
maybe that's associated to some degree
with my proclivity to depression I mean
who knows you know I don't know I was
obsessed with it and it isn't obvious
why things gripped you and shaky like a
rat you know I guess something there's
something about that that seems to be
associated with what people used to call
destiny so but it certainly wasn't
obsession when I was 23 or 24 when I
started writing maps of meaning I was
thinking about it 16 hours a day at like
top speed just non-stop and the only
relief I could get from it really was to
go work out with weights which I did for
quite
long time gained about 35 pounds in
about a year and a half working out with
weights and I had to quit because I was
eating so much was taking up like half
my life so anyways I don't know what it
was you know who knows who knows what
what darkness lurks in the bottom of a
soul no and why it's there maybe it was
also the fact that I could see in myself
the tendencies that might lead people to
do terrible things and I was also very
very curious about that so maybe that
was an encounter with the Union shadow
it was something like that
Jeremy Joseph says will you lecture in
the Netherlands yes as a matter of fact
I'm coming to the Netherlands in January
to lecture there I'll put the link to
that up on my website at some point in
the relatively near future
so
thuggish strike I've heard depressed
people who stopped down to depressant
said they never helped in the first
place what do you say to that mr.
Peterson
hey that that's certainly possible
antidepressants don't necessarily work
for everyone my personal opinion is that
antidepressants work quite well for many
people whose lives are in decent order
so they have friends they have family
that love them they have a career
they're educated approximately to the
level of their intelligence they have
things to look forward to but for some
reason their mood is extremely distorted
and negative and I've seen
antidepressants have miraculous effects
on people like that I think they're less
likely to work when people have a
plethora of life problems which isn't
exactly the same thing as being
depressed you know like you've been
having a terrible life is not the same
thing as being depressed although the
two can overlap and it isn't obvious to
me that people who you know maybe they
have a drinking problem or a drug abuse
problem and they're unemployed and they
have a pathological family and their
friends aren't good for them and you
know they have a string of failures
behind them and they don't have much to
look forward to in the future at all
about it's it's a lot for an
antidepressant to overcome but under
those circumstances maybe the
antidepressants can help stave off
feelings like suicidal feelings and that
sort of thing but antidepressants don't
work for everyone but some people they
work really well for and if you're
depressed they're definitely worth the
try you know in a month if they're gonna
work also there are a variety of
different kinds of antidepressants and
you have to figure out dose and you have
to figure out when you should take them
during the day and you and you have to
figure out tight so they're they're not
a cure they're a tool for helping
control negative emotion and they can be
very effective so but that doesn't mean
that there
people that they didn't help so that's
what I would say about that
what the player formerly known as most
caucuses what do you think the role of
psychedelics will be in the future
marijuana will most likely be somewhat
legal everywhere in the US and this may
push someone to try stronger
psychedelics is this bad let's start
with the first one I have no idea what
the role of psychedelics will be in the
future I know that the FDA just cleared
ecstasy for use for post-traumatic
stress disorder so that's very
interesting I know there's some very
interesting work being done at Johns
Hopkins on psilocybin mushrooms which
seem to be very effective for example in
helping people stop smoking I think that
we don't know anything about
psychedelics at all I mean we know that
they seem to have an effect on the
serotonin system but that's a pretty
broad brushstroke I think there
incalculably peculiar and that they
reveal things about the structure of the
world that we are beyond ignorant about
beyond a word I have no idea what role
they'll play in the future I don't know
what to think about psychedelics at all
marijuana will most likely be somewhat
legal everywhere in the US and this may
push some to try stronger psychedelics
is this bad I suppose it depends on how
they're used whether or not it's bad and
what the intent is I think there are
very bad party drugs you know
psychedelics aren't aren't for fun I
don't think that that's the right way to
use them at all I think they need to be
used seriously and they need to be used
in a manner that's life-affirming
and they need to be used in a manner
that's commensurate with genuine
exploration and they need to be used
carefully or they can cause a lot of
trouble so Carl Jung said beware of
unearned wisdom and I think that's very
wise so anyways I hope that we continue
investigating them scientifically
because there's much to be learned there
much more than we can imagine as far as
I'm concerned
if to.5 says what's up with all these
frog occurrences I've never seen such
synchronicity man I don't know what to
say about that
I had some frog synchronicity
occurrences earlier this year that just
about made me think so I don't know I
have I I have no idea what to make of it
you know I it leaves me speechless
that's all I can say about that you know
I I do young it Carl Jung had some
strange ideas and and one of them was
synchronicity you know the fact that
things could line up in a way that
seemed meaningful and you know much as I
don't understand how that occurs I've
experienced it many many times and in
very convincing ways and so it's it's
one of the things that leads me to think
that the world isn't structured the way
that we think it is I think it's
structured more like a symphony where
we're and there are times when discs
different parts of the world different
parts of being can come into harmony
spontaneously and all point in the same
direction and why that happens I have no
idea I don't understand it at all so
all right so let's go back to their
pre-existing questions
seaman eric says apologies for the weird
question have you ever performed a
ritual sacrifice no I haven't and it is
a weird question although I can
understand what you would ask it I have
performed psychological sacrifices you
know I suppose when I decided to give up
something that I needed to give up so
that I could move forward into the
future that certainly happened when I
quit smoking and when I more or less
quit drinking I still have a drink from
time to time now but I quit for 20 years
and that was a sacrifice I couldn't
continue to drink again I said I was
from northern Alberta it was pretty hard
drinking culture I really liked alcohol
but I couldn't drink and write and do my
PhD and manage my family
responsibilities it was too much and so
I stopped and that was a good thing so
that was a sacrifice in
you are very critical of post-modernism
and the egalitarian wave of the 60s
isn't there a danger of throwing the
baby out with the bathwater are there
positive things about these movements at
the moment no not really I don't think
there's much positive about them at all
I think they've gone way too far
I think they dominate the humanities the
post-modernism means the fact that the
post modernists point is that there is a
very large number of ways to interpret
any closed set of phenomena something
like that any limited set of phenomena
and that's true but it's it's shallow
it's very very shallow dr. and and if if
I'm throwing the baby out with the
bathwater then it's a baby that needs to
be thrown out and afraid are the
positive things about these movements
not at the moment
right I can't see anything positive
about it I think it's it's degenerated
into any illogical claptrap and I think
it's destroying the universities so the
egalitarian wave of the 60s that's a
different issue let me say I mean I mean
I don't think it's reasonable to deny
the utility of the civil rights movement
in the 1960s for example and or and you
know there were movements before that
like the labor movement that had real
justification for being it isn't that
everything that always happens on the
left is bad I don't think that at all I
think that the people who are let's say
on the lower end of the economic
distribution need a powerful voice in
politics I think that's only fair
and I mean there is room for an
egalitarian oriented ethos but that
isn't what equity is this has become
completely ideological and there's just
no there's just no excuse for it as far
as I'm concerned so
if you plan on doing meetups with more
intellectuals like Camille and and Sam
Harris who would be your pick um well
I'm going to meet Jonathan hi
that would be good I really admire his
work I think he's a really good guy so
I'm looking forward to talking to him
I'd like to talk to Thomas soul I think
it's soul I think that would be
interesting the rest of it I have to
think more about that I mean but those
are two that I would definitely like to
talk to you I'm going to speak with
charcoal Willie I think I mentioned that
so that might be interesting will there
be a third talk with Sam Harris maybe
this time with Sam is he your guest and
you taking your gloves off I don't have
any plans for a third talk with Sam I
wouldn't be opposed to it although I
think we I think we probably got about
as far as we were going to get in our
second discussion I think the two
discussions together actually worked
quite well so I think I think and this
is no I'm not saying this in any
negative way but I think a third
discussion might be might be beating a
dead horse and like I'm not interested
in particularly in putting Sam on the
spot and you know and it's also possible
that he would put me on the spot it
isn't necessarily that I would come out
victorious so to speak I mean he's a
very sharp guy and there's many you know
compelling arguments to be made in favor
of atheism even though I think that
overall it's it's it's it's a stance
that lacks I don't think it contends
with its opponent fairly because I don't
think that the atheist community in
general takes the thought of serious
religious thinkers seriously I think
they tend to strawman
okay
could you please offer advice for
individuals with high intelligence but
low extraversion and low agreeableness
and making and maintaining social
connections and friendships well I would
that's Roger Roger I would say make a
plan again spend some time on it weekly
go to things like meetups there's a site
called meetup.com
that's a good place to meet people do
whatever you have to do meet people take
a course strike up a conversation you
know and ask questions and listen that
that's particularly good if you're low
and agreeableness people really like to
be listened to you know you don't want
to pester them with questions too badly
but you can get an awful long ways by
listening to people and asking them
questions so people hardly ever get
listened to and they're so damn help
happy when you do it that that that
they're likely to open themselves up to
you very very rapidly so get them
talking and when they say something you
don't quite catch or understand and ask
them about it and and that can help you
move forward but put some time into it
like you need to be going out at least
once a week and find some social places
that you can go to regularly that's
another thing you can do you know is
that pick a couple of hangouts like a
local bar or something like that or
whatever but go there regularly and say
hi to the people who own it and run it
and you know eventually you'll be a
regular and then you can start to meet
people by doing that but you know it
might take you two or three years to get
good at it I've seen people go to go
from being afraid to strike up to have a
conversation with a friend in a in a
coffee shop you know like have a panic
attack thinking about that to actually
doing stand-up comedy so you can really
move yourself a long ways with you if
you make a long-term plan so okay John
damn I've only got three dogs after that
says how should a manager use the
perrito principle in his favour at work
I find myself constantly focusing on the
bottom five 20% that causes 89
85% of the team support performance oh
that's easy the managerial literature
the solid managerial literature is
absolutely crystal clear on this spend
all your time with your highest
producers and put your lowest producers
where they can do the least amount of
damage the probability that as a manager
you're going to be able to solve the
problems of the poorest 5 to 20 percent
of your work team is zero you just don't
have the time or the resources at your
disposal
so what you should Jen definitely do in
order to increase performance is to
concentrate on your top performers I
know that's not what managers do they do
exactly what you say they focus on the
bottom five to twenty percent but that's
exactly the wrong thing to do as a
manager focus on your best people
they're hyper productive as you already
know so you know maybe you need to
reconsider a king with your people but
you should have regular conversations at
least with those that you think are
outstanding let them know that you
really what would you say that you're
really happy with their performance and
see what you can do to get obstacles the
hell out of their way because as a
manager essentially what you should be
doing is identifying the top performers
and then doing everything you can to
clear out obstacles in their path that's
the right way to think about it and also
to give yourself enough time to develop
a medium to long term plan and start
fighting fires on a day to day basis you
need at least 90 minutes a week to think
about where you want things to be going
in the medium to long term so but I
can't add overemphasize the importance
of dealing with your talk productivity
your talk your highest your most
productive people that's where all the
gains are that's what all the games are
how are you doing someone is asking me
you said someplace that you felt like
you were at times dancing on broken
glass no I think I said that I was I
always felt like I was dancing on broken
glass are you getting enough rest and
R&R is the food sensitivity getting
worked out I think maybe the food
sensitivity thing is getting worked out
I think it's out the basis of this
depression that's been plaguing my
family for generations but I haven't
figured out exactly what it is yet
I'm working very hard on that with my
daughter who also seems to have the same
problem and it is absolutely brutal
it's absolutely brutal so am I getting
enough rest in R&R that's hard to say
because with the responses that I've
been having that have knocked my health
back it's hard to discriminate between
West and R&R the lack of that and just
getting walloped by by eating what
appears to be the wrong thing so it's so
funny because you know for years I was
very skeptical of anyone who was
concerned about you know gluten
sensitivity and that sort of thing but I
sure learned that that was arrogant so
yeah well I found many times in my life
that you have to be aware of what you
are judgmental about because many things
come back to haunt you so
dr. Peterson do you have suggestions for
how to make a schedule that doesn't make
you a tyrant I've watched your previous
videos put them struggling to make the
weekly schedule that is productive hey
Joshua start by making a weekly schedule
that you want really like imagine that
you're designing your schedule so that
you can have the life you want just
start with that like and be easy on
yourself to begin with you know you'll
get better at it you can have more
responsibilities as you as you practice
so so start by just scheduling in a few
things that you'd like to do and then
load it up over time but remember like
get get your attitude right I'm using
this schedule so that I can have the
days and the weeks and the months that
would make my life that would optimize
my life right not so that I should do
what I need to get done I mean obviously
that's necessary but that's not the
right goal so
what are you thoughts on students taking
adderall are there any long-term effects
there are long-term studies of the
utility of adderall for attention
deficit disorder hyperactivity and the
results are basically negative there is
no evidence that the medications help
with academic performance over the long
run I think that adderall is an
amphetamine it is addictive it cannot
sensitize you to other dopamine agonists
so I would generally say it's something
to be avoided you also want to really
watch it in combination with marijuana
for example or psychedelics because you
can get unlucky and trigger a psychotic
episode and that is not a good thing
because once you have one psychotic
episode you're a bit on the broken side
and it's hard to put yourself back
together so I would say use it sparingly
if at all it's not it's not a good plan
and especially not something good to be
doing eventually so any reading tips for
becoming teachers who don't want to be
corrupted by the current teacher
education at the universities well I
would say you know you can I have a
reading list on my book on my website
Jordan V Peterson calm you could go look
there I'm gonna add some more books to
it read as much classic literature as
you can read history like go into the
libraries and and and look at great
books programs that's what I would say
and you have to educate yourself at the
University you know I mean that's always
being the case and it's even more the
case now is is go back and go back and
read great literature great philosophy
great thinkers and you will learn a
tremendous amount that way and I I think
otherwise there's no way you can avoid
being corrupted by the current teacher
education and universities the education
faculties are absolutely dreadful
absolutely dreadful so
Jorge Gabriel on drugs says Jordan
please help me I'm 99th percentile
openness zero at the percentile and
conscientiousness yeah well how old are
you that's the first thing if you're if
you're young that's because younger
people are less conscientious so that's
one thing to keep in mind if you're very
open like that you need to be doing
something creative but you're gonna have
to learn how to discipline yourself
there's just no way around it and I
would say go do the Future authoring
program that's a good start and you'll
have to learn how to schedule your time
and how to get up at the same time every
day and it's gonna be a real struggle
but you know you you can do it I've had
students who are very high in openness
and low in conscientiousness as graduate
students and they discipline themselves
you need to find something that you're
really interested in that you're willing
to pursue and then you have to hit it
hard so that's what I would say but do
the Future Oxford program and get
yourself a plan and start to implement
it and every time you fall astray then
get back at it
and you know you may have to build up
your conscientiousness over a number of
years and but it's worth doing so
my favorite Tom Waits song I really like
cold water my son does a vicious version
of cold water but I really like cold
water what else I like hoist that rag
and that's pretty decent song I like
dozens of Tom Waits songs what else I
have this mental tic where when anyone
asks me a question having to do with the
name names immediately vanish from my
mind anyway so I really like cold water
I think that's a great song is it wrong
to turn down a promotion is withdrawing
from overwhelming additional
responsibility the equivalent of
ignoring God's call to Abraham not
necessarily it depends on what it is
that you're doing instead like if you
have a better option then take the
better option if you're afraid if it's
just fear then you might want to find
somebody to talk to about that and walk
through your fears and make a plan
because you know it's possible that it's
the equivalent of ignoring God's called
Abraham you know if it's if it's pure
fear then I would take a look at that
but if you have a better option well you
know it's up to you to decide the course
of your life so I wouldn't say that
necessarily it's a bad thing no not
everyone wants overwhelming
responsibility at work and people are
interested in their private lives and
they're interested in their friendships
or their or what they do outside of work
so and I think that's all valid but if
it's just fear then you need to find
someone to talk to and talk it through
to make sure that you're not throwing
away an opportunity that you know the
other thing too is that you know what's
your mood like are you depressed like
maybe you're under estimating your
ability somebody thinks you're worthy of
promotion and you have to remember too
that when you get promoted like almost
everybody feels like an impostor for the
first year when they're promoted to a
new position because you don't know what
the hell you're doing you know so you're
you're kind of acting out the role
before you're qualified to do it but
that's okay you know it's
it's it takes a while to fit into a new
skin so if your perfectionistic that's
another thing to take into account so
alright
I'm not very religious but your way of
presenting the biblical stories have
given me a respect for their function in
society how do I dress those who
actively oppose the wisdom on atheist
principles well look I think what you do
is you know you say what you've found
carefully and if they refuse to listen
and just like put up an impenetrable
wall then you shut the hell up and go
find someone else to talk to
you know that's the doctrine behind not
casting pearls before swine there's
there's a good rule which is if you're
not being listened to then shut up
because you're not where you think you
are there's something going on that you
haven't put your finger on you're not in
the place that you think you're in and
so you could also turn from convincing
to questioning you know if someone's
very very set in their views instead of
opposing them you can ask them to
elucidate their views and you can use
that questioning process it's like a
Socratic dialogue to dig into their
fundamental principles and sometimes
that's a good way of opening up a space
for dialogue so what do you make of the
Gnostic Gospels for example the Gospel
of Thomas well I've read the Gospel of
Thomas and I think it's a remarkable
document there are things in it that are
extraordinarily powerful
I closed maps of meaning in fact the
book I wrote in nineteen
you know with a quotation from the
Gospel of Thomas it's really interesting
too that the first person who got his
hands on that gospel was Carl Jung which
I think is an amazing example of
synchronicity right the first of the
Gnostic Gospels that was what released
into the broader world ended up in Carl
Jung's hands absolutely amazing
historical fact so they seem to me to be
extraordinarily interesting and I read
them I suppose in some ways the same way
that I read the canonical Bible I'm
trying to extract out what wisdom there
is in them or what wisdom I can
understand anyways and utilize it to the
degree that I can so in one of your
videos you mentioned about the power
that creates order from chaos but can
also create chaos from pathological
order can you expand and explain the
latter one well the logos that's the
human capacity for consciousness and and
communication and and awareness and I
think that it's it's actually the it's
actually one of the fundamental
prerequisites for being itself right
which is one of the things that makes me
different from a standard materialist I
I don't believe that there can be being
without consciousness and so I think if
consciousness is a primary element of
well reality that's its irreducible
element of reality something like that a
prerequisite for reality that's another
way of thinking about it and that's the
logos essentially and it's respect for
the logos I would say that's the deepest
doctrine of them of the biblical stories
now what does the logos do well you can
see this in Christ's story most
particularly so Christ is often
presented as a social revolutionary I'll
cast I suppose in the same mold as Moses
you know Moses Moses opposed the
Egyptian tyranny like Christ opposed the
tyranny of the Pharisees and the scribes
and Moses produced chaos as a
consequence of opposing the tyranny
right he first chaos was the crossing of
the water
Moses was a master of water and that's
the same symbolically as being the
master of chaos but after he freed the
Hebrews from the Egyptian tyranny while
they entered a period that was 40 years
long so the story goes almost on almost
complete chaos right abandonment in a
desert tremendous moral confusion lack
of direction and purpose and so
sometimes the hero is the person who
makes order out of chaos but sometimes
the hero is the person who makes
intermediary chaos out of an order
that's become too tyrannical and so it's
it's best to think of the logos as the
force that keeps order and chaos in
balance rather than transport rather
than generating order out of chaos or
chaos out of order because the logos
operates to do one of those two things
depending on the situation and so it's
frequently generating order out of chaos
because there's plenty of chaos but
there's also plenty of tyranny in which
case the hero or the person who embodies
the law Moses is is struggling to
destroy the tyrannical King and replace
it with someone that's more that's
playing a more reciprocal and properly
negotiated game so all right everyone
I'll answer like two more questions I
would say and then I have to stop
because I'm getting fuzzy minded so to
what extent do you think your tips for
young people clean your room make a
schedule read great books are predicated
on your own personality well I think
they're predicated on my personality to
some degree I think that a lot of my
conscientiousness such as it is has been
learned I think I disciplined myself
particularly in graduate school so I
don't think it was that's necessarily an
intrinsic part of my personality I think
it's something that I learned
to do because I felt that I had
something that was worthwhile to do so
it's very difficult to answer it beyond
that because you know I am affected by
my own personality obviously although I
think that I give advice that's pretty
balanced across all the dimensions you
know like I think that you should be
capable of speaking in public fluently
and that you should be able to
communicate with groups of people I
think that you should be able to be
solitary work on your own so that covers
extraversion and introversion I think
that working on control of negative
emotion is important and so that's
partly dealing with anxiety and stress
and that's the neuroticism dimension I
think that you should be agreeable when
it's necessary and disagreeable when
it's necessary and so that's a
broadening along the agreeableness
dimension I think that discipline is
really important in a complex society
like ours discipline is extremely
important and so I think that being able
to be conscientious and reliable and
orderly to some degree is necessary but
that you should be able to withdraw from
that when necessary so that you can take
a break and have some fun I think you
could risk becoming over committed to
your work or to your endeavor so I do
think that that's something that I risk
maybe I trained myself to be too
industrious it's certainly possible
openness well that might be a place
where I have a personality predicated
blind-spot because I'm very very high in
openness and but I do believe that
there's utility in exposing yourself to
the world of great ideas and that's not
for everyone you know I mean there are
people who are fundamentally
conservative in their orientation and
more power to them I suppose but if
you're going to read then you should
read great things and if you're
interested in the life
the intellect the philosophical life
then then there's much to be learned by
reading great books so so I don't think
that I'm overwhelmingly biased with
regards to my own personality but in
that you never know I mean it it's hard
it's hard for it's hard for someone to
judge that about themselves so
can one reason with a stalker my stalker
is highly intelligent at rational making
him scarier by beginning to work with
police and lawyers but wondering if you
have experience in this realm I would
say not knowing the specifics of your
situation know you can't really reason
with the stalker the stalker is already
gone beyond the realm of normal social
behavior you know and I would say with
most stalkers assuming that you're
dealing with the genuine article that
they tend to be a little bit on the
paranoid side or maybe a lot on the
paranoid side and the problem with
people who are paranoid is that they
have adopted a couple of axioms as
absolutely fixed and there's no shifting
them so I would say you know I hate to
give advice in a situation like that but
I wouldn't say that the probability of
using reason is precluded by the fact of
the stalking behavior so good luck with
it that's very scary and so it's hard
for people to be protected from someone
whose intent on following them and
perhaps on making their life miserable
so
insights on how I would overcome or live
with my fear of nellis and
disappointment in man Mike the novel
well here's something that you might
consider so when you're a child and
you're naive then you trust people
because you're naive and you don't know
any better and you don't know that
people can hurt you unless you're a very
unfortunate child so your your trust
isn't a virtue it's just a sign of your
innocence let's say and that kind of
innocence isn't a virtue it's just lack
of experience but when you're older Mike
courage or trust isn't is a hallmark of
courage you extend your hand to people
and you extend your trust to people
knowing full well that you can be bit
like you might be bitten by a Cobra you
can be betrayed and disappointed by
people but you extend your hand in trust
because of courage because you decide to
take the risk and by taking that risk
you open the door to the best in people
and but you won't see that door open
unless you first take the step to trust
and so I would say you have to practice
trusting people you know you have to
share things that are somewhat private
you have to ask people for small favors
and trade small favors and you have to
do that knowing full well that you can
get hurt so think about it as an act of
courage instead of instead of naivety or
or or or or well instead of naivety
let's leave it at that
so that's what I would recommend
all right everyone I'm going to stop so
once again thank you very much for
listening to me tonight I hope that it
went well I can never tell when I'm
doing this but they seem to be popular
I'm very pleased that you all spend so
much time putting these questions
together and and watching my videos and
listening to me I'm genuinely and
continually amazed and grateful about
that so I hope you all have a good month
and that you continue working as hard as
you can on putting yourself together
because the more together people there
are the better things are going to go
for everyone and it's very important as
I've pointed out before that you get
your individual life in order so good
night everyone
and keep up the good work man see ya
you