right it's a nice-looking venue it's
here in Spain right yeah this is my
kitchen
like it looks some rustic yes old stone
house kind of in the middle of nowhere
I've actually I've just my car broke
down a week couple of weeks ago and I'm
gonna try living here without a car and
rely on the kindness of neighbors and
that kind of thing but I need to move
and see I mean it seems I use it like
once a week it seems ridiculous to have
all that rubber and glass and metal and
whatever you know it I mean just sitting
there most of the time when I hardly use
it so I'm gonna try I'm gonna try if
it's intolerable then I'll get another
car but I'm gonna see how it goes nice
yeah I mean obviously my my guess not
obviously to my my mind leaps as you say
all that rubber and glass and steel and
aluminium and gasoline just sort of
sitting there slowly oxidizing my mind
turns to that sort of the Elan musk in
an image of the future where then
whatever has that anymore and we have
some was it called transportation as a
service and I said this cool in my mind
kind of leap back and forth between a an
earlier day where perhaps you would have
a driver show up with a coach or a wagon
only the very rare iris to cover to own
their own coaching wagon they'd be
possible to maybe have a local farmer
who has one and that individual could
bring and you can borrow that when you
needed it and then of course the pop
forward into a circumstance where I
imagine that where you are is what makes
them think goober unreasonable but an
appropriately managed transportation as
a service could totally load balance the
actual utility in need of you know
medium distance medium velocity
transportation on-demand Ryan II would
just say on Tuesday at noon I'm going to
need to have access to a vehicle to go
into town and that's all I need
yep that's right and I mean you should
get I did a little bit of research on
this a while ago actually
I've gotten I know some numbers there
are 32 million vehicles registered in
the UK and at any given moment in time
between 80 and 99.9% of them are not
being used you know and so not only is
all of that waste of resources but
they're sitting there parked on the side
of the road blocking you know blocking
potential access for traffic so you get
all those cars off the road double the
road with effectively immediately right
you know it's yeah the access versus
ownership thing but you know this is
this is actually one of the things I
want to talk to you about today is that
is the my head you get a head you get
over these mindset which is so deeply
ingrained hah my right you know owning a
car so yeah I'd like to get onto that a
little bit later but yeah thank you
really very much for making the time
against talk to me I really appreciate
it and since I last spoke to you I've
actually discovered that game B is not
just I thought it was like a narrative
framework that you would create it in
order to you know explain the precipice
that we were approaching in there and
the profound type of change that was
necessary in the way we go about things
in you know in order to in order to
avert that but actually it's much more
than that right it's it's actually sort
of a movement and a project and so I
wonder if you could just briefly outline
the history of it how it came about you
know what was the impetus for getting it
started
Wow okay great so let's see well it's
what I'd like to do first is actually
and this is a bit of a quibble but I
like it I think it's a useful quibble to
make a distinction between the concept
known as movement and the concept that
we're going to introduce I've introduced
elsewhere and you may already be
familiar with it obscene yes yes I've
seen videos aeneas yeah so - so baby as
a senior's not a movement and I would
say that in fact run by proposition
every movement is in fact what happens
when you intent to formalize and market
a scene yes the moment where a scene is
becomes captured into something that is
not it but is a simulation of it that
can be sold at a profit that is a
movement
I think this explains a lot about how
and why the things that have been in his
movements in the past have done what
they've done but I've also failed to do
almost universally what they most fully
intended yeah so consciously right
consciously it would be a sad thing
if gaming workers become a movement
which of course it could it can be
captured in a moment but it is
endeavoring to be aware of the
possibility of that and to maintain its
integrity as its seen yes
so I already begins to answer the
question so this is very much an
exercise of discovery there was a more
or less the way this began let me see if
I can
a couple of threats
interesting so maybe I'll just identify
three I'm sure there's many many many
many but I'll do three this seemed
useful one
Mia's around 2007 I was introduced to
her about a book called demon by Daniel
Suarez which is a sort of science
fiction near future Tecna thriller story
about a computer gaming genius who dies
and injects a semi-autonomous self
autopoietic computer game in internet
game into the world that becomes real
and this was deeply influential in my
thinking because Daniel Suarez the
author did a hell of a good job
predicting the future including things
like self-driving cars weight advances
them hitting popular consciousness and
drones cryptocurrencies AR VR the whole
bit so he was doing a very powerful
example through pure narrative of where
did he was trying to explain in the
story and it was not lost on me that the
framing of the game was quite helpful
and you might there's a gentleman named
John Robb who if you track him down and
kind of look at his context Daniel
Suarez John Rob and I had some really
interesting conversations brought
together by the book Damon and even some
of the early writings in deep code are
actually just cut and paste of some of
the stuff that we did so that's one
thread the second thread was a lot of
work that I had begun doing on the
nature of money in the context of the
financial crisis and so I was
practically curious and I was in a place
I think I've mentioned this before and I
think it David one of the ripa wisdom
interviews I was in a place but most
notably in this case but the Santa Fe
Institute and the Aspen Institute and
other places like the Perimeter
Institute to just have conversations
with people who knew a lot more and
should have known a lot lot more and so
I got this really interesting capacity
to have pretty quickly get a sense of
what was the real state-of-the-art in
thinking about this particular most
meaningful and at the time quite salient
question that it was shockingly
incoherent hmm and then started looking
at it myself mostly reading three books
so he was called the origin of wealth
which is a complex complexity approach
to economics a book by a kind of
conservative British guy something about
money
Ian something maybe and then graters
book about thousand years of not of debt
which is awesome and this begin the
process of leading me down the rabbit
hole and I should say by the way it's
just even background on that an early
dose of a who I think it's probably the
highest bang for the buck like most
obscure and most useful philosopher like
I named Manuel de langue de like I would
I would guess that that's the name that
is the most likely that nobody's heard
of him when I say it and would be the
most valuable for literally everybody
who have to read it with those two
curves right so del andhe and the two
books that are most specific here is the
war in the age of intelligent machines
it was his first book and I think like
95 and the second one is a thousand
years of nonlinear history and he's a
guy who innovated or at least
meaningfully innovate something called
assemblage today or that he calls
assemblage theory and anyone who is
thinking about complexity like complex
systems science who hasn't fully
metabolized Holanda has just got giant
planks in their mind so I had done that
like I'd already done all that work
through 1999 to 2007 so that was kind of
in the background so that I'm having
this experience with Suarez I've had
this experience with Graber and then my
my friend Jim rut who was at the time
the chairman of the board of the Santa
Fe Institute and I just start having a
dialogue literally just like a coffee
breaks between board meetings where it
becomes clear that we both had a very
significant sense of there being
something rotten in the state of Denmark
something corrupt in the nature of the
society that we have a to find ourselves
in and and Jim is a very action-oriented
individual but he has sort of the most
sort of doing energy remember the second
most of anybody who I have ever met and
he's he's senior to me he's I think if
I'm 48 he's probably Gashi maybe in
pushing 70 started if I'm if I'm I'm
aging you I apologize but he's kind of
in that zone and he did like his wave of
entrepreneurship he's a high-tech
entrepreneur very successful high-tech
entrepreneur
so his wave of entrepreneurship was
exactly one shift before Matt like when
I was a kid working on BBS as he was
just in early entrepreneur creating BBS
software for example and then he created
or was was the CEO of the company that
did DNS which was didn't the platform
the internet upon which I did my work so
as a consequence of our conversations
one of the things that showed up is he
was the guy who presented this concept
which we later named the Jubilee which
by the way Cohen said it's sort of nice
than with grey bears on propositions and
began to conceptualize well what might
we actually do so if there's something
rotten the state of Denmark what do we
do about it and gender is elitist
so he took the lead in his mental model
was actually just through the lens of
politics like how could we actually do a
political intervention with very high
leverage meaning not just policies that
are sort of fun and nice but actually
policies that are very carefully
designed from a complexity perspective
to generate trophic cascades in the con
and the complex systems feedback loops
of society so that it we actually did
move things meaningfully and if you
think about that as they abstract intent
things begin to actually make more sense
so the the artifact or the way of
embodying that intent initially was a
political party initially I think it was
calling the new day party that he got
rebranded as the emancipation party I
think you can still find the website if
you google it and we spent meaningful
amount of time with a pretty good group
of people thinking in the in the the
mall or the frame of policies and trying
to create policies that were very
thoughtful and for example we were
proposing universal basic income way
back then this is probably 2011 2012
2010 somewhere in that timeframe and it
proceeded for
and there was you know some momentum but
as we continue to maneuver we noticed
two different things one was that the
forum the forum of political party and
in fact the form of politics in the
domain of democracy seemed very much not
to be the right structure a way of
putting it is Millennials don't do
politics and so if you're designing
something that is going to be ultimately
landing on Millennials and the people
younger than them and if they don't do
politics this is back in 2010 2011 then
politics the political structure is not
the right approach certainly a new
political party it's not even just about
that though is it I mean the the very
council's of party is exclusionary right
I mean it's only in the realm of rival
ristmas and this is one of the primary
things to get away from right right
right
so in fact so this is the second piece
the second piece was as people began to
participate who were but people like
Brett Brett Weinstein and the
determinant Sebastian Coquet a number of
folks who were oriented towards a more
theoretical perspective and the
theoretical basis you know as I said we
were trying to do things that were
fundamental and so we were constantly
trying to figure out what would it mean
to do something this one minute which
means they were actually doing
fundamental theory and this is where Jim
had actually specifically assigned me
the responsibilities of what he called
deep code you keep doing the fundamental
theory until we have something we can
actually use to build things on top of
it those before you almost all the stuff
that I've shared online was either
figured out by me or discovered by me or
shared with me by various people during
this time for more or less mostly but
they're mostly shared
and so the theoretical foundation began
to actually point out a lot of stuff you
were talking about like the concepts of
rivalries and anti drivers simply hadn't
been part of the mindset until around oh
 this is more fundamental Campos
like complex and complicated weren't
part of the mindset so as the
theoretical foundation began to kind of
require a design it became increasingly
evident the design of a political party
was just the wrong tool and there was an
an intermezzo where there was a okay
well maybe it's the wrong tool but maybe
it's a transition or a useful tool like
we can use it to create space to do the
next thing
but then practically would it look like
well gee is more or less they won't land
like the idea of a new political party
just literally is not a real idea nobody
will participate in it then even that
argument went away and this thing gave
birth to the concept of game be nice to
say okay
Paul I was Greenhill at the time if
we're not gonna be doing a political
party what is something that might work
so just start thank you figuring that
out just think about it and and we had
these gatherings in Virginia so it's
like a city in Virginia called Staunton
Virginia so extended one two three four
five and so it's ten four when she had
two really important presentations one
by Brett and one by myself and Jim made
the third but the first two by Brett and
myself were really the the kernel of
game B you can imagine Brett coming from
his background he was essentially
describing how could we design something
that would not that would it would
evolve to towards the solution towards
the thing that we're looking for and
then I came at it from this perspective
of what is the meta design of that kind
of thing and how does it relate to the
circumstances we find ourselves in and I
think that should both those
presentations are still you know exists
somewhere in the digital memory there
may even be a video of me given the
presentation and that was at Stanton for
I want to say maybe 2012 and then
Stanton 5 was a substantial expansion so
it between Snoopy had a huge little
conversation and a lot more people were
beginning to be part of this prod
maybe 100 ish and that is maybe 70 in
base camp remember that was before slack
and a lot of conversation covering a lot
of territory and trying to figure out
how to do this work and that led to the
end of the naming of it is well I guess
I named it game B earlier but beginning
the the real precision and articulation
and standing v was a a real gathering
that included folks like Bruce Kunkel by
the way who I see a lot on the Facebook
and we need a Roy who's that it was at
that gathering really Kerr trying to go
deep and got a matsuhiko camera was
there gosh I hope I'm not creating a
list of folks to kill and if so
everything I just said is a very big lie
and none of those people were there just
a little bit may you characterized as a
result of all of your research just
correct me if I'm wrong the basic
characteristics of game a and hence game
B is the opposite of that is complicated
rather than complex rival ruse and
top-down broadcast in natures is that is
that basically the core of it is is that
the essence of it well let me just fire
up a bunch of other words and we'll see
if they reduce to those three I mean I
think my basic answer is yes let's try
some other ones so formal
but that could be identified as
complicated I think that's right and
it's a better yes hierarchical again
we've got is reducible
the notion of money is is fundamental
but that's still it within the context
of formal which is still actually within
the context of complicated so but it's
not I don't think it's necessary to try
to do this in the most compact way and
it is also some really use of sure istic
we identified that the
creating a an obligate bias in the
direction of the complicated
[Music]
rival wrists at the heart and
specifically here rival wrists so
solving the problem of how do I
out-compete other human bands at the
heart but I mean either a huge part of
that as I've heard you say before is
scarcity right whether real or perceived
scarcity is right at the heart of rival
nasaw bonus with rival risk as well is
it not because if there's plenty of
everything there's no need to compete
for it right yeah that's nice because
that you can we can be very careful that
we can talk about the fact that there
are and I think I've talked about this
and another context there's like these
two sort of overlapping continua one
continuum is the rival risk continuum so
this is these are phenomenon but at
least in principle can be rivalries like
the seller that I just ate in principle
that can be rappers and on the far in my
world left side of that is true scarcity
again like this glass of water this last
swallow of waters is an omen of true
scarcity there we go gone forever
there's no use to anyone besides my own
medical minute metabolism but on the far
right hand side of that continuum we
might called plenitude mm-hmm well you
got a whole lot of things that are
fundamentally rival whisp you have so
much of you don't necessarily care so
you know the the water in the oceans in
the in the air in the sky for the most
part right but of course the location on
that continuum is a relationship between
the presence of the phenomenon and the
demand of the phenomena all right so if
you add enough people into the equation
who are breathing air eventually all the
air in the sky is no longer in Punta
dude is now in scarcity where as you can
kind of snap back and forth and then the
other continuum and by the way like
might put non-rival risk is kind of in
net terms and then on the other
continuum we have the anti robberies
continuum and so this is like the
calculus or geometry or literally
anything that lives in pure pattern
we're on the far you know the far far
right hand side we have the fully
unmediated potentia that is
utterly unconsumed in its being help you
when I tell you something right now and
I just tell you what I'm telling you
you're actually providing the resource
the scarce resource which is your own
neurology and then the pattern is not
scarce at all so tabbed all over to the
right and we can tag even all the way to
the right of those are those
characteristics of anti drivers that are
generative meaning that when shared
their potency for producing more
antirattle ristmas is actually increased
so you've got this whole if you think
about the logic of network effects you
can actually think about those things
that there are sort of all the way to
the right of that we can go down some
real interesting powerful detail because
that's science the science of the entity
rivalries is kind of like mine well done
Honda it's sort of obvious that the most
important thing that you could really be
thinking about if you care about being
effective and is the area that is very
rarely thought about so we can go there
if you'd like but on the left hand side
of the anti driverís
is those things that our media are the
mediation the things that you need to
use the minimum viable mediation to be
able to have an amount of anti robberies
so for example your mind your brain
there's only so much anti reverse
pattern that your neurology can actually
hold and so there is a real rivalry that
is in relationship with the
fundamentally anti rivalries and you can
move back and forth on that continuum
and then by the way just to be complete
when you think that whole can go to
continuum and those are both talking
about the anti robbers and rivalries and
the point of view of phenomenology
phenomenology like phenomena in world
objective real things we can also talk
about those in terms of dispositions or
our ways of behaving in relationship to
real things so I can have a rival wrist
disposition or I can have an anti
roberts disposition or we have a non
rivals disposition and again there are
continua and these things relate to each
other so there's like this structure
which may be a nine a three by three I
don't
you know they talked about how the kind
of the complex dynamics of where you
find yourself and how you show up
creates so the ways that things these
things only do is are back before a
rival risk disposition in the context of
a non rival rest a plenitude will put
you in a tragedy of the Commons which
will eventually lead to actual scarcity
for example a rival wrist disposition in
the context of the anti robberies will
lead to trying to fence in the Commons
create for example intellectual property
which will move something from the
fundamental unity rather listen to be
simulated scarcity for example so you
can do that kind of work okay I think
the end of that the grand vision of The
Venus Project wasn't it that you created
the ultimate anti rivalries domain
globally because everybody contributes
not for what they can get but to add to
the Commons and everybody has access to
the Commons and as the Commons gets
richer everybody benefits from it and
can contribute more because they're
living in a healthier environment and so
on and so on so on and as far as like
this oh no for sure I mean I actually
came to rebel wisdom and game being all
of this via the zeitgeist movement of
The Venus Project and Jacque fresco
talks in very very similar terms I
actually hear you guys and him using
much of the same language but for him it
was the monetary system which created
the rivalries but I think the rivals
it's deeper than they stick right under
pins money doesn't it the rival the
rival was dynamic while I was not
directly influenced by Jacque Fresco's
ideas
I was bizarrely enough influenced by his
aesthetics meaning that I had at a very
young age come across images that have
been produced by him and they had
connected with me in a way that was very
compelling and so even what many years
later I found myself doing a sort of
weird search through what was what could
have generated these these images in my
mind like hey I kept having these images
pop up but aesthetically matched the
sensibility of game B what are these
things I was like okay looks at 70s I
had a
when it was encountered it like 70
science fiction top what was this and
turned out it was actually not entirely
but a decent amount of it was actually
his stuff from a physical way it looked
yeah I was never able to really get
enough of a handle on where it is he was
proposing in terms of resource of
economy so it feel I kind of got it but
at the aesthetic level it totally landed
so so then what happens we had this sort
of a burst of energy in game be building
had a whole bunch of different ideas
most of which were very poorly
articulated probably named and roughly
hewn but seems like like we'd go back
and take a look at it's like yeah we
were giddy got had some very good stuff
done then and we decided at this point
that Jim and I could no longer or did
not know looker chose to fund it out of
our own pocket and it was time to go out
and see if other people in the world
we're gonna buy into this thing and I
think part of this was also Jim's
instincts that how do you avoid becoming
a navel-gazing how do you avoid drinking
your own kool-aid well you have to
periodically just go back out and see if
anybody else is uh who somebody who's
definitely not a coolant drinker do they
connect with what you're sharing and
this is where we discovered the in fact
the answer was no we did I'd say like a
hundred different conversations with
people many of whom really should have
been able to get it and and sort of long
story short nobody did and I can go into
detail exactly what we learned from that
would happen in that context and in the
meantime because you weren't
articulating it as clearly as you do now
having having thought it through better
I would say I would say three things
roughly speaking
maybe for one is we were not
articulating it anywhere near as clearly
as we are now maybe 10% which if you
think about how unclear it is right now
that's rather impressive to was almost
nobody was prepared to hear it and it's
just a conceptual level a lot has
happened in the past five years six
years seven years that has brought a lot
of things into the conventional
consciousness and into the minds that
makes it much easier to bridge the gap
three the proposition that game a was
fragile getting more fragile and was
inexorably self terminating didn't seem
viscerally realistic seven years ago
okay the 2008 financial crisis if we
kind of solved that we're all world with
it
the green shoots in the new normal happy
times are here again next I remember the
Google guys saying that and of course
most of the people who were speaking
with had some vested interest in that
not being the case you know we were
talking to people who at least in
principle could fund something so they
had one game a to some level or if they
couldn't find it they were at least able
to be they had legitimacy they were
winners in gaming in some fashion and
then the fourth was something along the
lines of and kind of because of the
third people hadn't gone to the grieving
process and so what would happen is
often we actually just see that somebody
could get it they'd sense it they'd
realize it but then it immediately shut
down and not absorb it because you know
it's a tough thing to to chew on you can
scare yeah it's big and scary and so
that was that
and so in and by the way so on the one
hand the outward facing Keene
this isn't landing and on the other hand
the inward facing is I think Jim talked
about in a podcast there was a schism on
the inside the group between those
people who were coming from a
perspective of work on the interior and
people remember
to work on the exterior so you
a generation gap here too my sense is
that the boomers have a bad have a bad
mapping they were kind of burned by the
failure of the consciousness experiment
in the 60s and 70s and they have look
like little petulant toddlers it just
because they it up means it's
impossible and I would say like I'm
saying that kind of mean okay and we
could definitely say they it up
but on the other hand just cuz it didn't
work then means it's impossible I mean
it's I think it's reasonable to say that
lots of good stuff happened then onto
beds to that but lots of good stuff and
these sort of things are hard so we had
a kind of a visceral response and the
part of exterior oriented boomers who
are like not at all interested in any
kind of consciousness raising talk even
language to talk about the fact that
people have an interior at all and then
a cohort of people who are just coming
from that land and so they're more and
there's a bias in that direction to a
bias towards hey let's not worry about
institutions we just need to give his
consciousness raised which I think it's
also not reasonable and so that schism
was happening and I noticed it been
created a D cohered the system pretty
quickly actually and it's like okay
that's interesting too that while we had
a brief moment like a little summer of
love for like a night a year like six
months where there's a while a lot of
creative activity a lot of people
pouring energy in its ability to
decohere around somewhat who cares like
you're relevant or bad distinctions was
also quite notable and so Jim and I
agreed and by the way not without now
with an effort of consensus both of us
just said hey you know my energy to
karaoke push this thing forward is no
longer enough said okay let's move this
into spore mode that's not let's see
what happens if we just sort of each
individual who's been part of it takes
what they take it goes out and we kind
of go out and try to carry the ethos and
the aesthetics and the sense of ability
out into the world what happens
and that's what happened that's way too
so call it 2013 ish maybe I'm often the
dates by the way I don't claim anything
vaguely like chronological precision
it definitely wasn't 1920 and it
definitely wasn't 2300 somewhere between
those two sport mode with kicked in and
I went off and by the way Bonanza who
was part of it as well went up on our
journey and everybody else kind of did
their thing and it's interesting like if
you tracked the people in their journeys
they've been interesting very
interesting journeys that each of the
individuals are many of the individuals
have taken in that time frame you know
Brett for example has had a meaningful
move from a painfully obscure
evolutionary theorist and it painfully
obscure left-leaning college to somebody
who's you know schooling Richard Dawkins
and I think finally at long last the
possibility of him actually expressing
the more fundamental concepts that he's
been holding now for two decades seems
to be coming right it'll be great
because its major upgrades are possible
right now in his discipline and he has
them so him sharing there would be I
think quite useful
what brought you sort of out into the
open again on to rebel wisdom and you
making your own videos on your own
channel
what sort of brought you back into
mushroom mode well this is actually not
a trivial question to answer because now
we're asking questions like causation
how does anything happen and
to answer the question I think what
occurred to me this is never get to this
self referential one of the things that
happen in the context of my journey in
sport mode was a nearly reckless
commitment to Reno vation diving in to
the possibilities of growth possibility
of change which you've opposed
personally yeah personally yeah listen
pretty soon pretty intensely I was a lot
of commitment let's say and
it's almost like as a question as an
inquiry it's like what's possible in
this direction like coming largely from
the background that would have said
interior is medium interest exterior is
most of the heavy lifting lives but
actually finding myself very aware of
the meaningfulness of always being
scented by the folks who are speaking
with the interior so that I'll just do
it it I'll dive in I'll see what
happens
sorry just back sigh can you get a
little bit I'm curious about one thing
do you think you were drawn to the
intense inner work that you were drawn
to as a consequence of the schism that
appeared in gang be between the inner
yeah for sure yeah there are three
things going on one was my own outer
life was falling apart so I ended up
having a divorce and a lots of others
sort of fall out so I was painfully
aware of the fact that who I was how I
was showing up in the world was not
working so there's something about the
interior that either this whole thing is
just a show we all kill ourselves
or you can't actually change something
about yourself and you can actually live
a life that feels meaningful and at
least Pleasant so that's one part that's
super intense right and that was
happening in this same timeframe for a
long time it's been happening but it was
kind of becoming increasingly intense so
the second is that now I'm in this
context where by the way the the ability
to turn away from that was becoming
increasingly dishonorable now in the
context what we're doing in game be it
was not just you know my happy home it
was 2 degree to which I'm playing a role
or trying to participate in something
that may actually be much larger than
myself
I'm not just dishonouring my own life
and my family I'm also dishonouring
whatever this might be and that was
another heavy thing and then actually
to encounter people who are connecting
with me at a very human level and was
awakening in media with the recognition
that you know small shifts in
relationality can actually make huge
differences in who you are which can
make huge differences in how you show up
which then makes huge differences in
what you actually end up bring into the
world so all those were coming in at the
same time and then a heavy dose of that
was then Vanessa coming in with a very
similar arc and she also having a
divorce in more or less the same
timeframe and she came in with a huge
amount of self change that wanted needed
to happen and so our relationship was
sort of like on that like a
co-evolutionary commitment of let's you
know put all the chips in and see what
happens that must be awesome that must
be good great foundation for a
relationship right it really gets to
know each other well quickly I would
imagine yeah absolutely yeah it's quite
eye-opening actually just to do the
Delta between how much you really can't
get to know someone how much you can get
to know yourself hmm and even just like
the simple insight bit until you truly
have learned how to love yourself you
cannot love someone else like until you
actually have that hit like whoa and of
course once you do get that hit and you
realize the difference between that and
I guess you would call it narcissism
which is the simulation of that those
are all things that come when you hit
the you know the temperature levels high
enough things melt and getting the
temperature high enough boom the
crucible opens and then real things come
out of it
no and one of the things that happens
the consequence of that a journey was a
building of a particular capacity of how
to sense what is the the choice that is
the most effective in the moment you
might call it apply to
or something like that I think recently
I've been calling it flowing in hyper
complexity or flexing the muscles of
hyper complexity like I mentioned that
in a conversation with a guy sends stock
a few days ago and so I would say that
like that capacity that that sense of
how to sense what is being called for in
the moment on the basis of what it is
that I'm perceiving the whole perception
that I have and the basis of how my
relevance realization system identifies
that so the end the answer to the
question is it may not be satisfying
because it's sort of generally true to
every possible version of that question
but I could just say like the the local
reality I'll give you an example I
hadn't written anything
publicly and Vanessa said I should write
something publicly and I think I
initially
took a couple of the articles that I had
written and shared them on a a group
called deviant art because my friend
Angela created deviantART and is both
there was some interesting conversation
there was also a lot of not interesting
conversation so I wasn't super motivated
and then another buddy of mine I'm gonna
be GK more left at the same time nudged
me as well and there was something about
the synchrony of the timing like there
was no obvious background behind both of
them and the way that they show up is
very different but he was a friend of
mine from fourth grade and bio
collaborator in a bunch of different
initiatives I've done in my adult life
and you know she's my my life partner
they both the way they kind of nudged me
kicked me into an energy level of
endeavor and to actually write something
or the purposes of being received by the
public but I'm very experimental I can
tell you I was very it's called
truculent and in stepping into that like
I had no the opposite of desire to
actually be successful well sorry to be
popular is that their way of putting it
if four or five people read it and felt
like it was useful that was I would
consider that success is a million
people read it and just made in they
completely it made them less effective
or they actually took it the wrong way
so that would be terrible and so and so
here's the case then of that sense of
feeling like how do you actually follow
the Equality of rightness and noticing
and I mean and I think that if you
actually take a look at my writings and
by the way if you just take a look like
literally Who I am my participatory
knowing how I am showing up in the world
because now there's a enough of a
trace of that that you can actually
witness it publicly the feeling of when
a particular mode of expression created
possibilities of relationality meaning
people responded in a way that had an
increasing feeling of rightness in the
way that they responded oriented me more
towards how to hone and shift my own who
I was so that I could continue to
express more in a way that increased the
quality of the way that it landed which
increased the quality of the way that
they responded and who they were and
their own participatory knowing and this
then becomes a co-evolutionary dance and
you get this sort of triadic movement
where there's a my discernment increases
my capacity which then increases my
expression which then to some extent to
degree which my quality of expression
solid increases the capacity in the in
the other which then generates in them a
response which then my discernment can
signal-to-noise differentiate it's some
in some way which increases my
discernment because I now have a
differential between input and output my
destroyer was like oh okay it's better
looks then it creates a loop and then
it's notice the coordination there
between we were saying earlier with the
Venus Project
Oh what they've self-reinforcing
feedback loop into the Commons and ants
again sort of thing yeah yeah there's a
mapping it's actually a mapping so one
The Venus Project is talking about it in
the context of energy and here we're
talking about in the context of say
pattern or discernment um communication
there's a mapping that they're identical
to the same topology and then something
like rebel wisdom shows up like I didn't
go out to David you know who he was at
all he reached out to me I can't
remember exactly what the context wasn't
he was an email
can we chat it would be interesting for
us to chat here's something that I mean
and here's what I did
I'm meditated I meditate every day and
in the context of my meditation I just
sort of brought in the possibility of
that and felt that it feel like it was
the rightness to it could it feel like
there was a rightness to it and was
there any boundary conditions like did
some part of myself back but some part
of me like not really could I say with
like a whole wholeness of self I say yes
to this possibility with the wholeness
of self and what's interesting about
this is that it's not magic like I
didn't actually know he's gonna record
the damn thing I didn't know that he was
making a documentary and it was a
documentarian I didn't know that he was
gonna take me like I don't know you know
sitting out of my front stoop with my
laptop wearing my bathrobe spewing
whatever nonsense happened to come to my
mat face at the moment and appended to
the beginning of the documentary that he
was making that Jordan Peterson I
thought we were just having a
conversation so it's not like I knew
that it was a good idea but what I can
say is that my wisdom the degree to
which I had perceived what degrees I had
good perception which in this case was
clearly wanting and the degree to which
I can build good instincts definitely
left me to a wholeness of self saying
yes maybe no part of me given what I
knew is saying no and some part of me
probably should've asked better question
right so that's a learning but maybe
they ask better questions but
net-net it seems like it kind of worked
out so maybe I'm okay with that
and I they're just the part of me that
would ask better questions mmm still
hasn't grown any we call it strength in
the larger society of selves so and this
conversation is to that point exactly
like you've actually had things
mentioned many times and I imagine this
is actually something having to do with
your own interior and your sense of self
but you know why am I having this
conversation with you yeah okay
obviously it's not because you've got
thousands and millions of viewers so so
here's some thing because I think the
question you're asking actually brought
us here brings out some stuff that it
because my prove useful
[Music]
so one of the things that I noticed when
you contacted me was something about the
it's weird it's like the quality of the
language you can tell the difference I
think it's this is not even slightly
ambiguous you can tell the difference
between
a marketer and somebody who is actually
communicating with you you can feel it
you can absolutely feel it but the
consciousness that is behind something
is evident into something it bleeds
between the letters in between the lines
yeah yeah and so when I when you I think
wrote to me I'm pretty sure you wrote I
could feel that the consciousness that
was expressing itself through those
words to me was a consciousness that was
well at the very least worth taking the
risk of communicating with a little more
right and then in every interaction that
I had with your consciousness mediated
by the various expressions that you have
I think I watched
one video that you did maybe I didn't
even do that okay I contacted you to say
I've used some of your ideas in a video
if you want to take a look at yeah
that's right that's right I did and as I
listened to it what I felt was integrity
and what I mean by integrity what I mean
is that the things that you that I had
shared that you are now sharing back had
maintained their truth to the readers I
was expressing truth at all you were not
diluting but we're in fact reinforcing
and increasing that truth for me that's
it like at that point I'm done I will
definitely support that in world and
anybody who can do that to the rich I
have the resources to do so you know
have so many minutes in the day and I
would support that
and so then it's a yes the whole list of
stuff actually left it to it yes so for
me this has not been a question of like
begrudging it's more than a question of
I don't really know what's happening
here I don't have a good sort of reason
for why we would have this conversation
but I know that it's a good idea okay
good good enough for me that's good
enough for me too
I mean I've noticed you've done quite a
few broadcasts of one kind or other
podcasts or YouTube interviews with like
me people who have very very small
audiences so yeah I mean I it's just
small sports he's spreading all the
spools around on you you've your
mushroom is spreading more spores around
I guess something like that yeah yeah
it's it's uh you know how do you what is
just what's the right thing to do I mean
to me it's as simple as that like I'm
not I'm not trying to plan anything well
I am planning some things but certainly
in this demand I'm not planning anything
and I'm just trying to figure out what
the right thing to do they just tried
always go in that direction of what is
the right choice
and it's not easy now all the most
recent example is that when a guy and I
were talking he asked to record it and I
said sure and in during most of the time
frame that we were talking it was very
much an intimate her stood a person
conversation it was very intimate yeah
yeah and the feeling like the container
was the container there was just an
Internet person to person conversation
and but as we got to the end I had a
distinct feeling of well there's
that's a lot there's a lot of stuff in
there that is let's call it messy or
what unattractive might be another term
so part of me feels each with that being
out there but on the other hand if he
earnestly felt you
his you know in his wisdom from his
perspective that it was worth and
reasonable to share that I would support
that and so of course I specifically
said that near the end and then he did
and I know how many people who watched
it they may only been like nine people
but the point is it's out there right
and so that's
is a tightrope walk this is this is a
thing where it's like parenting a child
where you're definitely it up
all the time and hopefully also you're
getting it right all the time and your
job is just to try to figure out how to
continue to sort of get better as it
gets hard move forward so that you're
ahead of the curve and you're constantly
like on some up gradient yeah what I
liked about that conversant all of it I
watched about half an hour forty minutes
of it something like that it's only been
up a couple of days I just stumbled
across it yesterday what I like about
it's not the content so much but what I
liked about it was the the very obvious
and deliberate effort that both of you
were making to recognize fully the other
and what they were saying and what they
were feeling and vocalizing what your
emotional response was and how that then
leads to a more sort of intellectual
response and and so even though the
content of what you said was I must
admit I can't remember a single thing
that you said in terms of what you said
but I bet I remember very clearly the
the feeling of the exchange and I think
even though as you say in places it
feels a bit I don't know awkward clumsy
embarrassing whatever but I think I
think that modality is really important
I mean I've been thinking a lot about
rule Omega and tell me tell me what you
think of this because I've been I've
been sort of phrasing this for a while
so tell me what you think of this that
rule Omega is one of the or perhaps the
generator function which if installed
and run and sufficient nodes in the
network would bring about the playing of
game B yeah absolutely and the way that
you said it was just right
yeah so I think that I think that
modality of communication even though
it's to me personally and this is my
thing I completely get that to me first
personally it feels a little bit overly
touchy feely new agey kind of creepy
sometimes you know what I mean but but I
get that discomfort is entirely my
internal thing I I do get that I've got
a lot of work to do in that area and but
yeah I'd but I do know Sookie crucial so
yeah even if you don't feel great about
I think it's important stuff that kind
of thing well yeah I think I think
you're the way I think you said it just
right and everything I had quite liked I
had a strong positive feeling as you
were talking and actually several
distinct it's a strong positive to them
and I think that this distinction made
between the content and the maybe the
form of the the Wayne asst I think you
nailed it exactly like the the thing
that we talked about may have been
particularly meaningful to us and it may
not be meaningful to anybody else but in
particularly the way the guy was doing
what he was doing I am I was quite
touched by like Wow holy cow at a
masterful level as far as in my own
personal experience he was doing that
thing it's like really allowing the
space of the conversation to be like
perceiving the things that I needed to
perceive to allow it to actually
continue to open and deepen and become
more and more rich and then I think has
actually been a stronger characteristic
a rule Amega I was like I swear to be a
good dance partner something like that
whoo yeah that was great so that that
was actually specifically it that I was
hoping would land if he decided to share
it I don't I don't know that I or he
said anything that was specifically at a
Content level needing to be shared but
more being able to do the thing he was
doing yeah and that you know I would
like to do at that level would be great
really good
yeah something I struggled to find fine
willing practice partners for there's a
few of us on the discord Channel who've
started to get together on a reasonably
regular basis and try and have
discussions again content unimportant
but using this modality of
you know really being open and putting
your own agendas and your own paradigms
insofar as you can do to one side and
really try and enter into the other
shoes as I say I've got a lot of work to
do but yeah I mean I wish I'd come
across this stuff 20 30 years ago you
know because yeah I feel like it's a
really important time and I really this
sounds impossibly pompous but I but I
feel like I've got something inside me
which this moment is you know at me
unmatched to this particular moment in
history I feel I've got something to
contribute to I have no idea what it is
but I know I've got a lot of work to do
before before I'm able to effectively
contribute I think more more of a
hindrance than anything else well let me
suggest something they just came up as
you were saying that because I was I've
come across this a number of times with
with the poor recipients of the British
culture and the phrase this sounds and
possibly pompous which I suppose there's
meaningful value to that perspective as
well for sure
I would go the opposite direction which
is just say that I would drink of
humility until there is no more to be
drunk if you find yourself coming with
an absolute like
her cobb smacked perspective of
comprehensive humility then I think a
lot of the things that you're talking
about will find themselves more easily
brought into the world you know it's not
having like an adequate level of
pomposity to actually share what you
think is yours to share but the opposite
not to have the self doubt or self
limiting narrative that prevents you
from sharing it but the truth of
humility the truth that you are only a
vessel and you are here really just to
do the work of making it possible for
that which wants to express itself
through you to be truly heard and you
have nothing to do with it so get the
 out of the way and let that come
through that's what you're here for
that's maybe a way of getting through
that
yeah I get that it's not necessarily
easy to recognize that which is coming
through from that which is your own
stuff but yeah that's bad that's the
skill that's real if you can get there
then it hits nicely that's a powerful
thing to be able to share - yeah I'll be
really so launches to do another one of
these
yes that's nice let's do it well long
the pace is probably gonna slow down a
bit because I've got some other things
coming under my under my calendar like I
said my expectations are low so alright
man thanks very much Cheers