I just finished watching the double we
know and the double we know is a
documentary about DuPont and how when
teflon was created it was fairly soon
shown to be very toxic and at least part
of the one of the chemicals in the
manufacturing of the teflon was shown to
be very toxic and they cover-up that
took place so and a lot of us just like
plain stupidity you had they bought this
chemical from I believe 3m and the
chemical itself they were told by the
manufacturer of the company know how to
put it in the waterways it's not safe in
the waterways make sure this is not
flush them down the drain so what do
they do do they empty it directly into
the stream and directly into the air
through the creation process in the 80s
they knew that it was shown to be a
carcinogen and a mutagen and that it had
created birth defects in at least
animals and there'd have been evidence
they took their women off of production
because they found out that it caused to
be a birth defects if the women were
exposed to this chemical well they were
pregnant and they continued to make it
it's been shown to be a 99% of humans on
this planet because they just have been
putting it out there since the 50s but
they've known since the 80s and they
were like well we've been doing it for
30 years so just keep on doing what
we've been doing
there was a class-action lawsuit or
mediation and they offered around 350
million to the people who were affected
and they said no they said we need
better than that not even more financial
compensation we need there to be a
change
so they said about doing the largest
epidemiological study like I know what
they are but saying it's like Venezuela
seventy thousand people which they say
in the documentary which I've included
too is the largest scale of breadth and
depth ever done a by geological study
which is like backtracking and looking
at the health and the the factors that
that affected your health
and they showed that there were diseases
that were caused by this specific
chemical called c8 and caused kidney and
testicular cancer it caused thyroid
disease high cholesterol and some form
of colitis then after this whole process
took place and they finally sued and won
and did so they took out the c8 from the
water
Wilfred they stopped it in their
manufacturing process so that putting
more of it into the water system but
they didn't stop producing Teflon they
then changed to Gen X which is
thoroughly not been tested either
because we're not required to test it so
they didn't test this one it was shown
to be highly toxic working again
all the money was working against the
people proving that it was toxic proved
that it was toxic and so then they just
get to it replace it with a different
chemical that isn't tested and could be
toxic
anytime human beings make a chemical we
have to know what it does in the
environmental system and our health care
system that's not at all what is going
on there are 88,000 chemicals that are
being used in manufacturing we'll have
80,000 down here maybe that's what they
said
80,000 other chemicals that have not
been tested that we're putting into the
environment and there is no safe level
for four chemicals that we create
because there's no system to break them
down there's in our bodies or in on the
planet and sometimes they could just
pass through us and not be taken in at
all but that's still going to be
bioaccumulate like it's still gonna be
in the environment in the soil it
wouldn't be bioaccumulative we can't
taken it to ourselves and things grow up
but now what I would like to see and
this isn't even with the project we're
doing I'm gonna talk about what I would
like to see as far as like we need to
 change that this is David versus
Goliath and when David's get together it
becomes Goliath versus Goliath and
honestly they become David like they
can't that's I've completely burned that
analogy they can't control us in the way
that they are the only way they can is
because we're split up we're dissipated
they have all the money they have all
the power we can change that as soon as
we create the system that helps us share
that information
what about what I want to see is
testing and transparency of all
chemicals that are currently in
production all 80,000 chemicals
I want a database of what they are what
they look like what testing has been
done what health implications have been
given or what people say like the VARs
for vaccines
I want that for chemicals people say and
like I'm I've been exposed this chemical
I've been exposed to roundup I've gotten
cancer that like that is what we need
this is gonna clearly go longer than
five minutes and I'm fine with that a
new system for new camp so those are the
ones that are already out there that are
already getting profit already have the
system churning to keep them in
production for new chemicals that are
created we need a system that like that
is required we require that you
test on the environment on animals as
much as I don't like animal testing that
it's tested to be if it's safe before we
pump it into the atmosphere and give it
to all the animals and all the insects
and all the humans anyway that when
someone's been shown to be evil in
companies downright like no this what
this is doing and continue to do it then
not only are they sent to prison but
every single asset that they've ever
acquired being evil gets a seized
because that's ridiculous like you get
to go to prison and have no money
because you made a decision that
affected everybody's health and yeah
it's just we need tools to be able to
follow the money to be able and the
position so if someone does something
evil at one company we can see why they
were paid for it but they can't just
take the reputation the positive
reputation leave their negative one
because now they're associated rebrand
themselves if they're the company or who
cares cuz nobody cares about human
beings and their names and they went
from being a CFO here to a CFO there
moved from being DuPont to working for
the EPA and making just know we need to
be able to follow the high position
people to see like we're it's not what
is the LinkedIn or you're trying to
connect a network with people it's us
keeping track of who's working for what
what the shares mean and what atrocities
are committed by what companies it's in
the news we can what lawsuits are
pending against them our medical app
that we are gonna create it's gonna be
our first project I've been putting off
doing this video all day because I
wanted to first write up the blog so I
could link it
but I'm just going to wait and then link
it when I'm done the blogpost cuz I
wanted to get this data off my minds but
our medical app that we are creating
what we're going to take back our health
and stop being guinea pigs cuz we're
gonna track our symptoms in our diet and
it will also track these things so not
because I have to track everything I
ever touch I use Teflon pans but we can
ask everyone what kind of pens they use
once if we requested that and then have
people in both into the system but we
can see all of these cancer cases were
by the factory of the Teflon plant so we
can see that more clearly because
there's geographical isolation and we
know we can see where manufacturing
takes place especially in North America
and see why these are concentrated and
backtrack and demand because we're no
longer David versus Goliath when we have
the tools to bring people together this
guys cattle were dying in the 80s but
the internet doesn't exist he can't he
can't call them out he can't really be a
whistleblower not in the same way and he
was he was trying to contact the media
and everyone else and his whole cattle
died it's like these things are
important and everyone who's in powers
and money is invested in these things
their heads in this weather out of evil
or just ignorant they put their heads in
the sand and don't want to know that
there's they're causing harm and we need
a system to do better than that we need
a system that does put our health and
because everyone's health is on the line
there's 80,000 chemicals this is the
story of one of them and so yeah
creating our medical app is going to
attract we're gonna track the
pharmaceutical companies because we are
gonna track what we're putting in our
bodies and if it's great and helping us
that's going to show and that's gonna be
that and as the finance piece is part of
it and it's like ok well yeah it saves
my life but it's also astronomically
expensive that we have the power to
change that together that no single
consumer has the power to do no single
person is gonna have an effect on the
cost of insulin but a million diabetics
getting together people with diabetes
getting together and deciding that they
don't want to go bankrupt over insulin
so they're gonna get together and create
insulin for themselves at cost
those people can share that's how we
change the world is by creating the
tools to come together and we are gonna
create the tools to come together and
enough of this you should show
you get to just release anything into
the world and then it's on us to figure
out that it's causing cancer and birth
defects and then we have to fight it to
get it taken down to the system and then
they can just switch it for a new one
rebrand it and that one doesn't need to
get tested our procedure for
manufacturing on this planet needs to be
discussed needs to be transparent needs
to be known it I don't care
about your proprietary business I care
about my for private area health my
genetics we're passing out into the next
generation and what's being bio
accumulated we will never be able to get
rid of and then we need to create the
system to let humanity tackle the
that can't be completed on its own that
maybe there are mushrooms we can grow
that do break these things down and once
those things are discovered having them
available to everyone because the system
isn't designed to keep them secret isn't
designed to keep any new emerging
company from emerging and taking over we
can do it all together that is what we
are gonna do with together Tech and I'm
gonna go write the blog post now see you
tomorrow