welcome to voices
welcome to voices with verve aqui it's
my great pleasure to once again this is
his third time my good colleague Greg
enric's and I want to talk about a
really core part of his work it's not
it's not the entirety of his work
Greg's work is like kegels it's this
comprehensive huge thing I'm not I'll
take that reference so I want that you
know clearly understood but I think
there's a part of his work in particular
that jives with a lot of my work
especially I'm finding it especially
relevant to this whole project of you
know trying to get back to dialectic the
Socratic way of life and the integration
of sort of transformative psychology
psychotherapy and cognitive science and
break is very much a partner in that
whole project and so I'm very excited to
have you here again Greg welcome once
again it's so great to be back I really
appreciate the invitation it's always a
lot of fun and I think as you know John
I just such deep admiration for the work
you're doing the change you're making
itself
thank you so Greg in case people haven't
seen the previous video could you just
quickly do you know you know an audio CV
really quick about who you are
absolutely yeah so I'm a professor of
psychology at James Madison University
I'm a member of what's called the
combined integrated doctoral program and
clinical and school psychology it's a
program I directed for 12 years but then
retired so I could do more of my
scholarship so I'm really interested in
theory and practice in psychology and
organizing the fields research in
big-picture ways so that we can generate
a language of talking about psychology
that's actually coherent and there's
consensus about it and we have shared
terms and we connect to cognitive
science I don't think that psychology
should be terms science and those kinds
of things and I'm actually very very
that's my last as the pedagogue
psychotherapy video I really believe
we're in a very important time the
Kairos
the moment of course there's the
pandemic but I really believe you know
if you track this thing I developed
called the tree of knowledge it says
that we're really in this very very
important time with the emergence the
digital age and all the changes that
bring to bear and we need good sense and
meaning making systems help us to make
it quick I think really requires a
pretty quick transition over the next
three decades into new ways of being and
we need really good knowledge systems
and we need wise values and we need to
mesh those together so that's what my
big picture of passion is finding ways
of awakening to the meaning crisis and
addressing those so we can find a path
towards that's excellent and I really
recommend you guys check out the the two
previous videos with Greg especially the
one we did that was sort of centered
around the co vid and what what's that
what that is doing to people um so today
let's not talk about the pandemic if we
can very I think very good and in depth
and really richly reflective discussions
with people about that but I want to now
turn back to you know I'm I'm working
towards this project the after Socrates
project yes and really trying to
understand the functionality and the
normativity that regulates the
functionality of distributed cognition
yes and what's called collective
intelligence and ways in which we can
analogously like we do for individuals
can we get collective intelligence into
collective rationality into collective
wisdom and I take it that there was a
project in the ancient world that starts
around Socrates and then it has a long
history afterwards developing this
practice of dialectic which was both an
intra personal and interpersonal
practice yes Chris mr. Pietro and I have
written a few full of things on us
already book chapter and a couple of the
things there's been lots of discussions
I've had with you know the I sense talk
and George
Hall and Christopher master Pietro and
you and I've had one around the whole
idea and then the thing is I'm not I'm
not
not anachronistic I'm not trying to
bring that back but I'm trying to and
yes in order to put it into and I sort
of intend this pun into dialogue with
all these all these emerging practices
that are trying to tap in to distribute
cognition and really elective in in
intelligence so that we can yet as you
said much more powerful tools of
sense-making
because normative structures are not
made by individuals they're made by
cultures right and so I think we net we
need to get a very clear understanding
of that know what I wanted to bring up
in particular given that sort of context
was an idea that I have been talking
about and developing also with the book
I'm writing on the call Univ continuum
with Daniel Craig this idea that we've
gotten a shift into monologic reason
where it's a we give the classic example
is somebody presenting an argument or a
treatise right and right even as late as
you know Aquinas philosophy was still
written in a dialogical manner a
dialectical manner and so one of the
shifts that happens although you can
also see it earlier on and the shift
from Plato's dialogue to Aristotle's
monologues is this shift to the
monological model reason and and then we
and then of course that gets very
strongly valorized by Descartes and
Locke and ultimately by cons right and
the autonomy and the self-enclosed miss
right of reason right and the entire
enlightenment product becomes
individualistic yes anyway and of course
there's some there's some interesting
ironies about that you pointed this out
and one of one of the things I read by
you that individualistic cultures
actually tend to have a higher rate of
self-serving bias which is like a very
dry very rational argumentation so
that's that's that's so there's
something that I mean you
a lot of empirical evidence but that's
so I'm just taking that as a gateway
Anki
maybe this model of the monolithic and
also monophasic you know only one state
of consciousness is the matters so
monolithic a mono logic monophasic mind
right there seems to be increasing
evidence that that's sort of going like
it's taking us in the wrong direction
it's actually they're incorrect model
for how we should understand the
emergence the functionality and
ultimately the normativity regulating
what we call reasoned and I want to
point something out for the viewers it's
important to do so greg has developed
this around what it's called the
justification hypothesis and then
further work and I'll let him on packet
much more recently and independently
Sperber and Mercier have written some
articles in a book called the Enigma of
Reason is convergent very convergent
almost identical to Greg's argument his
was has precedents has clear precedent
but the fact that they have come to a
very similar conclusion using very
similar data argues very strongly it's a
convergence argument for this hypothesis
being very very plausible and so I just
wanted to state that and so great I mean
I can you know I'll be quiet for a while
cuz I want you to lay it out right ya
know cuz you have you have you have an
account not only of the origin right
you're doing that you're doing you're
doing the design stance you're doing the
classic move in cognitive science the
reverse engineering what we might call
reasoning emerges and then you do
something that's unique to your work I
don't see it as much in spur burrs work
you she's very relevant to Socrates and
know thyself you make some deep
connections between the emergence of
reason and self-consciousness and this
is and then and then you go on to you
know explain how and why we should now
re understand and reinterpret our
reasoning capacities in a much more
ecologically valid manner is that a fair
representation that's a water
representation because it gets the key
aspects of the idea so the set of idea
that I now refer to is called
justification Systems Theory and it has
three different components to it let's
start in the order that you offered so
one component is called the
justification hypothesis and I'll say if
you look at my writings I used to call
the whole thing this and then I changed
about two years ago Joan Mikulski a good
friend of mine and sociologists helped
me see why it just wasn't a good name to
call the whole thing I policies but that
is a good because it goes right into
Sperber and Mercier work and claim and
the parallels which I was making
actually in 2003 and in fact actually I
stumbled across this idea in 1996 and it
change into 1997 really changed how I
see humanity and humans and how humans
went from primates to people right
that's a really important point because
you make that point about that sorry I
wanted for interrupting I just I don't
know please I want to put that in this
another thing I want you to talk a
little bit more about yeah you you you
you you tie this to a specific in the
biological sense a species difference
right the specific dairy clear right
it's deeply relevant to our notion of
ourselves as persons okay so one more
theme but there's no that's great and in
fact I need to acknowledge a Peter of
sarios many people are nobody he
developed his own model of psychology
called descriptive psychology and he was
very concerned very similar to me it's
always at least an aspect of my concern
about our definitional systems and he
was concerned with what our persons and
what his behavior the behavior of
persons was what it try to develop and I
stumbled across this is way late but he
helped me understand and basically when
he argued is a person isn't you you
learn to be a person and that's one of
the things that only humans can do and
what that means is basically I'm using
my language a little bit was very
congruent is an entity that it has self
conscious awareness and justifies their
actions on a social stage
right person is okay and he makes an
unbelievably interesting point that
although empirically the only kind of
creatures we know to be persons are
human beings our capacity for imagining
and science fiction is replete with
persons who are not human beings right
Jabba the Hutt and Star Wars you know
not a human being but he's a person and
that shows you the relationship between
the concept okay
an operative concept of a person a self
conscious actor legitimizes their
actions on the stage and takes
accountability responsibility in certain
ways depending on the social dynamics
okay and that is what happened to us
because that's what we do you know
obviously soccer IRS phone calls a
rational animal we have pride reasons
and we rationalize what we do and that
is what makes us very very different
okay there's analogs in very weak ways
my friend Jo Mikulski asked Jane Goodall
he was talking about the difference
between humans and you know he's very
aware of this and embraces this from a
sociological perspective and he asked
Jane Goodall so do the Chiefs ever do
anything like justify their behavior
Jane Goodall's
no we've never seen anything like that
so so anyway so there's this issue about
what is it that divides us and then deed
there's the macro system out the tree of
knowledge and basically what it says is
the person culture plane of existence
which is like a new complex adaptive
plane emerges and it emerges as a
function of a cyclical feedback loop of
justification hmm all right whereby
individuals are justifying proposition
'le justifying their actions on a social
stage and there's a variation and
selection and retention process of that
process of justification that happens
between dyads and in small groups and
then emerges to create large-scale
systems of justification right and
that's what gets us into this what I
call capital seat culture is a way to
understand the normative ecology that we
reside in as a system set of
interlocking networks of large scale
systems of justification for example
like the law my daughters trying to
study law right now and she comes in and
tells me no this is one of the defending
this what you have to do and I'm all
kind of like yes this is the
professional convocation of our social
rules of justification which is not
available so that's just an example so
what the concept of justification does
is it provides a framework that links
the person defines what a person is
relative to a primate and links that to
the large-scale concept of culture right
okay you know that's really cool well
maybe we could slow down and unpack that
a bit because yeah you you I understand
you is arguing that you know
justification self-consciousness and
language are all sort of cool emerging
and co-facilitating each other in an
evolutionary fashion is that is that
correct that's exactly right and this
allows us now to come back thank you for
that because then we can then trail the
argument okay and we'll go to Sperber
and Mercier claim because this is
parallel and then I'll feed it my own
well there the title their books the
Enigma of Greece where it is reason come
from and basically they argued first
that it was argumentation and then
justification like a combination of
those two is actually where our
reasoning came from so it is the prime
and I love this and this is in fact this
is the an idea that I had and I built it
off of a number of different ways but
the argument basically is that what you
as you start to talk and offer you go
from mimetic and broken language into
propositional language yeah yeah the
propositional claim and what I think
both you know what we are saying what
I'm saying and what they're saying it's
really these propositional claims
actually then they carry weight and an
investment because they're claiming what
is not to be and now you have to
negotiate that mm-hmm okay and you have
to justify what is it ought to be and
argue about what is not to be you make
the point that language makes us
especially exposed and vulnerable
because right right because other
members access to what's going on in our
cognition and that that makes us you
know vulnerable in a way in which other
organisms aren't vulnerable right so
right right right so so here and so
Mercer it's of what they're doing is
they're giving an ecology argument okay
so all sudden we have an ecology which
by the way is very real open to the
dialog owes residence between but what
as you mentioned with Socrates and the
other ideas there's a vertical interim
psychic dynamic for as well as a
horizontal between dinette right right
now I'm gonna get to that so now what
we're gonna talk about as well here's
what the key insight that I had cuz I'm
a clinician I'm getting trained in
psychodynamic theory anyway look at a
lens of psychodynamic theory you see the
self conscious ego as a rationalizing
function that's the lens that you did
and that there's these underlying
demands and drives both from your
primitive child animalistic and from an
internalized parent and your self
consciously trying to navigate all of
that right you're trying to figure out
why you tell people what they do and
what you should tell them and in therapy
we create this very private context
right that's very confidential and I'm
very giving so that I can get to what's
all underneath the layers of defense
I'm learning how to do okay so and then
basically I stumble across this
justification idea and there's the
interpersonal emergence of culture
dynamic but now here's the real issue
this is what really separates this idea
okay it's a reverse engineering idea
right so everyone like Sperber and
Mercier and so many people see human
language is so different than other and
gosh what was all the capacities and
then it does allow us this cognitive
widgets and unbelievable right and and
then maybe it's argumentation
justification interpersonal here but but
here's the videos should introspect okay
John tell me the worst things you've
ever done in the world did tell it
publicly to everybody here so you don't
want to do that right you know you don't
want to talk about your unbelievable
weaknesses or the times that you were
selfish and all of that and yet what
language does with its questioning is it
allows me a highway into your subjective
consciousness in a way it's just totally
different then you know I have a dog my
dog just unfortunately he did not
unfortunately but he just got neutered
and he's in a lot of pain I presume all
right
but I don't know what's really bothering
me why did you do this to me yes um
Bertrand Russell once famously said no
matter how eloquently a dog barks it
can't tell you that its parents were
poor but hard-working there you go right
or betray them and then struggle with
whether or not you throw your parents
under the bus right right right right
right
and then what would that mean and if you
do throw them under the bus they'll come
back at you and other people might see
you and at the same time if you don't
you then deal with all the traumas that
hurt you well now oh there you go now
you're faced with a problem of what I
call a problem of social justification
the problem of social justification is
the idea that language now creates an
ecology where whereby the transparency
between us grows ok exponentially and if
you have your private room to use a big
contain Ian's notion ok and we talk
about sort of the complications with
that but I'm using that intentionally
you may not want your diary of your
private room to be exposed but language
opens it up for us in a way that's
radically different so then the question
is how do you manage that and the I
argument is is that the self
consciousness system a private internal
narrator evolves to become a justifier
alright so and then you look at the
structure of self conscious awareness
relative to subconscious and emotional
and perspectival perceptual awareness
and the social environment and you make
very clear predictions about the kinds
of structures we would expect that
reporting system that logic system that
narrating sense making system to say
about oneself ok and like for example
self-serving biases that would make the
prediction that depending on the social
context but if it you won't generally
want to take credit something goes well
you get an a on a test
hey it's because I'm smart and study an
F on the test is because you're a lousy
professor John right that's a natural
why because that kind of justification
narrative preserves my influence and
investment my worth in a particular way
and I can narrate that to myself another
context of course I have to be careful
because nobody like
so now you have the whole dynamic how
you create a justification system which
by the way I would argue
welcome to yourself yeah I like this
notion because it's very much like what
more argues and Socrates that you don't
discover the self primarily through
introspection or by just sort of stating
what you believe you discover the self
by what you will commit to within a
social context right exactly because
then you obviously one of the things
that this thing that's part of the
larger system is that we're very
motivated and this is pretty common
sensical but ice to you know to maintain
our social influence our relational
value our place in the social matrix
right so so if the crowd is going one
way right and you stand up and you say
well I think you guys are all full of
crap well you know that's I mean you
know that's a dangerous thing factors
can do that but almost everybody say
look at every like at the teenage years
what the crowd is doing I mean I work
with a lot of teenage troubled
individuals and we see trouble
psychological trouble really
exponentially jump in the modern world
in the teenage years okay
why well this provides a very clear
understanding that what happens in the
in adolescence is the emergence of
stabilizing identity self-concept yeah
okay for kids that are 5 it's contextual
they certainly have a sense about how to
justify did you eat the cookies no
absolutely not okay because they don't
want to get punished in there
particularly by the time you're 12
you're carrying around an image of
yourself that you can extract formally
across a wide variety of contexts now
you have to think about who are you how
do you get influenced who are you really
relative to who do you present yourself
best and you get all sorts of impostor
syndrome self-critical kinds of issues
well there's two points I wanna there's
one that seems the evolution about the
interpreter and then the second point is
this idea that I think you have it too
but I it's
clear and Sperber and Mercier that what
that individual reason sort of doesn't
work very well but collective reason
works very well so let's go to the first
one because um because it looks like I
mean you you do you go in and you say
you know there are organisms there are a
few a number and they have you know very
developed brains and they're social
creatures like us that do have evidence
of self-awareness some kind you know and
we have some evidence then I mean some
minimal awareness you know of the
perspective of their cohorts like they
they you know they go hide things or
they're back sort of thing and so and
then post in her work on the philosophy
of metacognition she said we have to be
careful to distinguish two kinds of
metacognition there's the one in which
we're doing something like self
narration um there's a procedural form
which is I'm self modeling so that I can
monitor and manage myself as I'm moving
around my world right right and so it's
very plausible that many organisms have
some and because we're even finding this
in robotics if you give the robot if you
get the robot to model itself the world
it does much so you get self modeling
and then you have that sort of
procedural metacognition and then it
looks like what you're suggesting is
that that can get exact into being
something like this interpreter all
right right absolutely so so certainly
you can imagine right why there would be
a metacognitive functioning to feedback
and afford say a more optimal grip on
the environment for non linguistic
animals that have cortical and
especially structures and there's and
you see you know mirroring awareness and
other kinds of indications of self
reference okay but it's it's just a
radically different environment when you
have the narrative linguistic highway
open up yeah you know and so now now not
only do you have to think about yourself
in action you have to think about giving
your
accounts to other people with the story
and that's that's the story of the self
is what is what fun yes so the
metacognitive piece of the story of the
self it really becomes a human person
private-public narrating I wondered if
your if your argument I think it could
be strengthened if you integrated it
with Daniel kudos work on the narrative
practice hypothesis narrative actually
really enriches it's it's a particular
way of using language and imagery that
really allows us to pick up on other
people's mental states because he said
the problem with trying to determine
your behavior is I actually can't do i
can't just you know the old model belief
plus desire equals behavior doesn't work
right right how do you how do you tell
if somebody's eyes twitching or winking
and how do you tell if the wink is nude
or pink right and so I need to know
onions a lot of history I need director
I need to know the context I need to
know what everybody's intention is I
need what possible outcomes you might be
I need narrative structure I need plot
and right he's he says it's literally
narrative practice and II said that's
why cultures practice narrative and
practice absolutely absolutely
powerful way of building our mind sight
abilities brilliant brilliant and yet
said and in fact actually I talk all the
time about will actually what was
framing us socially in the
socio-cultural context is the
justification merit right right right
right okay which is the story of the
self that legitimizes who I am and what
I'm doing and legitimizes or not you and
what you're doing so it's absolutely
along those lines and I agree that that
lineage could be strengthened and
informed by that working there's an
enormous amount of detail fact that's
why I love the idea it's a hubbub I'd
takes lots of other people's like those
ways in which their brilliant work can
be built upon it and then create a hub
that then ties a lot of that work
together I mean this is one of the
reasons we're and we cuz there's a lot
of work now on how the Platonic
dialogues we've been missing what we've
been mistreating them because we have
this Enlightenment perspective of you
know the monophasic monologic
monolithic mind right and while we would
lack the arguments right
and what we're leaving out a lot of
people you know do Highland and lots of
people drew Heinlein that comes to mind
immediately but lots of people arguing
you know no but the drama because a way
of life is being justified and made
attractive to people and the drama has a
particular narrative structure right and
biologically and that's just as
important and you can't actually get
Plato's philosophy if you just extract
the argument right so and that's exactly
I mean and so the what I call the
problem of social justification is
essentially what gives rise to this
reasoning dynamic which means that it
evolves in a social relational context
right and so that's apps and it is that
iterative process and think about every
one of them you know what was it James
Mark Wallander said ego and alter are
born together and that's that's both
because we have an intuitive social
relational system our attachment system
our mirror neurons are tracking others
the importance of our place in the
social world but in humans then we are
born into a socio ecological thicket
okay and then it is the process of
negotiation around that thicket that
gives rise to the collective
intelligence right
the opportunities of things like
emergence of a wisdom in the crowds and
earn all of our intuitive perspectives
and relationships of being able to see
what none of us can see individually and
the process of creating context and this
is what I think your wonderful project
really is about is creating a context to
maximize that yeah so taking advantage
of that as opposed to say our current in
the United States at least so you know
not to get political I'm an argue our
current political context is absolutely
antithetical yeah yeah because of its
polarization is creating stupidity
across its collective stupidity so then
what we need to do the transition that
we need to make right now in the next 20
years is create a collective
intelligence system a distributed
network of collective intelligence
system that maximizes wise
justifications and that is an
interpersonal dialogical process right
yeah I'd say to two things there well I
think what were primarily just advocated
to find
is not beliefs ultimately but we're
justifying ways of life and identities
we're alternately trying to justify
personhood not our particular
conclusions and I think we need to bring
that back as central so this brings up
this is a perfect segue to the point
that I wanted to come back to which is
this idea that individual reason that
you know that that model is actually
fraud and we have just overwhelming
evidence you know that this is the other
enigma right that's bourbon wells nuts
for moral since forever and mercy I
talked about it you know widely we seem
to have this superpower but it seems to
really not be working very well
you know there's all the evidence of all
the bias all the self-deception and I go
on a lot about this in my work right and
then they have the idea and I think you
do too right but if you take these
individualistic things these things that
look like they're malfunctioning
individually and you put them into the
dynamic system of distributed cognition
you actually get really powerful and
wonderful results I agree absolutely and
indeed I mean if you look at the
structure of the way hunter-gatherer
systems organize themselves they hated
dominance they were really anti
dominance hierarchies right why I think
the reason they were doing that is
because they're cultivating a
distributed collective network right so
of the various roles of hunter-gatherer
intelligence to be brought to bear along
those lines and I think that we have
grossly erred on the idea that one
person you know we have the iconic
Newton solving for F equals n a you know
and that that is then the idealized
transcendental ego of Conte and all of
that stuff and that's just that's I
think that's grossly mistaken on many
many levels I think it's grossly
mistaken at the level of value first off
I think fundamentally we seek relational
value in networks you know what we might
be known and valued and want to matter
to other people that matter to ourselves
that's not at the core of as a
psychotherapist I'll tell you what do
people really worry about
not mattering and relational value
that's the meaning in life literature -
very good absolutely
what do we really want to do we want to
participate this is like in a religio
fashion we want to participate in what
we think ontologically matters and tell
ourselves metaphorically matters you
create mythos about that that's what we
want to do so and we do it the best when
we do it together okay I think that I
think that's what these are massive
transformations that need to hit from
modernity and it's idealization of self
interests in the individual to a you
know meta modern modernity that actually
embraces the collective and does so
wisely and I keep coming back to wisdom
because fundamental met eval you you
need to be training what is it that
makes a you know a flowering you die a
monic picture of a person and the polos
and the collective group well I mean
there's two things that come out of that
right away one is the that the you know
our capacity for person making is right
and and making conditions of person
making agape its best yes which is which
yeah then a broad interpretation of
Christianity as you know basically is is
to give the love to allow the other
person to flower I mean there's a garden
behind me because I take a lot of that
metaphor relationship you know how do we
shower relational value or love agape
each other and actually neutrally
maximize it that's actually the
socio-economic problem that we should in
my opinion focused on I agree with
though yeah I mean you yeah I mean
there's you present research and other
people who presented research that the
individualistic cultures ironically you
know they tend to have much more of
self-serving bias which is at the core
of a lot of how people you know do
poorly in reasoning tasks and
argumentation too so we're you know if
you're highly individualistic you're
actually much more likely to give in to
confirmation bias and other things like
that whereas if you're in a collective
culture that's much I mean there's
difficulties there are not saying
collectivism is the answer or anything
what I'm saying we've we've got this
weird idea I think you know that somehow
individual reason is the pristine case
but the empirical evidence really cuts
against that dramatically
I'm trying to therefore create a value
system based on the individual like sort
of the individual atomically
individualism what about what I think is
is deeply mistaken because it's just
sort of misrepresenting I think that
it's also part of why you know and I've
had some really good discussions about
this with rave Kelley and he's helped me
moderate what I'm saying but this is why
I've been a little bit critical also of
the hero archetype being so valorized in
our culture because it tends to be
aligned with that whole individualism
thing that is actually very detrimental
to rationality and overcoming
self-deception and affording you know
collective intelligence the kind of
collective intelligence which is the
only place in which our norms are
created this idea that we can be self
normative that we can create norms
purely for ourselves I mean there has
been subject to so much devastating
criticism that it barely even makes any
sense I mean you know that the entire
normative culture is to create a
large-scale system that coordinates us
in relation to collective values I mean
that's what it's doing I mean creating a
normative system if you lived on a loan
on an island I mean really what you
would be doing is creating an inner and
we know this clinically is whatever
projected interjects that you're
carrying around yeah I don't know if
you're familiar with like internal
family systems but there are therapeutic
approaches if you say that my
personality you know like Freud too
obviously decided you know we've argued
the release of personalities well in the
therapy world that made people have
taken that and I think very very
legitimately to the internal working
models of the roles that we internalize
about ourselves and essentially carry
around a family of multiple selves yeah
well I mean that's because the you know
how the brain and how various parts of
the brain are modeling each other is not
actually very different from how one
brain tries to model another brain right
so that that's of course important I was
thinking of Tom Hanks in castaway how he
has will say yeah I mean it's Wilson up
there right yeah just to have to have a
mirror at an intuitive level right a
self other positional stuff and somebody
to talk with and intimately for myself
every time I try to do a paper okay
or trying to come up with a new idea I
bounce it just intuitively comes to me
to bounce into all the positions of the
critic positions of the supporter
positions for people on the side finds
in other words you jump into the roles
so you play out a multiplicity of
different dialogues argumentations
justifications in your own a cos you
reason and when we do it well together
that's what's going to generate the best
collective intelligence which means
therefore that the mimetic at the
mimetic are mimetic abilities and how
they in here within our perspective all
knowing are much more integral to being
rational than we've previously given
appropriate credit to perspectival
knowing is doing a lot of heavy lifting
that we have really marginalized and
back rounded on in in our current
understanding well that's you know I
know you've had some really stimulating
conversations with Ian McGilchrist I
mean the Western logos the Western
idealized individualistic rational
motives you know is completely
imbalanced it's a it's great at one
level but it's not it needs to be
contextualized and there's so many other
different aspects keep in context right
that we need to that we're out of
balance around and so if we're gonna get
moving in the 21st century and a right
more holistic and sustainable way
clearly getting imbalance in
relationship to perspect I will know and
recognizing our phenomenological needs
and how crucial those are tomini making
and harmonizing I mean go to a rock
concert and everybody's jiving together
around music which is all intuitive
participatory perspectival not all
salience manipulation and serious play
so I mean this your your point there
that converges with into you know again
with independently generated work you
know I bought all T's in starting her
that you give people a sort of a wisdom
task which they're you know trying to
decide what the right thing to do and
you ask them to imagine talking to
somebody else
they do much better than if they just
stay in their own head or you know Igor
Grossman colleague and friend of mine
you know all the work on the Solomon
effect people tell me one of your worst
problems and people describe it in these
they say now this private is if a friend
was describing the same problem and they
get insight and real
zatia right just by taking that other
perspective right and all that sort of
work just that keeps coming and pointing
to a dialogic mm-hmm well I'll tell you
I'll say at a clinical level it's
unbelievably important because what
happens to people is when they get
vulnerable inside they feel neurotic
they then don't generally want to share
that because then it makes it look weak
so they create a public out here and
then hide what's going on to here right
and then they become not in a
narcissistic way but in a perspectival
way in a parasitic thoth way they become
completely self-absorbed right they just
talking to themself about what it is
that's going on and then we know from
like a cognitive theory perspective
being developed rigid and absolutist
beliefs about their feelings about who
they are and a dialogue that allows them
to actually engage in a process of
wandering about in fact that's what
cognitive therapies about is like bring
it to somebody else start to get out of
your head and begin to analyze this in
other ways with other people you know
right right that's really cool I mean
and there's therapies that bring in the
perspective title you know this better
than I do like sort of a motion focus
therapy and really well and specifically
actually mentalizing therapy I don't
know if you're fine but it's
specifically it's for individuals that
have personality problems and it's
called mentalizing
and what you do is you explicitly put
yourself in the role of other people I
mean that's the extra that's why it's
called mentalizing so yeah that's
absolutely so so let's just be clear all
that an idealized individual rationally
deducing what truth is is an
unbelievably bad community of
individuals that have some collective
shared framing but then allow for
distributed network and emergence of
toward whatever would be good in that
context and so this means we have to
bring in you know we have to connect to
the perspectival and the participatory
we have to have things that connect
symbol on together the collective and
the individual so a lot of symbolic you
know enacted stuff and it's going to be
collective it's gonna be its and it's
you know a prototypical thing that
bridges between
his ritual behavior you have an
individual doing something but it's
often from a third-person perspective
with with other people around so what
I'm saying is it sounds like you know
reason is going to be situated within
all of this machinery and you explicitly
bring this up that has typically been
called religious right yes because
religion seems to be the software that
runs distributed cognition for managing
all of this kind of stuff completely
completely and what it does is it
provides you just a shared identity and
set of practices that cultivate
collective meaning making together no no
which is what you know we're engaged in
I mean I I love I don't know if it's
true but the idea of a Salons God a
human history he speaks to them that the
idea basically was people are building
more and more temples 10,000 years ago
like the temple like no bleckie techne
exactly it's in Turkey 12,000 years ago
so you know why did we build
architecture I mean agriculture
agriculture sucked at first as a way of
life you know he argues is because we
start building these temples yes are
built before the Neolithic Revolution
exactly that's what the idea is and then
and what happens is if you're building
temples you're around right then you got
to live there you can no longer be no
matter it's they're too big and so you
didn't have to create our agriculture as
a necessity that emerges out of the
function of the size of the temple what
actually translated to in terms of the
modern age I love telling the New
Atheists by the way it used to be I love
telling you it means that the concept of
God gave rise to modernity and it was
birthed by the concept of God so so for
me I believe in the concept of God you
know I don't make any supernatural
claims about theism I believe God and
that's what and I think we flip it
around and say what do we need we need
Tillich's ultimate concern right a you
die a monic ultimate endpoint that gives
us heaven on earth to use it for and
Peter's I mean you know that's and that
and the you know one of the things that
modernity did and it's materialistic
flatland is set the stage for us to you
know dissociate and I know you know this
it's you know I was talking to a friend
of mine I've actually put
look I'm not a friend but nephew of mine
came back his first year of college like
Oh what did you learn basically that a
bunch of chemicals you know he had a
neuroscience course or reductive sort of
analytical op course and you know he
learned that and and so he's like yeah
all of this stuff is should be brain
based like you know my brother a lot of
money for that conclusion materialistic
flatland it's not ideal so yeah we had
21st century's got to read Orion or
collective meaning making systems
absolutely and and I'm now to place your
grace calling that religion yes I mean
so this is wonderful so I mean it's it's
providing a very powerful context a
concept of justification in fact for the
project that I'm engaged in which is
well what is the psycho technology or
maybe Jordan halls term is better what's
the meta psycho technology that we can
recover and also maybe I like the word
inventio it's not because it both to
discover and to make and sort of then
and carry does this wonderful thing is
he talks about how augusten basically in
been Tio's the the inner psyche right
the inner soul
she sort of discovers it while inventing
it it hangs but right well obviously
Europe you you are the absolute genius
of that right with your point of
realization yes yes it's a venti Oh
realization see I mean you know when I
dog on me but you beat both the Janis
face two sides of the point of
realization I was excited about that the
whole damn day I mean that was that is
that is one of the most brilliantly
placed words I just need to say you know
it's one of the most brilliantly placed
words that I've ever seen thank you I
was saying yes to the the double faced
nature of realization not to attribution
of brain but I thank you for saying that
so I I yeah I think that's really really
important and
I guess what I'm trying to get at then
is the inventio of dialectic as a meta
psycho technology that will curate and
constantly be from and feedback to you
know an ecology practices but this meta
psycho psycho technology it's job is to
as you say optimize right all of this
optimizes much possibly can right right
so and then the question is sort of what
we need to do to bring together to
create that meta frame yeah and creates
sort of the latus for the participatory
vines of dialectical exchange to grow
around yes yes yes so that's the way I
would you know I think about it and in
fact so inside my system the way I I
develop what are called ultimate
justification so the ultimate
justification is the justification
justifications correct right okay and
that creates the lodestar or and for me
what that is is be that which enhances
dignity and well-being with integrity
right so these become big free meta
values dignity well-being and integrity
become meta and I mean meta cultural
meaning that I see them as moral
relational universals knit and sends
culture and then create a sort of a
wisdom complex why these three ideas
what they have they interrelate but it's
just an example and I would say that
what we need an attitudinal level around
this is what I call an integrated
pluralism I mean somebody might bring
agape for instance a beautiful bow of
course love a freedom you know of the
individual any number of kind of
potential metal values and you'll see
like all the Universalist kind of church
and wisdom traditions their integrated
pluralistic meaning that they emphasize
different aspects but man is if there is
an essential yeah yeah yeah it's very
much yeah I've said it that's why I
reject both perennialism which says they
all say the same thing and relativism
which says they don't say anything in
common and it's what I use a model
that's like like from deep learning like
you you can see that you can see like
they're they're sort of you can extract
what's in variant but you also have to
pay attention to
varies between them and if you move back
and forth you actually get you know you
get a deep learning from all of them so
a procedural relationship to them rather
than trying to grasp the final
propositions from the movie right and so
pluralism is what's variant and
integrators of course in Barry
exactly exactly you know yin-yang
dialectic around that concept so you'd
and so I think that's exactly right you
have to you have to try and figure out
what that what that's what that would
you called it all of a justification and
he also said it's sort of sort of your
bedrock normativity Bob I'm on and I
think that's totally important I'm not
dismissing I'm trying to also do the the
reverse engineering of the practice no
I'm trying to figure out the best model
we had from our own past which is
electic in that whole front and you had
both these dimensions and Chris master
Pietro and I are doing a lot of work on
this I'm also doing work with you know
Peter Lindbergh that I've mentioned that
and also great I'm gonna take a watch
that that's great great stuff Peter's
doing that yeah so you know dialectic
has this interpersonal intrapersonal and
and ultimately transpersonal dimensions
to it the three dimensions right yes
what I need to put that get that as
clear as I can because we can't go back
there we don't live in ancient Greece
but right and then put that into
dialogue right with all these emerging
authentic discourse practices that are
all springing up because there's a
vacuum and there's a vacuum and that's
right top-down and bottom-up to talk to
each other as deeply as possible I mean
it's a brilliant description you know
it's a brilliant description I'll add a
couple of pieces especially since wrong
justification
please so according if we follow
justification Systems Theory what
emerges first is the problem of
justification in general and social
justification in particular right so if
I'm making propositional claims you it's
easy to ask questions once we have that
argument marketers just hang out with a
four-year-old all right and they'll be
why your ball why sky blue why's this
and how essentially it is
I was like and so so we have to prom and
justification the promised social
justification how do you explain that
concise now we have now we're involved
okay and then we see the evolution of
culture hundred thousand years you know
fifty thousand years it's definitely
exploding right but what happens with
the ancient Greece in in ancient Greece
is unbelievably different and important
in and really I think you can locate
what happens with Socrates Aristotle and
Plato as a fundamental transition in
processes of justification right right
what does Socrates really develop and
from my view he basically develops
formal epistemology and we mean by those
well justify your terms mm-hmm right
okay so he basically realizes that
social pragmatic justification doesn't
necessarily and up to absolute
epistemological truth justification he
sees the difference between those two in
a fundamentally different way and builds
the dialogical technology that helps us
become aware that maybe we're all just a
bunch of vultures right right and then
how do you know when you're not that's
what he basically is asking right in a
very very powerful way and then trying
to create this ecology of trying to
detect now if we keep that
going okay then we realize all right you
get into ultimately I think that gives
rise to science eventually in terms of
empiricism the empirical addition to
that all right and I've got I love
science and I'm a scientist but I have
my critique of modernist science and
what it did okay and ultimately what we
begin in the whole enlightenment
modernist way of thinking
go ahead prioritize objective analytic
reductive truth and individualism way
that is it needs to be recontextualized
both in terms of systems thinking big
picture sense of thinking and relation
we need to bring the relational social
pragmatic back in right way to create a
scientific humanistic philosophy or
macro religion that informs how we
educate our children and fortunately
we've go across the various lines so
what what I'm basically saying is I can
take the concept
the vacation I can trail it through the
evolution of culture right I can then
think about culture as large-scale
systems of justification and I can trail
up sort of then what are the ultimate
justifications that would ideally
organise a large-scale system at the
level of value that cultivates wisdom
and that's where I get my big three but
that's or architecture what you're
seeing about what it is that we need to
do and I take this idea justification
you put those two you can really see a
lot of yeah yeah we ever keep working
together that's very clear
that's very clear I think you know we're
running out of time but I want to give
to you the opportunity to put up that
wonderful diagram yeah yeah yeah
absolutely take it take us through it
and so should be sharing my screen here
it is ok great ok ok so let me just
orient you to this okay we're at the
viewer to this this is a map of human
consciousness that's what it's designed
to do and there are in argues that there
are three key domains of human
consciousness one is your perspectival
phenomenological domain right
I often now refer to this as mind - but
it is your integrated sense of being in
the world and John is an absolute expert
on what consciousness might be and I'm
learning greatly from that's just a side
note ok but so so this is this is the
emergence of say whole brain activity
gives rise to a global neural workspace
then this is you have a private narrator
okay so this is interpreter you were
talking about earlier exactly so this is
the self consciousness interpreter and
in fact we can see anybody has feel
familiar with Michael Gazzaniga --zz
work tennis for your interpreter really
shows at a very mechanical the left
image generates justifications for what
it is doing when it doesn't even know
what's going on but so this is this the
problem of justification and the
mechanics of self conscious narrative
reflection and this is what you actually
share when you talk to other people what
you decide that you will allow them to
see right so now if we go to your
articulation
what is the diet logos about horizontal
we're going in between right here okay
and we each feed the vertical work yep
very much down from the
self-consciousness into our subconscious
and you see this thing called a Freudian
filter right the argument is is that we
want our narrator wants us to be good we
want to be important we want to be
intelligent okay that creates a bias of
desire so tell the story of ourselves in
a particular way alright now we know for
clinical reasons lots of reasons why
people get trapped almost in the
opposite of that and also dynamics that
go on but fundamentally we know from a
basic psychodynamic perspective that
there's all for a vertical alignment of
the self consciousness system into the
phenomenological experiential and then
into the dynamic unconscious light in
other words you're shot right so the 14
filter is very much like what would be
hiding behind your personal shadow
attentional filter what I'm talking
about a lot when I'm talking about like
all the relevance realizations exactly
what that is so this is how how does the
collective representations that are non
conscious jump onto the screen of
experience you basically have you have
the emergence of one representation and
then if you give a Rosenthal model that
I was just learning and then you have a
second representation okay I talk more
top-down bottom-up to use those terms of
awareness and then that pops into your
global workspace of awareness and what
you're doing is you're hunting the
attentional system is hunting for
salient variables or relevant variables
in relation to see what kinds of problem
information it needs to solve the
problems of what I would call problems
of work effort which is how do you
direct your time and energy to solve
problems in living and then what's the
Rogerian filter it's exactly Rogers the
Carl Rogers is that it's an exact
reference to Carl Rogers okay and what
this is is that there's this highway of
information and we want other people to
be a particular way and we judge them
accordingly okay so in other words you
say hey you know I want you to think
this way like me and I want you to like
me and I want this the other so we put
pressure on other people and creates a
pressure to then share
what we publicly want to share in
relationship to social influence right
right
all the Rogerian filters so if you're
familiar with Rogers at all his central
insight is that people have what's
called it he argued people an organist
big valuing process that's actually
would be connected right into the
experiential heart and then if you let
them grow in a non conditional and
loving environment they will reach their
potential that organismic valuing
process knows what's good for them and
they will find out full flourishing
moment happens as other people judge
them okay and because other people judge
them that creates a social split out
here and a private true-self split in
here they've become imposters so it's
the tank the Rogerian filter refers to
the tension between the judgments of
others and how the contingencies that
others will place on me if I share
what's my thoughts are right and so
that's when you're saying hey I don't
want people to know this about me you
know it's managing that transparency
that we were managing that transparency
when anyone puts on and this filtering
process can be done inside but actually
we create a lot of extent known extended
mind around this way of course if you
put a lock on your diary a lock on the
diary is an example of the Rogerian
filter the public why is the lock there
I'm gonna talk to myself and I like
writing is that hell Street process I
don't want anybody to see that that's a
filter and so this is so what the cool
thing about this is it both describes
the various domains of mine and it shows
their dynamic in a relation inside and
interpersonally and you were talking
about we're watching all of these you
know sort of to use peter lindbergh term
we're seeing a culture 2.0 multipolar
war yeah
Peter do with those 35 little mean
Plexus he recognized a brilliant job
idhaya lot diagnosed them in my term as
these emerging competing systems of
justification totally that's I think
that's I think that's completely out do
it I think that's right and they haven't
they have a core idea and then they have
a core opposition and they have more
peripheral things and then their major
players that have influence and
relationships that advocate for right
and our danger in this environment will
create Joe
boring chaotic multiplex that we will
get that will blow ourselves up because
of chaos right or the other danger is a
nightmare and 1984 one gets dominant and
then they control the internet right so
there's an order of chaos dialectic that
we actually have to manage and so what
we need to do is we need to create the
right socio-ecological set of practices
ideals values right to network these
things together so that they benefit
from the dialogue rather than tear each
other down like in exactly you know and
you know but basically what that is is
so that you and I can sit here and be
like gosh John that's a great idea let
me see if I can rip off of that hey my
my tenure is dependent upon ripping your
 down yeah that's very much very
much Wow Greg well we're coming to the
end of our time this has been really
really really exciting to talk to you in
your work and really unpack it and you
know one of the one of the markers I
make of dialectic
dialectic is working and it's creating
deal logos to people can get to a place
where they couldn't get to individually
on their own and I very much felt like
that was happening oh absolutely and
that's you know I've been having a
dialogue with you ever since I started
the awakening of meaning crisis soon
yeah and sort of like and that just the
framing on that well you know is exactly
you know in terms of so if you look at
like the tree of knowledge okay so it's
goes matter of life Mayan culture and
each one of those things life minding
culture our new complex adaptive planes
of behavior that are merged as a
function processing and computational
cybernetic control systems okay cells
and genes and neurons and animals and
people and language right well I've
always been like oh my god as soon as I
saw that I knew that the 21st century
would be we laid the groundwork with the
internet and artificial intelligence the
digital landscape is going to be upon us
okay and that's novel information
processing
so I've always had the intuition ever
since 1997 that the 21st century's gonna
be unbelievably intense right when I
listen to the meaning crisis I paired
that aspect with the struggle of people
trying to justify in the Kairos of where
we are yeah exactly that's well and and
it just woke me up to the in a totally
new way so your synergy of that history
right and the bringing us to the moment
and the framing of it in relationship to
the meaning crisis and what the entire
tree of knowledge system really is this
actually hey here's a sense making
system you know we need to update the
way we think about science we need to
think about science certainly there's a
method we also need to think about
science a structural thing to use to get
an optimal grip on the world
ya know basically is about that it so
it's a sense and meaning making stuff
riffing off of that it's very very
signature sticking you know it's been
great for me or since I discovered your
thank you Greg if you could email me
links like you know you know two or
three quick links yeah there are focused
on what we were talking about today
the justification hypothesis the
justification systems all that so that
would be really because I'd like to try
and get this video up soon this one I
want to up really really soon okay so
well we will obviously talk again and
keep up your excellent work and I highly
recommend Greg's work and those of you
who have have already taken an interest
in Sperber and Mercier OHS work the
Enigma reason I strongly recommend you
look at Greg's work I strongly recommend
it so thank you I appreciate it it's
been very excellent dialogue lots of
energy lots of fun yeah very good