until recently the New Atheists like
Richard Dawkins and sam Harris had a
firm grip on the cultural conversation
the rise of Jordan Peterson and his deep
explanation of religious belief have
thrown a spanner in the works he's now
doing a series of high-profile talks
with prominent atheists like Sam Harris
and recently Matt Dillahunty
Rupert Sheldrake is a rebel a spiritual
scientist who's been having these
debates for a long time what does he
make of it when did you first become
aware of of Jordan Peterson and what
what was your initial reaction I think I
first became aware when people started
telling me you know here's this guy
who's suddenly burst onto the public
scene and check out some of his youtubes
I looked at some of them and I was
actually very surprised hear somebody
talking in a very sophisticated
intelligent way who seems to be prayer
God which is very unusual in these days
and knew a lot about you and was clearly
an intellectual and clearly able to
stand up for himself in conversation
with people with different points of
view so I was impressed here's somebody
who's really raising the level of public
debate he seems to be arguing for very
similar things to the conversations that
you've probably been having for a good
few decades now particularly the reality
of religious experience and the
irreducibility of it to a sort of
materialist paradigm would you say that
was why you connected with him well I
think I connected with him to start with
because he was first of all taking the
Christian story seriously normally
people who are interested in
spirituality it's sort of Buddhism
lights or shamanism or something like
that I mean it usually follows the
principle ABC anything but Christian and
he was
rather unfashionably talking about bible
stories and in a very interesting way
and taking seriously spiritual
experience I mean it wouldn't be true to
say that materialists don't necessarily
take it seriously I mean Sam Harris
after all as a meditator and so as Susan
Blackmore and they're both committed
atheists so there are quite a lot of
people who now practice spiritual
practices as the theme of my most recent
book science and spiritual practices who
would argue that what's going on is all
inside the brain and I don't agree with
that but the nevertheless there are some
materialists and atheists who do agree
that spiritual practices work and confer
important experiences but without
connecting it to any religious tradition
how do we have these conversations
because it just seemed like I mean there
was the Matt Dillahunty and Petersen bit
Petersen was also going to be talking to
Sam Harris later in the year and I
imagine they'll have a similar
conversation about the origins of these
right Sam Harris will say something like
you don't need God to give you these
rights they're just rationally obvious
is there any way of having that
conversation or are we just doomed to
talk past each other
insofar as atheists have a polemical
agenda to attack all religion and is
dismiss it as being inferior product of
feeble-mindedness delusory and so on I
mean all the usual attitudes that one
encounters among atheists then and if
they think they're right and they've
seen the truth and anyone who's
religious is being deluded and they'll
probably continue their evangelical
mission to liberate the world from
religion I mean it is it has this kind
of evangelical zeal to it very often it
certainly does in Sam Harris's case not
all atheists are evangelical
proselytizing atheists John Gray for
example whose recent book seven types of
atheism is enormously enlightening a
he's an atheist but he's certainly not a
new atheist or a secular humanist who's
much more passive
mystic and realistic atheist in my view
and he also traces the history of this
types of atheism were embodied say by
the Marquis de Sade the Marquis de Sade
invented sadism or at least after whom
sadism is named was an atheist and he
thought if the snake God anything can be
permitted and the rule of nature is the
strong dominate the weak so why not if
there's near God and why not have
sadistic practices where if you want to
beat someone and kill them your own
pleasure why not
it's that kind of atheism you see is
very different from secular humanism so
there are different kinds of atheism
that the modern kind is usually secular
humanists and so I suppose that the key
questions really and not so much the
origins of morality am you know I think
it's morality has origins in human
social nature and all social
organization as I said before is it
involves cooperation between members of
the group they have to be sanctions on
people's or animals behavior if they
want to remain part of the group so I
don't think it necessarily depends on a
divine sanction and I think it's
perfectly natural and normal for human
beings to look after their young and to
fight to defend them I mean after all
mother bears defend their cubs and you
know all sorts of animals defend and
protect their young and members of their
group I think we're the particular form
of morality that is the object this
discussion comes in is where it goes
beyond the social group is natural and
normal for animals and humans to protect
their young to be prepared to work hard
to bring out their young is deeply
instinctive to fight to protect them or
their immediate social group where the
human rights things becomes more
interesting and where the Christian
message becomes more radical is where it
goes beyond your own group
helping other groups that's not natural
in most social groups you fight for your
tribe you fight for the good of your
family you help your kids and you help
your relatives but why should you care
about somebody from some other group who
you traditionally been at enmity with or
something you never heard of the other
side of the world what business is it of
yours
the idea that you're connected with a
consciousness far greater than your own
and far greater than all of humanity and
gives you some motive for reaching out
beyond the obligations of family and
social duties your in-group that's the
bit where the mystical experience of a
connection with something much greater
than yourself gives a motive for this
selfless behavior secular humanism you
see which doesn't base it on that guy
the love of God can transmit such the
love of humanity because it turns
humanity into God as it were love
humanity but as a command it's on you
ought to do well you know it's a kind of
duty yes you ought to do this you ought
to have this duty it's not as powerful
persuasive or as effective as a mystical
sense of connection which gives you much
stronger motivation if you feel you
really are connected to something deeper
and greater than yourselves if you were
giving advice to to Jordan Peterson
going into the debate with Sam Harris
for example what would you say would be
the most fruitful lines of argument well
I wouldn't presume to advise Jordan
Peterson he's a much more skilled
polemicist than I am and and he's had
much more experience and in fact he
seems to be on the road practically all
the time so I wouldn't presume to advise
him at all but my own approach with
atheists and is is that to see look at
what they believe because you see the
normal stance is that atheists are on
the attack normally you believe in God
was as very silly idea
has led to all these problems and people
just become obsessed with violence to
get their own dogmas across this
hedgerow I mean all those usual polemics
and think of the Inquisition think of
the Wars of Religion think of Islamic
terrorism and so forth I mean these are
their usual points of view
atheists normally put themselves in the
position of the Inquisitor you know here
all these people with silly beliefs here
they are coming to it with reason and
science on their side and turning the
spotlight of skeptical reason on these
beliefs which they think of as being
completely devoid of evidence and then
they get the religious people on the
defensive that's the normal dynamics but
atheists are not people who have no
beliefs or who've risen above belief the
great majority of them have a very
strong belief system they believe in
materialism the philosophy of
materialism mechanistic materialism
which they often think of is of the
scientific worldview well the trouble
with mechanistic materialism it's a
philosophy not science and it is itself
a dogmatic belief system as I show in my
book the science solution called sunset
free in the United States mechanistic
materialism the official belief system
of science and every atheist I've ever
met has been a mechanistic materialist
so there are some who are not well
probably John Gray is not but most are
they have a belief system that they
think is science and is true and what
they believe is true and what everyone
else believes is just a belief but
actually the mechanistic materialist
worldview is based on ten central
assumptions the first being that nature
is mechanical works mushy as a machine
not an organism in other words it's
inanimate and purposeless and secondly
that matter is unconscious that the
whole universe is made of unconscious
s'matter and therefore there's no place
for God spirits or angels in nature
because the whole of nature the Stars
the galaxies outer space it's all
unconscious matter well these are
assumptions they're not facts and
they're not proven by science and
they're not tested by science even
they're just taken for granted and in
the 17th century the philosopher Rene
Descartes defined matter as unconscious
because he split the world up into
unconscious matter and conscious spirit
spirit consisted of God angels and human
minds which he thought were immaterial
outside time and space and matter was
material inside time and space and
unconscious he made this distinction in
the 19th century this Cartesian dualism
was overturned by materialists said well
why bother with this untestable realm of
God angels and and human spirit is
everything's just matter so they
scrubbed out the spirit pole of
Cartesian dualism leaving the material
pole as the only reality and say God and
angels disappeared at one stroke from
this worldview was one stroke of the pen
they just defined a way but this is an
assumption is not a proven fact and it's
an assumption that Descartes made in
connection with a dualistic model of
reality which has then reduced collapse
down to a monism and the result of that
is that materialists and atheists are
left with the problem of consciousness
it ought not to exist in a universe
which is totally unconscious if they
define matter as unconscious then
consciousness shouldn't exist anywhere
yet we know it exists in human beings
and that's why in the philosophy of mind
it's called the hard problem the very
existence of consciousness is the hard
problem and so they then have to say
well it somehow emerges from brains when
they get complex enough but how can
something emerge that something
radically different from or they have to
say it doesn't really exist some of them
say it doesn't really exist it's an
illusion
but that doesn't explain it because
illusion is itself a mode of
consciousness it presupposes
consciousness or some of them say it
does exist it doesn't do anything it's
an epiphenomenon of mental over the
physical activity of the brain but the
point is that the very existence of
human consciousness is a massive problem
for materialism and it's what's led to a
whole burgeoning field of consciousness
studies a tremendous debate about the
nature of mind many materialists in our
jumping ship and have become Pan
psychist saying that well actually there
must be some kind of mind even in the
simplest forms of matter like electrons
or atoms so it's not just in human
brains it's throughout all nature
there's a conscious side to nature well
then that's no longer materialism in its
old form it's something new so what is
well I think the question I'd ask Sam
Harris if I were discussing with himself
is just how does he see and understand
consciousness and according to his book
waking up he actually admits he doesn't
know he doesn't commit himself to a
straightforward materialist position he
says that's his default position but
maybe there's more to it than that but
he doesn't say what and that's the
crucial thing in the whole debate
because what makes materials and
atheists different from everyone else is
their belief that the whole universe is
totally unconscious all legends are
based on the idea that there are forms
of consciousness beyond the human level
that the universe comes forth from a
conscious ground of being that there's a
sort of underlying consciousness of the
whole of nature and of the whole of the
universe that our consciousness is part
of a much larger system of consciousness
all religions take that for granted even
Buddhism which defines the ultimate
state of being Nirvana as extinction or
the void it's not the same as just
material activities in the brain is a
conscious state which is blissful but
beyond normal definitions
imitations and qualifications so I think
that if one has a debate with an atheist
where one takes for granted that their
assumptions are correct that mechanistic
materialism is a true view of reality as
both as bound up with science then
atheists will definitely win any
argument based on that because they're
taking the ultimate view of reality to
be this materialist philosophy which
excludes God and angels and then you
have to add them on as kind of quirks of
the human imagination or as phenomena
inside human brains or if you have the
idea of miracles and God working in
nature you have to say well gods then it
has to suspend the laws of nature and
occasionally intervene these are all
preposterous views that are very
unconvincing and if a theist can force
religious people into those kinds of
views then clearly there's a more
rational position so you have to reframe
the debate yes I think you have to
reframe the debate because it can't be
taken for granted that mechanistic
materialism is a true philosophy of
nature it's a philosophy of nature it's
a belief system it's a worldview so the
atheists have a worldview not instead of
not having a worldview and I think a
real discussion would involve discussing
their worldview as well as the religious
worldview on a level playing field
instead of putting in the atheist in in
I mean Dillahunty has the typical sort
of rather he's not a bad a son there's a
kind of smugness about that she well we
know will apply some skeptical thinking
to this and you know you could benefit
for a bit of skeptical thought I'm
totally in favor of skeptical thinking
in my own case I apply the skepticism to
the assumptions of science itself
I think radical skepticism is a very
good thing what I don't like is partial
skepticism where you take for granted
your own beliefs and use this laser beam
of skeptical thinking against everyone
else's assuming your own are
invulnerable I think it should be
applied to all belief systems
it's fascinating if you if you think
about it as okay the materialist
worldview can explain absolutely
everything apart from what is
experiencing everything that that's a
huge hole if you reframe it like that
then it just seems to the whole thing
seems to collapse well of course it does
and and and materialist world view as an
idea it's in mines it's nothing it
doesn't exist out there it doesn't exist
as something you can find and
crystallize in a test-tube
it's purely intellectual it's and I I
dare it exists only in Minds and so as a
view of the universe it's not an
objective view it exists only inside
minds in fact only inside some modern
human minds and it presupposes
consciousness and for most materialists
who think that physical realities the
only reality they have to believe
disbelieve in free will their mind is
just the physical activity through
physical causes and trance events inside
their brains so how come they believe in
materialism well it must be their brain
that makes them do it so why should you
or I believe in materialism just because
their brains made them believe in it
there you can't prove it's true if it's
just something that your brains made you
believe in and it's also I find another
of Peterson's views very persuasive on
this where he says you cannot play that
game if you play that game in the world
and you treat people as if they have no
free will they get very angry with you
so it's not a playable game no and I
think it's self contradictory because
Sam Harris who is a believer that there
isn't in a free will I'm he's written a
book about it and and Dennett too I mean
they try and get rounded by saying we
behave as if we've got free will or
something like that but we don't really
then
his views are ones that he has no
freedom to choose so undermines the
entire basis for any discussion about
truth there is no such thing as truth if
it's just something you're my brain
makes you do
and our brains make us do it because
they've been shaped by natural selection
to do for long periods of time with
social behavior and small
hunter-gatherer groups and making stone
axe heads and and studying the behavior
of animals and plants they hunt or
gather there's no reason to believe a
brain that was shaped by those
evolutionary forces over long periods as
the evolutionary psychologists like to
point out it should have the necessary
capacity to understand distant galaxies
or the Big Bang or the origins of time
and space or the entire universe why
should human brains evolved over such a
limited period for such limited purposes
have this ability and and if they do and
if we think that we do have that ability
then how do we know it's not evolution
and if I have this materialist worldview
and try and persuade you of it what
right have I to try and persuade you of
something my brains just made me do and
why should you listen to me rather than
anyone else it's self contradictory and
also don't know if you agree with this
but I also think that it's quite
dangerous you have on one side the sort
of dawkins types that are sort of saying
we're the brights we're the intelligent
ones or the all the religious people are
not only wrong but dangerous in their
beliefs and we hold up this idea of
secular humanism and whereas I think
most people listening to a very
materialist worldview will put two and
two together and say well as might as
well just take what I can for myself I
don't see a way out of like complete
selfishness and I wonder what impact
that has on the world those are the
rampant materialism that we see in our
culture and how much of it is being fed
by these kind of anti spiritual
worldviews well I think quite a lot of
its fed by anti spiritual world views I
mean after all in ordinary parlance
people use the word materialistic to
refer to people who like going to
shopping mouths and buying lots of
things who are obsessed with money
I mean philosophically speaking is this
doctrine that matters the only reality
but the two are clearly
and one can't pretend that in the past
there were you know humans weren't
greedy there were plenty of greedy
people at all times but in past
civilizations greed and avarice was seen
as deadly sins not as admirable
qualities that make the economy grow and
say there were countervailing forces in
traditional societies so I think that
the main danger of materialism mr. tic
gives people a false view of themselves
and and the reality in which they live
it's extremely isolating it trade treats
individuals as nothing but they the
activity of their brains the mind is
what the brain does is a materialist
slogan if I'm nothing but the activity
of my brain and if societies are nothing
but individuals interacting through
enlightened self-interest or whatever
enlightenment philosophy of it is I mean
that's one of the basis of the
enlightened self-interest idea I don't
want you to steal my things you don't
want people to steal your things so
together we'll gang together and stop
other people stealing things and this is
one of dillahunt his points well that no
doubt there's true up to a point but if
it's just isolated individuals if
there's no sense of connection to the
universe to nature to the was lives
under lay under nature the conscious
ground of reality or God if there's no
sense of any of those connections and if
we live as materialist science tells us
in a purposeless universe where we are
here as a result of blind chance in
mutations and unconscious natural
selection forces then it's a pretty
depressing worldview and the result of
their series that in secular societies
the endemic mental condition or mental
problem is depression on a massive scale
vast proportions of the population on
antidepressant pills
lots of suicide even among children it's
a depressing worldview and I think it's
and it can lead to this rampant
destruction of the environment and now I
think that is a kind of spin off from it
but I wouldn't like it he doesn't chart
the natural world and then why bother
protecting it yes I mean I wouldn't like
to say though that it's only atheists
and materialists who do that I mean look
at the United States it's much more
religious than Europe and yet America
leads the world in wasteful consumerism
in fact it sets the kind of gold
standard for the world in terms of
wasteful consumerism and a lot of these
people are actually religious believers
so I wouldn't want to overstate the case
but I think this there is something
about the process and Reformation that
disenchanted the world even before the
scientific mechanistic revolution in the
17th century disenchanted further but
the ground was already prepared by the
Reformation which was on the whole my
process of disenchantment of nature
withdrawal of God from nature and a
focus of religion into the relationship
between humans and God
leaving nature out of it whereas most
traditional religions including Orthodox
and Catholic Catholic forms of
Christianity have included in a sacred
place is sacred times you know festivals
pilgrimages the sense that the natural
world is a reflection of the Divine
Being and and in Hinduism you have
sacred animals and holy trees and all
that kind of thing the Protestants who
didn't want any of that they wanted to
focus religion on humans and human
relationship to God and that sense
prepared the grounds for humanism
there's excessive emphasis on humans so
again I wouldn't like to say as all due
to mechanistic science or materialism
there are long historical currents that
have been at work I listen to your talk
with Mark Vernon about Jordan Peterson
and you described him as obscure and I
wondered what you
what you meant by that and whether I
agree or not I'm not sure he's evasive
on the question is he a Christian isn't
he a Christian I mean one of the things
I liked about Delahunt is he did put out
at YouTube about his discussion with
Jordan Peters and afterwards you know if
if he said Jordan Pearson are your
question and do you believe in God he
doesn't just say yes
he's as well as the story and you've got
to I mean it becomes a much more
complicated thing which what does he
believe is he a Christian isn't he and
if he is a Christian does he actually go
to church services or take the
sacraments I mean all that is obscure
he's talking about these religious
issues but it's unclear as to his own
position and practice I mean I can see
why he doesn't won't say I believe in
God cause for an atheist that presses a
button they think they immediately know
think they know what you think I mean I
see that yeah and usually the God they
don't believe in in my discussions a
theist turns out to be a God I don't
believe in either yeah I think I think
it's more of he would describe himself
as an existentialist so I think for him
to say by act as if God exists it's
probably as close as he come to saying I
believe that God exists because he
doesn't really I've seen him in other
time say he doesn't really believe in
belief belief is something you act out
in the world belief belief is something
that influences your actions and if it's
not it's merely an intellectual conceit
that is not that is ungrounded and he's
he's also got that which he also links
to the Catholic Church about this terror
of intellectualism for its own sake
because the intellect can go and create
worlds that we then inhabit and they
turn out to be missing something crucial
all of these intellectual utopias seem
to degenerate into into disco pious
because they're missing something yes oh
I agree with all that no problem with
that and I think that believed just as a
sort of system of I mean against the
idea of religion as a system primarily
of belief I don't think it is I think
it's a question of practice just as he
says and and ultimately the way you
behave in the world and that's why my
books called science and spiritual
practices
because I think that we have to start
from practices which lead to experience
and that is primarily about experience
even for Christians who have a Creed
which is about a belief system that's
not what most practicing Christians are
primarily about they don't work out
their position in relation to the Creed
and then start going to church they go
to church because they take part in the
sacraments the communion they like
singing with other people as part of a
community they're in a sacred place they
observe the festivals it provides rites
of passage and so on I mean it's a whole
kind of mythic structure and pattern of
meaning and so forth as well as a
morality but it's not primarily about
abstract intellectual beliefs and
certainly agree with that but I think is
the reason I find him obscure is that
it's not I mean when you explain it it
makes sense to me but you'd have to
listen to hours of his video text work
that out and I just haven't had the time
to go into sort of Peterson Studies in
the depth that some people have I
suspect that you you too would find an
awful lot to agree on from what I've I
think so I mean I'd be very happy to
meet you my admire him and I think what
she's doing is great I hope that comes
about Peterson is has got a couple of
very high profile interviews with
discussions with sam harris coming up
and it seems that there is this huge
interest at the moment in discussion of
these deeper ideas and do you have some
some hope or expectation that what we
are seeing is some kind of revival of
maybe a 21st century spirituality or at
least consideration of these deeper
questions on a much more widespread
level I think there's already a great
revival of spirituality going on I mean
the enormous popular interest in
meditation for example and yoga these
are spiritual practices there's an
enormous revival of pilgrimage going on
in Europe and something like 300,000
people a year walked Santiago de
Compostela in the 1980s
less than a thousand so we're seeing a
great growth in interest to world
psychedelics I mean the psychedelic
revolution of the 1960s makes it sons if
it was something that happened then but
there's more people taking psychedelics
now than the well then and I think there
but the pervasive influence on the
culture is very great and for many
people that opens up a great interest in
spiritual realms and most people who've
taken psychedelics usually think there's
more going on than just chemical changes
inside the brain and obviously that's
part of it that's why these drugs work
but they're pointing to something much
more than just changes in the brain on
the temporal lobes or something so I
think there's already this big spiritual
revival going on but I think it's what
it hasn't done is is made contact with
the Christian tradition with our
indigenous religious traditions it's
outside the Christian churches for the
most part and involves the kind of
diluted forms of Buddhism like secular
Buddhism or sort of neo shamanism you
know people who take ayahuasca in Peru
and I'm you can now do a weekend course
and become a certified Shaymin I mean is
so these have all got rather diluted and
so we've got a mishmash of different
traditions but all of them I think we
can learn from but I think the key thing
what makes Peterson so interesting is
the way it contacts the judeo-christian
tradition and what makes atheists
interesting in this debate is that their
stance is almost entirely to do with the
judeo-christian tradition it's a it's a
in what John Gray says is basically a
Christian heresy
it's basically rooted in Christianity
shares many of the same assumptions and
is part of a wider Christian debate they
don't like it when you point that out
though well historically speaking they
can't really deny it
so I do think it's a very interesting
period that we're in and and I think
that some atheists like Susan Blackmore
and Sam Harris who have taken up
spiritual practices really where the
cutting edge of this debate is at the
moment
old-school atheists like Daniel Dennett
and Richard Dawkins who just dismissed
the whole lot are not really part of
what's going on that's an old
intellectual polemic all stance is
basically 19th century point of view
that they're representing that doesn't
take into account the psychedelic
revolution the growth of yoga and
meditation the opening to Eastern
traditions the influence of the Dalai
Lama and all that kind of thing do you
sense that someone like sam harris is on
more of a journey as more open-minded
than Dawkins for example yes I think
he's more open-minded than dawkins but
he still got this extreme anger against
anything to do religion and he treats
religion with contempt and I think it's
just bad manners for example in his book
waking up where he's talking about
meditation practices he said our job is
is to steal the diamond of spiritual
practice from the dunghill of religion
now you know he's learned from an
enlightened Tibetan master in the SOG
chen tradition he's been initiated I
find that incredibly disrespectful for
someone who's a teacher as a mayor as a
very deep and fundamental level to call
what they believe a dung heap and and
instead of saying we're going to learn
from these traditions and give thanks to
the people who've taught us that seems
to me more appropriate than stealing and
and and treating with contempt and the
same with Alain de Botton in his book
religion for atheists he's an atheist
philosopher again he says we have to
steal these practices from religion and
invent a new kind of a sea of
spirituality but why not just be more
friendly and why be so hostile and so
unnecessarily negative
that's the limitation I see in it what's
interesting reading a lot of the
comments on some of the Bible lectures
is there's a lot of people who say I
used to be an atheist and now I finally
have an appreciation for the religion
and it's very easy to get the impression
reading it that that's that's an
overwhelming an overwhelming thing I I
mean I wonder how how broad that
phenomena is but it's certainly very
interesting that for a long time at
least as far as I can tell the the
online world was a bastion of new that
new atheism it was very cynical very
skeptical and it's it seems that at
least very interesting to me that there
seems to be at least some move towards
an appreciation of religion now yes I
think most people who've been raised
atheist I mean in Britain most people
have been raised without any religion
over 50% of the population now identify
themselves as having no religion and
many people have been raised by parents
who had no religion or even grandparents
so there's a a great deal of ignorance
about the Christian tradition most
people don't know much about it except
what they've read in a theist polemics
and for them Christian who is all about
an incredible belief in a God whose
outside nature and who somehow engineers
the universe in the first place and then
suppresses a start button a very
implausible view of God which I
certainly don't accept myself but they
think that's what Christians believe and
then they see it as a whole series of
dogmas that people are terrified into
believing by scheming priests and a
fanaticism that leads to endless wars
and bloodshed I mean these are the
standard kinds of views that a lot of
people have and they often see a Theo's
and more secular humanism as
that goes beyond all this and leaves all
that baggage behind as a kind of
liberation and I think for some people
it is a liberation but for people who've
never known about the Christian
tradition they don't know that the idea
of God and the Christian tradition is
not some being sitting on a cloud with
the white beard no one's ever believed
that it's the doctrine of the Holy
Trinity a much more sophisticated and
interesting view of the nature of
ultimate consciousness so I think that
talking about the Bible stories as
petersen does is very illuminating for a
lot of people because they they've never
heard them before if they have they
haven't seen that these could be
interesting illuminating informative and
contain psychological truths as well as
religious truths and it also you see a
lot of comments saying how naive a lot
of the the sort of simple materialism of
the New Atheists is against such a
nuanced and literary and mythological
appreciation of religion yes
no a lot of atheism is extremely naive
and is is based on a few clichés and a
kind of emotional rejection of
everything to do is religion I mean some
is more sophisticated obviously and
there are some people who have a deeper
understanding and there are some people
who become atheists having had a
thorough grounding in Christianity or
Judaism it's an interesting fact that of
all religions Christianity is the one
that most easily leads to atheism most
atheists in the world today are from
Christian backgrounds you don't often
meet Muslim atheists or Hindu ACS or
Buddhists atheists and you meet
Buddhists who claim that viii Buddhism
itself is atheistic I mean it's a
arguable case but
arguably though as John Gray as a
philosopher John Gray argues that
atheism in its most common forms is
actually very similar to Christianity
it's a kind of religion in itself it's
it's mainly brought about by taking over
the framework of morality of
Christianity which becomes the morality
of secular humanism and taking over the
Christian view of God but instead of
believing in God believing in humanity
so humanity becomes a substitute for God
and many of the things that were
worshiped about God are now worshiped
about humans this is something that
you've all now Harare brings out very
clearly in his best-selling books in
homo deus he makes it very clear that
the modern world is dominated by this
religion of humanity which has its good
points as well as it's bad points one of
his good points is the emphasis on human
rights which derives from the
judeo-christian tradition the idea that
everybody is equal in the sight of God
gives rise alternately to the idea of
human rights ancient civilisations
didn't have that idea ancient Greeks and
Romans were slave owners and so were
Jews and in the Old Testament and indeed
many questions were in the 18th century
you know the slave trade and the slave
plantations in the Caribbean and in
United what's now the United States were
mainly run by believing Christians on
the other hand the abolition of the
slave trade and the abolition of slavery
was also driven by Christians largely
Protestants noticeably Quakers so anyway
this human rights thing which is so big
in the modern world is grounded in this
tradition and takes over these
assumptions from Christianity if they
were challenged it would be hard I think
for many humanists to defend them
because they were part from saying we
think people ought to behave
as therefore everyone has equal value
etc you could easily I think have a
reaction against this liberal attitude
and say well why should we treat
everyone as equal and people never used
to in India there was a whole religion
based on a caste system which didn't
treat everyone as of equal value is not
part of human nature to treat everyone
as equal value this is interesting
because this is a point that Petersen
recently got hung up with Matt
Dillahunty on where he was trying to say
the ethic you think is derived from
rationality is actually coming from a
far deeper place yes Dillahunty I mean I
studied the whole integer interchange in
detail but Dillahunty basically goes off
on the standard humanist thing that you
don't need God to have morality which I
agree with you don't need you can have
moral systems without God and indeed
arguably animal societies which are all
all social animals have societies based
on mutual help and interdependence
that's what makes them social animals
and they don't believe in God in any
recognizable form to us so I think that
where Dillahunty is wrong and where I
think a lot of secular humanists are
wrong is that they trace this value to
the Enlightenment they think the
Enlightenment is the source of the sense
that all humans are of equal value well
I think it isn't it isn't I mean the
chief Enlightenment figures the greatest
of them all in France was Voltaire
Voltaire was a tremendous racist he
thought that you know that Africans were
an inferior species he was extremely
anti-semitic and the founders of the
United States and the Declaration of
Independence which if you like Thomas
Jefferson were slave owners so they
believed in equal rights but only for
people like themselves sort of white
English stock he didn't think it applied
to black slaves from Africa
so I think that if you go back to the
Enlightenment it's not at all obvious
that enlightenment values favored
equality of humans and they traced their
inspiration to ancient Greece and
ancient Greece was a slave owning
society so it's a much more complex
picture as to how the concept of
universal human rights arose and a great
deal of it comes from not from secular
humanism but from Christian humanism and
the sense that humans have divine nature
what part of the Christian tradition is
is especially in the Eastern Orthodox
churches to do with the process of
deification Jesus was a human being who
became filled with God became a divine
and opened the way for all other humans
to become divine and in a way the
religion of humanism secular humanism it
takes this divinity of humanity as its
starting point and that's exactly what
you've are now Harare brings out so
clearly he's an atheist so it's not as
if he's arguing from this point of view
as a polemical argument against secular
humanism he's not he is himself an
atheist but the religion of humanity is
makes very little sense without this
kind of divinization background because
why should human life be especially
sacred why not all life I mean the
Buddhists after all say all sentient
beings the Tibetan Buddhist so why
should it be such good thing for humans
to be totally sacred and every human
life to be cherished well we can have
battery chickens raised in their
billions and in appalling conditions
this is interesting as well because this
is another point that we saw Dillahunty
and Peterson get caught up on Peterson
was kind of scientist hunter you are a
Christian or you are you do accept the
judeo-christian worldview you just don't
accept that you do and you could see the
argument degenerate because the last
thing that he wants to accept is
you're you're actually a Christian
pretending not to be it just feels like
a very difficult conversation to have if
if what you're actually saying is you
you have an entire lived morality an
inherited morality that you that means
that you're actually living out these
values that you don't you say you don't
believe it's a very it's a very sort of
triggering thing for for an atheist to
be told
oh I don't tell atheist that they're
basically Christians I doing they are
but I think that as if you look at the
historical roots of human rights which
after all any became a kind of standard
liberal trope in the 20th century I mean
it's not as if people always had this
fear as I say at the Enlightenment
itself the Enlightenment intellectuals
are racist and slave owners for the most
part and it wasn't really until the 19th
century of this idea of human rights
began to take root but for much of the
19th century under the influence of
Darwinism in the later 19th century the
view was that there are superior races
and inferior races and natural selection
favors the white races that's why they
dominate the world and that's the way it
should be because this is Darwinian and
it's based on science that was the
standard view and it was taken for
granted by the imperial powers most
people in them that the white man's
burden was to civilize the rest of the
world through a superior civilization
and so their slavery itself didn't exist
after well it still exists but I mean
the slave trade came to an end by the
and then in the British Empire of
decades before it did in the United
States the stronghold of Liberty and the
Declaration of Independence so I would
serve right up until the early 20th
century the idea of really quality of
human nature wasn't a widespread belief
in any culture I've seen the comparison
made quite a few times online between
Jordan Peterson and Terence Mckenna
quite a few people saying not since they
first heard Terence Mckenna have they
been
just devouring someone's output so much
and finding it quite hypnotic and
compelling and just reframing their
their view of the world obviously you
know you knew Terence very very well is
that a comparison that lands with you
not really I mean both of them have a
and of gift of being able to speak and
think on their feet is it well I mean
Terence had a bardic poetic gift much
more so than Jordan Peterson I mean
Jordan Peterson gives the impression of
someone who's struggling to find the
truth and it's as if you actually see
the struggle while it might be Leah sort
of like that you see someone honest
struggle to find the truth now Terence
wasn't like that at all Terence had this
kind of bardic poetic gift and there's
just magical language flowed from his
tongue taking one or two his sort of
enchanted realms of the imagination you
know whereas whereas Jordan Peterson say
well Young's got these archetypes and we
got these things hearing he talks about
the imagination Terence was actually
living in it and partly because he'd
spent so much time in psychedelic realms
which in in exploring realms of the
imagination and also chance wasn't
really a polemicist he wasn't trying to
make a point or score points I mean he
was trying to give a new view of human
evolution that consciousness had evolved
partly through psychedelic experiences
that when people discovered psychedelics
in some cultures a long time ago it must
have shaped the way they saw the world I
think that's a very plausible point of
view I think he overstated it because I
don't think all cultures were shaped by
psychedelics some might have been where
as jordan peterson is more polemical and
political I mean he rose to prominence
through arguments about gender and the
serve compulsory you know gender
politics in university settings and he
does talk an awful lot about
psychedelics John Peterson but he
there's a whole lecture where he uses it
to talk about the irreducibility of the
religious experience I see well I
haven't heard that talks I don't know he
talks about psychedelics an awful lot as
being one of the primary if you
accumulate all of the the reports of
mystical experience that they're one of
the most reliable ways of inducing
mystical experience and we don't
understand them at all he says they are
completely inexplicable within our
current paradigm I see well then that
might bring him closer to Terence but as
a style of speaking and as a you know
the way he operates I don't think it's
very similar they may overlap in some of
the subject matter
yeah Terence just wasn't involved in I
mean he gave talks in the kind of
underground world of people who are
interested in psychedelics at places
like the Esalen Institute and he was on
I was once with him on a radio show in
Los Angeles and he is called KPFK which
he was on the slot that ran from 2 a.m.
to 6 a.m. and and and in that slot he
said you know most of the people who
listen to me are insomniacs and you can
say anything at that time of night so it
was very much the kind of underground
sort of outlaw Robin Hood type image
that he had whereas Jordan Peterson is
engaged in mainstream polemics with
mainstream figures are in a very very
public arena Michelle Wright thank you
very much for your time
for more films check out the rebel
wisdom website and if you feel inspired
to help us make more please consider
supporting us on patreon
[Music]