[Music]
so Heather for people who maybe don't
know you so well you're Brett
Weinstein's wife yeah you were also at
Evergreen and the main reason I think
that you were not as high-profile was
that you were actually on sabbatical at
the time the protest kicked off and
looked this stuff that people have seen
I also have a different personality it
would have been less like me to to
continue going into the hornet's nest
but I was I was there in the shadows the
whole way you know I read every single
thing that he sent out before I send it
out but yes I was on sabbatical I was
doing a totally different thing
blissfully for five months in the
immediate run-up to to what happened I
never green and what I find really
fascinating is that you have a really
strong lived experience of a lot of the
a lot of people talk about this sort of
force that they say at work in the media
and in various places and that they're
very worried about it but your story
seems to me to be the the new plus ultra
example of what can happen when this
tendency gets completely out of control
indeed I mean it really even with the
attempts of the Evergreen administration
to basically pretend that the story was
the opposite of what it was and to hire
PR to to to make that happen
for a while it seemed to be working and
people would say to us ah it didn't
didn't happen the way you said it did
you know there were never people with
baseball bats you weren't chased out of
your own home you know all of these
things and increasingly people are
saying well yes evergreen was bad but
it's sort of a one-off thing
and I would say you know I'm I'm
horrified and dismayed and heartbroken
and what happened but given that that's
what was going on that campus I'm glad
to know and to have been part of a
couple that stood up and not be
participating in it through be a silence
I'd rather not be there even as much as
I loved
when it was functional than to be there
under very false and authoritarian
pretenses a lot of people say as you
said evergreen was a one-off and this
when you talk about this kind of threat
your straw Manning you're kind of
creating a bogeyman that doesn't exist
what what is your impression of that
having gone through the Evergreen
experience and then seeing how the
culture is at the moment it's only
getting worse while it is also true that
it is not a majority certainly no
majority of students not a majority of
faculty who are pushing this
authoritarian ideology this groupthink
but I would say that a majority of
faculty are cowardly and probably so
narrowly trained that they have
convinced themselves that they don't
themselves have the intellectual tools
to assess what is going on when these
little uprisings erupt as they do on
most campuses to some degree that
strikes me as anti intellectual the idea
that oh that's you know this this phrase
stay in your lane this is the most anti
intellectual authoritarian phrase that
that's emerging right now stay in your
lane what since when do I have a lane
like okay I was I was trained in a
number of different things as it turns
out like I'm apparently I'm actually
allowed to talk about classical music
because I was trained as a classical
pianist but I don't I have very little
interest in talking about that most days
that's my lane and anything over in how
society is erupting and falling apart is
not actually no like absolutely not
and in part and part I would say anyone
who wants to be a broad thinker should
be should feel entitled and is entitled
to speak and think in particular and any
topic they want but and you know this is
my distinct bias but I think it is
warranted evolutionary tools
evolutionary thinking allow you access
to thinking about just about anything
with the exception of things like rocks
and quirks alright rocks and quarks
don't you know are not subject to
the rules of evolution but otherwise
everything else and pretty much
everything that you've got around here
was created by humans or modified by
humans for our purposes and we ourselves
are evolved and we are you know we are
these very strange generalists and
specialists who are also Apes and
monkeys and primates and mammals and you
know and reptiles and vertebrates and
all these things and there's truth in
each one of those layers and the fact
that we're animals tells us for sure
that we have that we are sexually
reproducing and you know not all animals
are but at their base animals are
sexually reproducing we're sexual
creatures that's what we are and when
sex shows up in animals as it does
across almost all of them there's two of
them
and so you know being able to talk from
a scientific perspective and then go you
know at one level narrow or narrower
except once you get to humans then it
explodes into this big thing again there
is this there is a long history actually
of the social sciences looking over at
biology and going basically stay in your
lane you can talk about chimps if you
want to and bonobos and gorillas but
that's it as soon as you get to humans
you're not allowed and there are a lot
of us over an evolution space who are
saying nope nope no way because only
with the tools of evolution are you
going to be able to more fully
understand what it is that we are and
why we're why we're behaving the way we
are and would you say that sex and
gender is at the core of that
conversation I don't know that it's at
the core but it's one of it's one of the
focal points for sure I think one of the
major confusions at least if I run into
and maybe that maybe this is just more
about the particular conversations that
I'm pulled into both because of my
interests um because of what I've been
speaking on but the confusion about sex
and gender is particularly widespread it
is put a particularly easy to politicize
and almost there are so many different
confusions possible and so many
different ways that people
willing to be angry about what is true
and what they want to claim is not true
that it's it's just it's ripe to be one
of the epicenters of disagreement and
sort of one of the one of the hills on
which the battle for enlightenment
values is being fought from the
experience at Evergreen do you feel that
certain doors have opened at the same
time as other doors have closed yeah of
course I mean we're sitting here right
and and I've been sitting in a lot of
rooms with a lot of people that I never
would have met before
and that's extraordinary and it's
certainly nothing that the
administration at Evergreen imagined
would happen we're going to happen when
they went rogue for that I'm grateful
and Brett's and my world has expanded
dramatically we have much less stability
and financial security but we have much
more possibility to do good in the world
we were doing good with 25 or 50
students at a time for 15 years 16 years
and that was amazing and through it we
learned tools about engagement and
actual teaching and actually reaching
people that I don't think we could have
learned anywhere else but in terms of
reach the reach never grew right the
reach continued to expand but that same
incremental amount every year and I know
many of those students are still my
friends I'm in touch with even more of
them and they're they're wonderful and I
cherish them and that time but given
that evergreen was going off the rails
in the way that it was and it refused to
be helped like it really actively
refused to be helped we offered as many
ways as we could think of I it would be
foolish of me to be anything but
grateful for many aspects of this new
life and one of the doors that has
opened is the intellectual dark web
which has a door that's a new metaphor
yeah what you're you're in the
intellectual dark web according to the
New York Times
I guess well it's the
return of truth yeah so what do you see
the IDW as what's your frame for the
early W I don't I haven't formalized a
frame for it it feels like a true
recognition of aggregation of
individuals and ways of approaching
intellectual disagreement and
conversation that at the time that Barry
Weiss wrote that article in May of 2018
many of us knew each other many of us
didn't in terms of just the people that
she names in that article you know to
varying degrees and I still haven't met
some of them we if you take those people
as some they're just a named subset
politically very diverse developmentally
from a lot of different backgrounds how
it is that they're making their mark in
the world is pretty diverse all those
may be somewhat less other a lot of
podcasters among them and people
interviewing and you know really having
conversations as a way of making their
way in the world which is maybe one of
the unifying things about about what the
IDW is to the degree that is a thing
people who who engage ideas broadly and
who are willing to sit down with ideas
even when they don't feel that they have
the background have the training have
the authority it is it is very much of
the moment I think and I hope that it
remains of the moment the the clear
hunger that there is for people to be
simultaneously pointed in their critique
with evidence to back up what they say
or hypothesis tests with which you might
assess whether or not what I'm saying is
true
always with respect and compassion and a
refusal to conflate the individual with
the argument I think is perhaps the
right encapsulation of what what the
group is there for people in the group
and you know many many many many others
besides tend to reject orthodoxy tend to
reject ideology tend to be interested in
first principles thinking meaning that
if you you don't take something on faith
you try to figure out if that's true
what else must be true let me see how
far back I can go in the logic tree and
see what basic assumption sits at the
floor of that such that if I have to
start questioning this thing here I've
already done this backwards logic and I
can as this starts to falter I can go
back is this faltering - it's this
faltering and maybe it's the assumption
maybe it's the basic fundamental
assumption of whatever it is that you
believe and not all not all beliefs are
subject to that there's some there's
some that you just can't do that with
some issues that really are questions of
but I simply I simply do believe that it
is immoral say to kill an unborn child I
don't but you know that that will be a
belief that some people hold and there's
like what would the assumption be at the
base of that I don't I don't find one
right but addressing questions of what
life is and what the barriers around
life are like all of those questions can
be assessed scientifically and being
willing to go in and being willing you
have to be excited but being willing to
be wrong being willing to be publicly
wrong even and to have to or to be very
wrong in the moment not know it and come
back and say screwed up looked into it
or someone else revealed to me this is
the thing that I thought because of
these things and turns out no so that
that is tough for most people to do for
psychological reasons but it's also
something that we have almost no
experience seeing because politics
doesn't allow politicians to ever do
that which we've cooled before in our
channel thinking in public yes it's
almost an example of people thinking in
public right people are very hungry for
that as a phenomenon that's that's
exactly right and politicians have been
for some read I don't have an answer for
it for this all that's probably pretty
simple
why aren't politicians allowed to think
in public they are when they do they
will of course make errors and they are
just slaughtered right there disappeared
so it is no accident that the people at
least who very wise described in that
IDW article and in general the sort of a
larger amorphous group who identifies as
such are mostly people who are not
beholden to institutions there is this
would be harder for me to do for Brett
to do if we were still at Evergreen if
we were still at the Evergreen of ten
years ago which had complete academic
freedom it would have been possible but
today's evergreen not so much it's
harder to do with any kind of employer
who might be monitoring what it is that
you do in the world your public persona
and be concerned that others will
conflate what you say with what they
think I guess one of the reflex
criticisms of the IDW the probably
expected was its it's white men's
protecting themselves which is a kind of
reflex criticism that you often have
from the left there aren't so many women
in the IDW you're you're one of them do
what do you make of that well so you
said white and men and I think the
answer is potentially different for
those two criticisms you know there's
there's no bigotry in any of these
people whom I know and with varying
degrees there's none it's just that's
that's one of the things that does
unifies as it does so many
actually right if if you are worldly and
you have spent time with enough
different people
whatever bigotry you did have fades so
the lack the there's no there's not a
lack but the somewhat lower racial
diversity then then you would expect if
it was just picked at random from the
Earth's population I think does reflect
past inequalities in opportunity for for
some races and that so here's an
anecdote when I was a TA when I was in
graduate student in graduate school at
the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor
I taught a lot of intro bio classes that
were basically hoops for pre-meds and
sometimes I got pre-vet someone's got
pre-nursing very occasionally I got
students who said they wanted to be
scientists very rarely and I loved them
they were more curious on average and it
was a not very racially diverse student
body um in the 90s but it was somewhat
diverse and I remember talking not at my
instigation to a few of my black
students one year about why they were
pre-med and not prescience though that's
a term and they said look I hope I hope
this changes soon but at this point my
family I'm the first of my family to go
to college and they are taking financial
risks to allow me to be here and I
cannot take the kinds of risks that
being a scientist entail being a doctor
at that point not so much anymore given
what's happened at the American
healthcare system but being a doctor was
a pretty good guarantee of a very good
income and what these that turns out
these were all men but these these few
young black men anecdote but said to me
and I then asked a few other students
over the years and I got the same
some answers back was we don't have the
kind of resource to to fall back on for
me to follow what might or might not be
my passion I haven't even really thought
about it I'm going to be a doctor so
that may be part of what is is going on
with regard to to race with regard to
sex you know there's no sex isn't a
lineage like race to some degree is
unlike an african-american family that
is sending their first child to college
there is no family of all women who are
sending their first woman to college
that's not how it works
obviously so you know down to the ages
so we it's not possible at that's
explanation weather guard to imagined
discrepancy isn't the expected sex ratio
in the IDW is this how I would say it is
the biologist anytime these claims of a
gender gap come up I my brain goes to
why do you expect the sex ratio in the
particular population they're looking at
to be one-to-one just because the
population is one-to-one does not mean
that this self-selected group is going
to be one-to-one because guess what on
average men and women are different we
have different aptitudes even but let's
just put that aside like there there is
evidence in some regards and a you know
with regard to general intelligence not
so much but you know there's there's a
lot of varied stuff over in terms of
what particular aptitudes men and women
have that are different you know women
tend to be more about language and text
and men tend to be more about math and
spatial reasoning that research put it
aside for a moment let's just talk about
preferences which frankly probably
emerged from underlying aptitudes but
just preferences in the most gender
equal countries out there in the
Scandinavian countries you see people
going more and more
two more gender traditional roles they
are doing everything they can to try to
get rid of gender traditional
expectations and people are freed from
expectations pursuing them even more so
you know famously James d'amour and the
Google memo claimed not that women can't
code for God's sake he never said that
he said and he cited literature that has
stood I'm not very long test of time but
stood the test of time that actually
women seem to prefer this kind of work
less than men do and and that just that
seems to be the case
so I think that women on average
probably prefer risky conversation less
than men do and that sounds that sounds
like it's going to be a problem but it
you know in if it's true it may be a
little bit ugly but sometimes truth is
ugly I would say that two things that we
know from the psychological literature
which could be overturned but these
things have stood the test of time or
that let's see on the big five
personality test the personality trait
that is agreeable Ness is very gendered
women are on average much more agreeable
than men are and all of the
subcategories under agreeableness
tonight which I remember at the moment
women are more agreeable that would tend
to make women on average less interested
in getting involved in conversations
where they were they should expect to be
challenged and were expected to give
challenge it's not a particularly
agreeable position it's uncomfortable
right I would say also that the Asch
experiment from the late fifties early
sixties and princeton one of the
mid-century psych experiments that that
were famous and stood the test of time
the conformity experiments in which at
that at the point that he did it was all
Princeton male undergrads
who were asked without going into the
details of the experiment to describe
how long a line was compared to other
lines when there were seven I think
Confederates who answered before them
wrongly and 75% I think of the subjects
in the original experiment conformed to
a patently factually wrong answer
some of the time not very many people
conformed all the time but 75% I think
that's the number conformed some of the
time which is a really large number so
the ash experiment has been redone many
times in many different settings
including now of course with women
because this was you know one of the
very real things that we are emerging
from not too long ago where women were
not included in a lot of medical and
psychological experiments to the
detriment of women's health frankly when
these experiments have been redone
including women the result is
uncomfortable but it's been repeated and
it's that women conform it and even
higher rate than men women conform to
social pressure to agree to wrong things
at a higher rate than men do
I think that agreeableness and over in
the big five personality index whenever
it's called and conformity as measured
by the ash experiment are a highly
coupled concepts and I don't know I
don't know if there's a psychological
literature comparing them but they
strike me as very similar and perhaps
because of women's greater tendency to
conform to social norms and perhaps
because of women's tendencies to be
somewhat more agreeable than men the
kinds of engagement that occur by the
people whom Barry Weis profiled and a
large very much larger number of people
who are seeking truth even when it hurts
maybe at least at first
more the purview of men and women now
that everyone isn't invited and
encouraged
but the Preferences underlying where you
go are different and what are those
areas that are now really hot topics
well sex that one's still on no one's
off yep
there are a lot the the ones that are
getting the most play at the moment are
so that the demographic ones that the
authoritarian left is yelling about a
lot and yes there are some dog whistles
to the authoritarian right but that's a
smaller group and pretty much pretty
much society-wide we don't approve of
what goes on on the authoritarian right
and that leaves the vast majority of
conservatives going like we disavow
those guys but but we're here the
ninety-eight percent of us are here and
then on the left the authoritarian left
the ones who are actually yelling is a
tiny percentage but the things that they
are saying that are threatening to
become the new orthodoxy and that now
increasingly large numbers of the left
even those who don't who if they just
thought about it a little bit they would
realize they don't agree with these
things are questions of sex and gender
what sex is questions about religion and
religious tolerance and whether or not
we should be allowed and able and
actually should be should be asking all
the same questions of every religion if
we you know especially on the left
people sort of pride themselves on being
secular and it's become it's become very
fashionable to hate on Christianity and
to love on Islam and why are we not
applying the same kinds of critiques to
any religion that's out there of course
are there differences between races is a
dangerous dangerous topic but
to the extent that races represent real
populations that have had separate
histories of breeding of course there
are differences will one be able to be
seen as better than another better
what's better better in what context
better how better for what thing my
feeling is as an evolutionary biologist
of course not not better for modernity
but different if there's actually like
if there are if there are racial if
there are real races which is
increasingly not the case anymore then
of course there will be differences just
like there are differences on average
between men and women which don't worse
don't reflect a lineage the same way
races do you know the the actual the
actual stuff we should be talking about
like the actual existential threat stuff
like AI and energy and climate change
and you know nuclear nuclear everything
war and energy together somehow barely
ranks on the list of what's being yelled
at over here which makes it seem really
non-organic at some level because where
are all the actual important
conversations like why aren't we talking
about the things that actually matter
and if we can get through well I don't
know if it's the next 40 years
help us something next for but you know
four years 40 years a hundred years if
humanity's still here in a hundred years
we are going to have fixed most of these
problems or we're not going to be here I
mean it feels like we're we're at this
point on so many of these issues almost
none of them being the ones that we're
talking about all the time but it's
those it's those of sort of enforced
tolerance of crazy views on sex and
gender and religion and race and oh yeah
there must be others but you know all of
you know everything in the progressive
stack right but you know we have to
pretend that bodyweight has no effect on
health
do we really yeah that's where we are
that's one of the big issues no we don't
and
we're gonna move on we're not gonna move
on you have held us hostage so two
things right there's a bunch of
conversations we should be having and
some people are still but mostly we're
stuck over here talking about actually
no we're gonna stand for science and say
there's differences there are
differences between men and women trans
is real
rare and a lot of people currently
claiming to be trans aren't to that
thing and trans man and man aren't the
same a thing not the same thing because
a lot of these topics have become toxic
on the left the only place because we
can say well no one's talking about this
no one's talking about this and then you
you can look at the fact that these are
being widely talked about on the right
they've been widely talked about online
so it's not true that no one's talking
about them but the fact that they're not
being talked about in the left in the
media in these kinds of institutions is
a big problem because suddenly the only
people who are talking about not but are
possibly people who don't have who may
have some bigotry they're they're made
the conversation may go toxic so I guess
it's good to kind of define that
sometimes yeah so the right you know
there are amazing numbers of good and
honorable and smart people on the right
and I knew that I mean I I had friends
on the right before this but I have a
lot more now and I've heard from a lot
more and the fact is that we both the
left should want a smart and educated
right and the right should want a smart
and educated left and and certainly the
right hasn't had that for a while that
said there are different ways to define
what makes you a liberal versus a
conservative or left or right but one of
the fundamental ways that I think is
pretty standard to define the
differences is are you fundamentally
interested in regulation for either
systems that are too big for individuals
to regulate or to help people who have
gotten the raw
the stick if you are if you are if
you're a pro regulation at some level
then you're over in left space and so
even imagining that we've excluded that
tiny percentage of the right that are
actually bigots and nasty and don't have
the best interest of all of humanity at
heart and you take the remaining
whatever it is 90 plus percent for sure
the fact is we do disagree about real
things right the left and the right
disagree about the well first the level
of actual inequality remaining in the
world which is part of what the far left
is screaming about but more to the point
for right now left and right disagree on
what we should do about it
and in general what the right has seen
is boy do does the left not recognize
unintended consequences of regulations
and because we can't know we better just
not let's just let's just let these
systems go and the market will take care
of it and people on the left are much
more likely to say yes absolutely and
precautionary principle please but we're
gonna have to regulate some things that
individual individuals and unregulated
markets simply can't simply can't fix so
you know we need we need all the
reasonable people on both sides to try
to shut down the bigots on their on
their extremes the right has its bigots
the left has its bigots and the left
pretends that they're anti bigots but
it's they're bigots all the same and
start having the conversations that
[Music]
you
[Music]