hey folks we are back with the 22nd
Dark Horse podcast live stream the Q&A
section we are joined through a feat of
well yes duct tape and baling wire but
we ran out of duct tape so it's almost
entirely baling wire that we are using
we have Eric our Weinstein PhD on the
phone ready to join us he is it turns
out this will surprise
none of his followers he is not shutting
down stem isn't that right Eric that's
true
terrible this is this is why people
confuse the two of you yes yeah this is
why I don't want them to yeah all right
researching performative Lee yes yes yes
absolutely thanks Larry
so what do we do people are cowering to
the Mao ISM well my feeling is is that
they may be smarter than us because at
some level we may be in the process of
outsmarting ourselves given how stupid
this moment is and it's really
remarkable to me that if you know as
I've said before if you had a movement
called
save the adorable baby penguins from
hunger no matter what the movement stood
for you would have a lot of people who
would sign on because they want to
communicate just how beautiful and
decent they are dude I didn't know there
was such a movement I'm making a mental
note right now to go sign up for it as
soon as this is done
you heard it here well I guess you're
heard of here second right save the baby
penguins from hunger there it is I also
should say somebody left a comment
recently on one of my videos which I
quite liked which was we all see the
cheese some of us see the trap that's
very good that's sweet
that is very
good yeah we all see the cheese some of
us see the trap that's that's very well
I agree I saw somebody referring to an
outbreak of anti-semitism which I
thought was a very good turn of phrase
for what is it sure what is happening
all right so what else can you tell us
what are we missing about this moment
well is that some concept of wronged is
substituting for some concept of correct
so the more wronged you can claim to
have been the more correct you have to
be because no one is allowed to
challenge you the act of challenging a
person who claims to have been wronged
with an intersectional claim on that on
that issue of oppression is a person who
cannot be disputed and so the issue of
if I have less intersectional and you
are more more intersectional as per the
concept of oppression then effectively I
can't be right and tell you that you're
wrong and therefore I have to cheat you
of reasonable feedback and this is where
lived experience and claims of identity
are used also to game the system because
not only does your does your position
and the progressive stack how many
intersectional points you have
contribute to how wrong you can claim to
be but it's only you who gets to do the
math on how wrong do you are because I
think that one of the problems that you
have to deal with is that the underlying
idea is that my history of being wronged
has to do with my history of being able
to succeed within a system and the
problem of let's say the overseas
Chinese or the Jews is that you have
people who are often oppressed but who
are often very successful while wrong
and the biggest problem here is that for
example the Jewish claim on
having been wronged is particularly
problematic for this movement because it
rivals or even can exceed the black
claim and therefore the claim must be
disposed of with extreme prejudice
because it gives the lie to the idea
that one's level of oppression and one's
ability to sort of navigate the system
the assumed linkage is called into
question
yeah I think hey one more let me give
another example of the kind of reasoning
one may not introduce are you familiar
with the killing of Daniel shaver in
2016 no Daniel shaver was in a motel I
think in Arizona and he had some kind of
a gun for pest control I think a pellet
gun that had been seen in a window and
the police showed up and they forced him
prostrate into the hallway and they gave
very complicated instructions for what
he was to do if he didn't want to be
killed on the spot and having some
alcohol in his system he was unable to
follow the instructions and was shot
five times I think died instantly if you
imagine that George Floyd who was by all
turns somebody who did not necessarily
believe that black lives mattered
because I think he was present in a home
invasion into a pregnant black woman's
house previously served five years for
letting a bunch of armed men into the
house while he pointed a gun at this
woman if I understand correctly you have
a situation whereby were the two
killings exchanged I have no question
that black lives matter would be enraged
by the killing in Arizona and relatively
mute on the killing in Minneapolis and
so what we're talking about is we're
talking about a level of clairvoyance of
a right to infer the belief that no
white person hears the police
this is only understandable by black
people the entire concept is beyond
preposterous but it plays into a sense
that I think white people and others who
do not have many black friends are
incredibly frightened of this and I
think those of us who do have black
friends and strong black contacts are
completely confused because many of them
are saying what the f yeah in fact I had
forgotten the the young man's name who
was shot but he is obviously in this
clip quite terrified that he is about to
be shot he's trying he's pleading for
them not to shoot him and I think he his
shorts he adjusted his shorts as he was
trying to comply with the orders and was
shot so the point is the fear is
obviously there despite the fact that
he's a white guy facing heavily armed
cops etc you're right it is it is a very
interesting counterpoint and I think I
mean the shut down stem idea is about
shutting down the tools with which to
test whether a claim is true and the
problem is what they leave is how
intuitive a claim is and in fact what we
are watching is claims that are not true
being converted into intuitive claims by
force right and as retired by the threat
of contradicting them resulting in you
being punished people are by car
convincing them so this is like a group
rationalization that we are watching
unfold well you say group I would say
cult I mean I think what you're what
you're seeing is you're seeing an
ideology occupying a place in the human
mind where the you know there's probably
like a chomskyan like pre grammar for
religion many people don't have a
religion this is clearly inhabiting that
place where you have a closed circle of
ideas which is sort of the sealed
epistemology and science is the same
threat to this that it is to claims of
the Catholic Church about you know
if there's a miracle where milk is
coming from the eyes of a statue you
know more or less we have a lot of
sensors and detectors we can probably
tell through inspection if a miracle is
occurring and this is a miracle in the
same sense that that is a miracle which
is it's not true
so the point good well the point I was
making earlier I don't think is a
simpler version of this but actually an
adjacent point which is that people who
don't rise in the progressive stack
because they don't have any
intersectional points because their
lineage or their sex doesn't have a
history of oppression there are claims
that can be made now to game the system
and this is what we're seeing with with
the trans ideology and again this is not
to say that trans isn't real and rare
but it but it's important right I mean I
actually so this this is this is one
point where Brett and I do do this thing
because we actually do know trans people
and you most people don't actually right
we actually had trans students who we
don't talk about because their privacy
is paramount and you know who who we
understand to be really and truly trans
and to to not be out on the streets
talking about how trans they are because
they live in this deeply horrifying
position of having their actual
biological sex be out of step deeply out
of step with what their brains are
telling them about what their sex is so
that that is a real but super rare
phenomenon so I will I will do it in
this case Eric just because I because
most people watching probably don't know
any trans people and it's really easy to
dismiss the trans rights activism as the
future portrayed is believing and I
would like to have a general statement
that anybody who's put as many hours
into the world as I have this is like
the jizya in Islam where you have to pay
a constant tax at a higher rate than
anyone else and effectively what they do
is they grind you into a pulp
so what I
say is I don't believe that this is
actually as opaque as we're pretending
it is the idea that this is you know a
highly politicized demonstration of
power I think is evident to everyone
whether or not we echo it is a different
question but I can tell you if you want
to know that the federal government
through the National Science Foundation
and the National Academy of Sciences
studied the fact that a tight labor
market would bring women and minorities
into science and decided that it was far
too expensive both in terms of a fear
that the quality would be lower and that
the price would be too high so they
opted for a program to fake a labor
shortage in the 1980s which is of course
impossible in a capitalist economy
because the wage rate rises to whatever
the correct level of need is and if
these people weren't all interested in
the blackening the feminization the
trans a vacation whatever you want to
call it of science the best things they
could do would be to put in term limits
when they got rid of mandatory
retirement for these positions they
would cut down the visa programs which
of course they don't want to do because
it saves them a ton of money China gets
what it wants which is access to all of
our labs we get what the professor's
want which is cheap labor and this whole
thing survives only by virtue of the
fact that there are no grown-ups
anywhere in the sense-making apparatus
that the new york times washington post
an NPR used to represent so that
everybody who wants to tune into reality
has to turn into you know a bunch of
kids with their teenagers doing the
audio and visual yeah but I think you're
I think you're you're missing something
important and I think it has to do with
why either and I tend to be very careful
about saying these preambles and saying
you know that their content is careful
it's not they don't hurt anything we've
already paid the price right they can't
hurt
in a sense we've already we've already
been through it but there is a question
the paradox that is being deployed is
putting people who are facing something
opportunity not being equally
distributed or whatever it is that
results in there being some populations
not being represented in some fields at
a high enough level there's a question
who is really actually advocating for
your interest and your point about Jews
having faced a obviously appalling
history of oppression and yet being
successful really points to the answer
the Enlightenment was not a Jewish
project the tools are not resident in
some particular race they are absolutely
democratizing all and the thing that
empowers people is science so to the
extent that you're actually interested
in taking a population that actually did
face a unique kind of oppression
especially in the new world and
empowering them the obvious tool is
science and for these cynical forces to
be prying these populations away from
science and tell them what they've done
is they've taken the antidote and
they've labeled it as a poison which
we've seen in other contexts so it is
necessary it is necessary to put that
message into the world actually much
more pointed perspective let me let me
just share it with you I don't know
whether you saw my walk and talk on this
but the my feeling is when I started
here hearing abolish the police and I
think about the threats to Jewish
schools and places of worship for
example my feeling is I've had it with
you I want to be very clear and adamant
you are overstepping your bounds whoever
you are as to what you are advocating
for because maybe you feel in some way
that you will be marginally safe
boy do I not believe that black families
would be safe world without the police
but you have no right to endanger
everyone else pretending that everything
is about you and the thing that I want
to get very clearly across is we had a
world in which koban created tremendous
unemployment it created tremendous need
to see other people because we are
social creatures we are all pissed off
you guys there sorry I just lost you for
one second we are all in a situation
where everybody was amped up and I don't
know if you remember the film Animal
House of course there's a scene in the
in the end where there's a parade and
the person leading the parade has a
giant baton he throws it into the air
and one of the animal animal House
members pushes the guy to the ground
grabs the baton and takes the marching
band down a blind alley and because
everyone's playing their instrument they
can't have a conversation so they all
blindly follow down the blind alley and
the person represents to me what black
lives matter as an organization just did
with a global anger and frustration
which is now 100% focused on the issue
of race not even the issue of race and
if you of a particular race so we saw in
the Evergreen run up to this
we saw experiments with demonizing
people who weren't white right Asians
were singled out as part of the problem
and offered an opportunity to be
re-educated into the fold and now what
we're seeing is this is about anti
blackness pure and simple and everybody
else is the problem and you know it's
all predictable well Americans obviously
have an astoundingly good claim on
oppression
I think at some level where we've gotten
to is that we all feel very
uncomfortable like if you're taking a
person who's had everything go wrong in
their life every every knock against
them has occurred and you have a second
person born with a platinum spoon in
their mouth right what we can't allow to
derange is that the level of badness
that one can claim proxies for having a
point and you can't also then pick and
choose like who gets to say who can feel
what oppression I don't personally
believe that anti-semitism can't be
understood by somebody willing to have
an intuition pump put in
I mean having friends who are black and
like being in New York City with my
friend Stephon Alexander and watching a
cab that we were trying to take together
slow down for me and when it saw Stephon
speed away it told me yeah absolutely
I've now been through that as somebody
who you know is very deep into black
American culture I can tell you that I
got beat up in our at our high school
bred for being but I I guess I have to
say an n-word lover although I guarantee
you they didn't use the genteel
euphemism many of us have felt enough of
this through our close associations that
I don't think I can grasp the entire
experience but this claim that nobody
can possibly understand what I've been
through there's a turning test for this
and it's called screenwriting how many
screenplays have you seen were you
accepted that a you know like you know
Kung Fu Panda was written by Jews and
China said well finally somebody
understands Chinese culture perfectly
why is it an American this is brilliant
there is a Turing test for this and it's
called screenwriting I haven't I haven't
heard you say that before I haven't
heard that formulation before I think
that's that's a perfect encapsulation
and it put it puts the lie to my lived
experience trumps everything you have to
say to me
that I could probably write a story
about you know a young black kids first
day in a swanky private school and my
guess is it would be pretty credible yep
so there's obviously a ton to be done
here
this day is obviously this day is
obviously special I'm wondering before
we give me one second as a king became
from Caltech and what it was was
absolutely chilling to me and if I could
just locate it here yes you knew it went
out I think it's kept for Cal Tech alum
it's new it says what we face is the
all-important question what do we do we
are a community that acts presented with
an intellectual challenge we would
heartily dive in and puzzle it out the
this issue of racism against the black
community in particular should be no
different black lives do matter now here
comes the great part we must continue to
press the sentiment until there is no
one left who would dispute it or
rationalize it however well intentioned
the alternate perspective may be in
brief inaction is not an option as we
our teachers and our training and
education drive us to tackle complex
problems that most challenge society
racism included can you imagine a
teacher or a researcher saying we must
continue to press the sentiment until
there is no one left who would dispute
it or rationalize that's a threat it's
the Graduate complete lack of
understanding of what science is can you
imagine if no one were allowed to
challenge whether stress causes ulcers
or the wisdom of the food pyramid or
whether or not Newton
laws could be violated it's a
misunderstanding not just of science but
of Education it is indoctrination not
education and it is anti science well we
were I don't know maybe the idea is that
if we constitute it like this then
science is anti blackness because
science is not sitting around and say
well you have lived experience so I
guess nobody else can say anything
except the other people who have lived
experience their lived experience
doesn't matter I think one of the very
weird things about this movement bizarre
is the complete deadening of empathy
towards certain groups including groups
that have a history of higher oppression
yeah that's that's right it's
dehumanization of everyone who is being
we are being told our other even when we
belong to those groups ourselves and
somehow the majority of people appear to
be stepping in line well it's just this
is happening horizontally inside of
there is a social dynamic that includes
people with names and identities inside
each of these organizations that letter
you read is the result of some
discussion that happened somebody won
that discussion and a letter went out
and we will never see the internal
workings we have seen it at Evergreen we
were fortunate to have them film it and
to actually see the inner workings but
this is a this is a show of force it is
advertising to us that it has the
capacity to take everything that one
might look to for protection and to
invert it and frankly I'm not convinced
that it doesn't and the question is how
do we bootstrap a response that
functions in other words somehow all of
these major scientific institutions are
tweeting hashtag shut down stem they've
just alerted us to the plan some of us
have been hearing this for years so we
have to we have to announce that there
is an alternative and what it is is it's
the real deal your friends are not the
people who have inverted a life ship and
turn
to a subordinate relationship your
friends are the people who understand
that a lie ship cause a peer
relationship right your friends are not
the one with the simple solutions your
friends are the ones who are telling you
something that some part of you knows
which is that a deep understanding of
science liberates it is the antidote to
oppression so I would love it if we
could hashtag something in response to
this hashtag that is taking over the
scientific establishment and we have the
high ground of course it's very
important to state very clearly you know
you and I come from a scientific family
and our grandfather was a chemist the
family you know about the brookside
plunge I don't in the 1920s there was a
swimming pool in Pasadena and one of the
things that radicalized our family was
that they had a swimming pool that was
the water was changed once a week and
the day before the water has changed
they allowed blacks to swim in the pool
and they called an International Day
because that way the whites wouldn't be
contaminated by blacks right and our
family was so sickened by this stuff
that we began a project were just you
know 100 years old which has to do with
using you know science and decency
together to eliminate nonsense and
 and the idea that this is now
going to be inverted that the very
people who have always been progressive
who have always been and I really want
to use the word ally ship because it's
now so tainted and contaminated as some
subordinate relationship where we are is
that we some of us actually have open
conversations loving conversations with
people who are all different hues come
from all over the world all different
situations we feel least guilty I think
the great danger here is a huge number
of people who have no actual
Touma see within other communities and
those people are so moved because they
suspect deeply in their own hearts that
they are really deeply bigoted I think
that the recognize give you for example
an inner an interracial relationship
with interracial children you're
probably not all that focused on the
idea that you absolutely hate people
secretly who don't look like you so
whenever the stuff comes around you just
sort of feel sick to your stomach and I
think what we're doing here with stem is
stem is the great refuge where anybody
of meri should be able to force their
ideas down the throat of the bigot and
this was even true in the Soviet Union
which you know at a very competitive
culture I remember I think David Kazdin
showed up to the moscow state university
entrance exam with the kippa and they
hated you they found any excuse they
could to get rid of them and the guy
said sorry I'm coming through there's
nothing you can do about it I'm that
good and you know I really believe at
some level that what we're talking about
the black community at least the black
community that I grew up knowing pretty
well was the most merit oriented
community because what had been used to
drive them out was trickery you know
fake you know poll taxes or literacy
tests and all this nonsense and so they
developed a fiercely meritocratic
culture and that's what allowed Eminem
for example to win in rap battle and
maybe people didn't want him to win but
the fact was he was better the same
thing about open mic night in Harlem
where the jazz people said look whites
are welcome to take the stage but you
don't mind if we blow you off the stage
if you can't play it if you could play
you could hang and I think that the key
point is science is open mic night think
of it as Cal Tech is Minton's Playhouse
and you've got some of the best people
in the world and man if you can blow
your horn or if you can play the keys
you always should have a place and to
lose that to a completely different
sector of the black community
which knows not the huge strides that
were made through merit right being
better to be blunt it's just offensive
to a hundred years of black history I
agree we're gonna have to go but I would
say can we combine forces hashtag
science liberates and also hashtags
science is open mic night science is
open mic night that's what I just wrote
down
no seriously scientists open mic night
is the is the second thing you've said
just in this little conversation Eric
that strikes me as the the gem of truth
that no one else is saying is part of
what made open mic night admittance such
an incredible meritocratic tradition to
blow Julliard let's say out of the water
because the the hotness of the
improvisation was the fairness of blacks
who associated Starr chambers and closed
rooms and all that kind of stuff with
prejudice and bigotry and the idea that
open mic night was judged fairly if you
could play you could play there was no
escaping it there's a beautiful
photograph called I think one day in
Harlem which ostensibly people remember
as all of the greatest jazz players in
one photo and they remember it as black
because the word Harlem is there when
you look at that photo how many white
faces Latin faces do you see one thing
that you have to just admire black
America for maintaining is that they
were so pissed off about the ante Maryna
Craddock methods that reduced to keep
them down that they were the most
ferocious Garden Guardians of pure
meritocracy the only rival I can think
of were certain sort of subcultures
within the Soviet Union and I think of
what we're talking about is in fact anti
black of course attend to black well
it's anti black because the black
cultural trait of saying if a white man
can play the horn
he gets to sit in if he can handle these
time signatures and these weird keys and
these strange modes he's in he's one of
us yeah I mean this is obviously
anti-black I tweeted that yesterday
about shut down stem and that's the
problem is that we have been saying
forever that these syllogisms these
false beliefs that are at the head of
this movement empower the worst people
in the community and placed them at the
top because they are willing to take
advantage of this nonsense and that this
is the opposite of liberation it's going
to be a very short very ugly ride and
there's nothing there's nothing
honorable about it so I don't think
people even understand what the idea of
changing the rules about what science is
and what it means they don't understand
the repercussions and because it's
uncomfortable to say hey you you have
definite claims on oppression for sure
and you don't have claims on what you're
trying to do now is such a new message
to so many people the idea that you
could say hey you don't get to do this
say no just the way you have to say no
to your children if you love them if you
don't love your children just tell them
yes all the time you can screw them up
as badly as you want but if you want to
tell your brother hey know you've told B
know Brett and I've told you and so when
we use the word brother do I have black
brothers and sisters or do I not if I do
then no if I don't then I don't know
where we are but I thought what we
wanted was you wanted complete
understanding and recognition for all of
your accomplishments which personally
I've spent my entire life in awe of and
this feels like a complete betrayal of
everything that I've studied in the
black community everything that I love
about the black community I just don't
understand this this team's the height
of non blackness well yeah it is it is
that but as you point out about the
defund the police movement which is
really a shutdown the
movement you don't have the right to put
people in that danger you may not have
the right to put yourself in that danger
but you sure as hell don't have the
right to put anybody else in that danger
but in this case what we're really
talking about is I was I was trying to
alert Richard Dawkins to what was going
on he was not aware of shut down stem
and I was trying to compel under this
and and the thing is what I said to him
is this is the dawning of a new Dark Age
that's what this is this is the uninvent
of the tool that brought us out of the
darkness and you don't have a right to
do it right you sure don't have a right
to do it to anybody else and you're
you're a fool to do it to yourself you a
number which means that it is definitely
a great time to see who is kaleri I just
did a little bit of a poll and I'm gonna
check in with it I haven't checked in
with it I'm gonna read it to you I'm
gonna leave it says given the following
statement switch statement better if it
perfectly represents your view this
moment is genuine this time is
performative this time is hopeful this
moment is stupid and the answers are so
far with almost with over 8,000 votes
this moment is genuine 12 percent this
time is hopeful 12.2% people are not
coming out in the open and saying what
they feel because they're afraid that
they will be portrayed in ways that are
completely an asthma to them and I have
no doubt that we're going to be
portrayed in those ways what I do know
is that our record is 100% rock-solid
over a very long period of time and that
we are in a position therefore in part
because of the investments of our great
grandparents grandparents and parents of
course our father marched on Washington
you know and talks about that to this
day this is a very long process and
those with the credentials to be able to
say
[Music]
thank you awesome we'll talk to you soon
I'm gonna advocate we take a quick break
and just set up a new like and have this
be a separate separate video okay we got
a whole lot more questions come in so
I'm not gonna be able to go for an hour
solid for here without a break so let's
just take a few minutes of five minutes
five minutes and we'll be right back
he's Akal said about another length
sorry Zach I know you didn't see that
coming
and we'll be right back with the third
live stream for today awesome all right
all right see you soon