[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
welcome to the high existence podcast
where we challenge the way you live we
bring you the wisdom and tools to help
you grow into a more enlightened version
of yourself join us by taking the
ultimate life experiment I have 30
challenges to enlightenment course a
complete spiritual path to help you
overcome the limitations of your mind
and to embody the highest philosophical
realizations use the code wisdom a check
out to get a huge twenty five percent
off the course available only to podcast
subscribers at store a existence calm
I'm your host John mortal oh you can
fire me over on high existence and on my
own podcast voices in the dark hey
welcome to the high existance podcast
I'm John Waterlow joined by Martin sharp
well we welcome we have a great guest
this week Daniel SH macton Berger who is
a found at the neuro hacker collective
and movement dedicated to upgrading our
individual and collective capacities and
to safeguarding the well-being of all
he's an evolutionary philosopher systems
designer a strategist and I could
probably keep throwing lots of labels
around and that still kind of apply
there's a lot of crossover between
different fields which i think is
something that we're going to explore in
this episode so Daniel thank you very
much for joining us thank you for having
me fun to be here how do you how do you
feel about the labels in fact when
trying to sum up the things that you're
interested in I like talking about
things that I'm interested in more than
labels of things that I am or am not so
when in general when people are wanting
to ask what my background is whatever
out I like sharing things that I'm
passionate about and I like asking
people similarly what they're interested
in and yeah as you said there's a lot of
overlapping interests when you have a
deep fascination with the nature of
reality and everything within it
yeah I think it's good to start with the
the things that you're interested in
rather than making identity statements
so what what do you think how would you
sum up the the mission of neuro hacker
collective and what what drives and
prompted you to do the things that you
do and what the collective is aiming to
do hmm
so the collective is an awesome project
and it's one project that I've
associated with and there are other
projects I'm associate would they do
very different things so what its
mission is and what moves me are
partially overlapping the goal of neural
hacker is really at an individual level
increasing human wellbeing and human
capacity and right in that right now
it's mostly focused on the physiology
side of that but is eventually
interested in the psychology and
psychological cognitive development side
as well but specifically looking at the
how physiology effects psyche both
states of experience emotion you know
well-being and capacities and working to
do a better job of how we support
physiologies to predispose happier and
more capable and more positively
oriented people is really the interest
of it and in terms of what we're doing
so far that's exploring the space of
what you could think of as kind of
psycho neuropharmacology or psychiatry
but rather than just looking at single
molecule solutions how do we address
dopamine through one synthetic molecule
or address serotonin or one synthetic
molecule trying to look at is is there
anything even imbalance with this
person's dopaminergic system do we know
and if so where did the imbalance occur
and do we understand about the
regulatory systems that are involved and
what would a more comprehensive approach
to supporting those regulatory systems
to do better and is dopamine the only
thing that was in balance if it was
their other neurotransmitters involved
were their other nutrient amounts as
involved where their gut brain access or
neuro inflammatory dynamics so how do we
do a better job of understanding the
physiology as a whole as a subset of
then not just physiology but the mind
brain environment complex but starting
even just with physiology how do we
understand how the different systems
interact with each other more complexly
how do they self-regulate what leads to
increased homeostatic resilience or
decreased homeostatic resilience or
deviation from homeostasis and how can
we do a better job of both understanding
these systems and supporting these
systems to have more resilience and more
capacity so that's the goal of neural
hacker and if you know if anyone goes to
the website and checks it out with what
they'll see right now is some
information about that mission writ
large but then they'll see one offering
which is you know we we we had a first
offering that was kind of how do we do
something better than the smart drugs
that people are taking to increase
productive capacity but that increase a
fairly narrow bandwidth of productive
capacity oftentimes at the expense of
other meaningful aspects so maybe we get
more focused but certain memory metrics
decrease certain creativity metrics
decrease and maybe things like empathy
decrease anxiety can increase and it's
doing it in a way that creates long term
dependence and down-regulation can we
increase a broader set of the things
that are meaningful for people and do it
in a way where because it's working
through and with their endogenous
regulatory systems rather than
overriding them if they're on something
like this for a while and then get off
of it
they don't have dependence and crash and
if anything they have lasting elevation
of baseline those are our goals and you
know we're working on that for a number
of other categories not just in the
productivity category but that that was
the first thing that we were able to get
far enough with to have as an offer
- that's neural hacker yes and that's
the those are the kind of the areas
where we're going to get into in a later
episode with the personal development
that I think if we look at the the
bigger picture of societies and where we
are across the world it's almost the
same problem but talking at the
collective level about how we can
optimize what we have and try and raise
and change some baselines away from if
there are depleted or dangerous levels
do you see them as sort of overlapping
goals in in that respect the the
collective optimization or is it a
different sort of perspective the human
brain the human physiology the human
psyche and culture and ecology are all
complex systems right self-organizing
complex systems and we are not that good
at interacting with and supporting
complex systems yet we the whole field
of complexity science is still a brand
new field and hasn't really entered that
meaningfully into how we approach things
like design we're quite good at simple
systems and we're also pretty good at
complicated systems so when I look at
something like a the LAT laptop I'm
talking to you on the blueprint for how
to make it from you know the transistor
level all the way up to all the parts
fitting the other software I mean
there's a tremendous amount of
information no one person could do it it
takes a tremendous number of people but
there is a blueprint and it doesn't
evolve itself in real time right so it's
a static design it was designed the
computer didn't design itself it's
designed from outside of itself it
doesn't repair itself as opposed to when
we look at biology and we see systems
that organize and emerge in relationship
with their environments but without
exogenous design and where they don't
have a formal blueprint the blueprint
itself is changing the structure of it
is changing in every interaction
even if we look at the genome the
genetic expression is changing and you
know etc so what what happens is when
we're dealing with a complex system like
human physiology and we if there's an
acute cause of an issue like an injury
we're pretty good at that in medicine
dealing with things like injuries it
doesn't mean we won't get a lot better
an exponential tech will help us get a
lot better but when we're dealing with
something like cancer or autoimmune
disease or neurodegenerative disease or
something that doesn't have an obvious
acute cause it has complex causation and
that might mean that there isn't one
cause there's a number of different
causes and they might not be the same
for different people so you might be
looking autoimmune disease where
infection was part some kind of
subclinical infection was part of a
destabilization of homeo dynamic systems
and some kind of toxicity exposure and
maybe some kind of nutrient deficiency
combined with some kind of genetic
predisposition right all came together
to lead to a series of imbalances that
eventually we call MS or rheumatoid
arthritis or whatever it is and so not
only it might it be multifactorial right
but it might have many steps of causal
transform the infection leading to
changed immune cells leading to
autoimmune antibodies you know etc and
that happened over the course of time
and you have this delayed time causation
all of this makes it much harder to
assess cause and effect and so you need
really a deeper system that isn't just
working with one variable at a time and
where there's clear causation but they
can do this kind of complex causal
assessment in the same way that we are
just starting with functional medicine
and systems biology to try and
understand the human physiology more
complexly but we have dealt with it
pretty much like oh you have a tumor
let's cut it out rather than understand
carcinogenesis well cut it out or
radiate it out or poison it out and they
we've really dealt with global issue
right we've dealt with the environment
in very much the same way the
temperature is too high so let's do
geoengineering to address decreasing
temperature but that's not addressing
the cause of why the temperature is too
high at all because we really don't know
how to do that well enough there's too
many complex economic and social and
worldview and technological factors so
we largely deal with it symptomatically
well there with Ward's symptomatically
without understanding all of the things
that lead to patterns of human
experience and behavior that lead to war
and so I would say that one of the
things I'm really interested in is
understanding that universe is a complex
not a complicated system that just like
our computer our civilization most of
what we have built a civilization have
been complicated systems complex systems
are anti fragile inherently like in a in
a forest each tree is exactly the way
that it is in relationship with
everything else around and it's changing
and adapting in real time it's
contextual right and because of all the
ratio of aerobic to anaerobic microbes
of certain kinds of plants with others
ones that fix nitrogen and take nitrogen
it you can't get one bug that's going to
devastate everything there's gonna be
predators for that bug there's not gonna
be that much it likes whereas you
contrast that to row crops and you can
get a bug that can devastate everything
right the row cropping is fragile it is
susceptible to collapse in a way that
you know robust complex biospheres
aren't and we can think of physiologies
you know in a similar way we can think
of culture in a similar way well what we
have called civilization so far has been
a process of converting complex systems
into simple and complicated ones and
that doesn't mean it hasn't done
anything good but it has been kind of a
entropy generator in that way when you
think of evolution as increasing
elegantly ordered complexity that has
more synergy leading to new emergent
properties we take a tree than a
forest that has an indefinite number of
value metrics right like its value to
pollinators and its value to stabilizing
the topsoil in to sequestering co2 and
producing oxygen and home for these
kinds of animals and just all these
things and and the fish a thousand miles
away that have the different water
because of the way it stabilizes topsoil
and the people that eat the fish
generations down down who are going to
have different epigenetic patterns
because of it like the tree is in this
radically interconnected complex system
so you say how do you even assess its
value
it's totally non fungal non and are
exchangeable with any like it and you
can't even quantify it but if I kill it
and turn it into two by fours that two
by four is not really adapting or
changing it slowly degrades but
otherwise it's a fixed thing I extract
it from its environment it has all I
care about it's a tensional and
compressional strength two things and I
really am going to take that even
further and just measure it in dollars
and make it accumulate able or
exchangeable when we look at that
process I took something that was
contextualized and complex I D
contextualized it brought it into a
lower degree of complexity and in the
process we're making we're actually
making human civilization our whole
habitability here fragile and so I'm
very interested in how we can understand
universe and nature and reality better
how we can understand complexity and
self-organization better so that we can
work with the systems that like
economics is just made up monopoly right
like what our governments are made up
systems but ecology isn't and biology
isn't and psychology there are intrinsic
stew it even though there's plenty of
made up stuff in there so how do we
understand those better so that we can
work with them in ways that support real
thriving of the things that are
fundamentally meaningful in trying to
understand that and thinking thinking
how much expertise needs to go into it
is but I was thinking back to what you
first said about
the nature of the body that when it say
we have a disease or a disorder of some
kind there can be so many interlaced
interlocking causal factors yet doctors
are often experts in just one of those
so is there potentially an expert
problem here that lots of people are in
their particular fields say economics
and they only see things through the
economics lens do we need to have more
Jack's of all trades involved or is this
a case of I don't know really
understanding what you need to be to be
an expert yeah so an expert in a
complicated system see one of the things
about a complicated system is you can
break it apart into parts and understand
the parts in isolation and put it back
together and you don't have the same
kinds of synergies that you have in
complex self-organizing systems so no
one has to understand every part of the
computer because we can take it apart
and put a new CPU and put a new hard
drive in and you notice that we've
treated bodies very much like that like
oh this parts worn out let's take it out
put a new one in or you don't really
need this part as opposed to like whoa
what happened with the regulatory
systems here and what role did it really
play and and you a gastroenterologist
can't you know in a neurologist an
oncologist they can't really understand
any of those parts independent of the
other ones because what's happening in
the gut via the microbiome via the gut
brain access via the enteric nervous
system we have so many different kinds
of pathways is affecting what's
happening in the nervous system and then
all of the top-down mechanisms so there
is I wouldn't I wouldn't say that an
expert problem is how I would describe
it I would say there's a problem of
hyper specialization in complex systems
where that is just not the right
epistemology and Alfred North Whitehead
wrote this great paper some decades ago
called the problem of over
specialization he said
notice how we the smarter a kid is the
earlier we start moving them into the
specialization and we move them further
and further into specialization so that
by the time they do their PhD there's a
few people in the world to really
understand their dissertation and they
have relatively little abstraction
across domains lateral thinking into
other spaces etc because they're
supposed to be able to do a good job of
that specialized expertise and of course
we know there were benefits of
specialization but I think then there
were real problems with it you said so
when all of our a students are thinking
about tiny tiny parts then who's
thinking about the hole and so we are
leaving two people who didn't you know
excel that well to think about it or
just nobody at all and it is just a
complex kind of system but it's not
necessary the one that we want
or that works effectively so I wouldn't
say what we want is jack-of-all-trades
that's kind of a false dichotomy I would
say people who are studying complex
systems and who are studying systems at
all and who are studying deeper level
generalized principles and things like
design that are cross applicable so that
they can so that they really have the
right epistemology to understand the
systems that they're looking at and to
work with them yes I think that's
critical and I think it's been critical
for a while but especially in the face
of machine learning within narrow
intelligence right now already and over
the next little bit narrow intelligence
via machine learning will just be better
at us better than us at combinatorics
with in finite spaces and it really is
generalized intelligence that is at the
meaningful place for humans to develop
themselves and work yeah and in that
case it's um it looks like the education
system and the way that we value certain
kinds of education is going to need to
change and I've heard you speak
passionately and passionately in the
past about an issue that we damp down
kids curiosity in the traditional
education systems and say no stop
looking at that stop playing with that
you need to go and learn these specific
exercises so I wonder how you think we
can reawaken that kind of curiosity
without fear and when I say fear I mean
the fear of parents or older generations
because they might want to nurture it in
their kids they might want
understand the necessity for it but if
they don't have any answers themselves
cuz they've only the parents have only
got this old-fashioned education how can
we overcome this this divide and find a
way to nurture it in children the other
thing that we call modern Western
education is not the only system of
Education that has ever been explored
and it's I don't think it's very hard to
have the educational philosophy argument
that it is just not even a very good one
for many definitions of what is a
meaningful way to educate a human being
but when you look at kind of the history
of how it came about and things like we
need you know the movement into an
industrial revolution where we needed
people we needed a lot of people to get
trained to fulfill roles within the
Industrial Revolution that were pretty
fungible right factory line workers were
pretty fun like any of them could do
basically what any of the other ones
could do and MBAs are supposed to be
able to do pretty much what the other
ones can do and doctors and so how do we
the society needs people to fulfill
these roles so how do we create both an
extrinsic incentive economics to get
them to do it and how do we create an
education system to train them up into
these roles where then we identify them
with this role and this role is really
fun jables anyone else who had that
training give or take a little bit
there's gonna be profound
meaninglessness and that because the
uniqueness of self is gone their own
kind of self-directed processes gone
right and again especially in the place
of robotic automation where those jobs
are going to be getting automated and
not just physical robotic automation but
even the deep deep learning through a
lot of the things that we think of as
thinking things but things that are
procedural aiza bulimics possible and
necessitates a foundational rethinking
of what education should be for and
really like what society what
civilization should be for and it is
rather if we if we can decouple to where
the jobs don't need the people
to do them we can also de couple it or
the people don't need the jobs meaning
start to actually change the economic
structure because we don't need it to be
a source of extrinsic incentive then we
get to say okay now we can actually have
a system of entry where intrinsic
incentive is deeper to both the
economics and the education so what is
an education system where the focus is
facilitating each child's unique
expression their unique passion interest
curiosities capacities and following it
right now you say how can parents how
can teachers participate with that if
they weren't facilitated that way and
they don't necessarily know the answer
and the kit the kids gonna ask them
questions they don't know answers to if
the parents earn this if they really are
earnest about this they can go on a
process of code discovery with their kid
and when the kid says so why is the sky
blue and the parent realizes that they
don't actually know they remember
something about diffraction but maybe it
is reflecting the ocean they don't
really fuck about right then they can be
like well let's pour it together yeah
and then rather than push for that
exploration to go in the way that
they're interested in pay attention to
the kids interest and ask them like war
find out why they're interested in it
and what their what their intuition
about it is what their thought is and
help help go through the process of
helping them learn how to learn and
facilitating their interest in life and
letting their interest in life and their
learning reignite the adults also I
think that's it that's a key ingredient
that you mentioned I hadn't thought of
which is not only to go and find the
answer for the kid but say first of all
what what do you think and why do you
wonder that and try and tune into into
the nature of that curiosity it's the
the dynamic that I often see and I even
feel that myself is a sort of sense a
little bit of shame and fear if someone
asked me a question I feel I ought to
know the answer to
and so it's kind of a conversation to
about putting aside our own ego and need
to appear a certain way in front of
others well there's a there's a few fun
things here so let's first address the
part about asking the kid why they're
interested so the kid asks why the sky
is blue maybe that was the question I
asked in the moment but they're just
really curious about why any color has
color and they could just as easily ask
why is the leaf green and they really
just want to know what color is right
and or they're really asking kind of a
question about God an existential things
about like why did the Creator make it
that way because that's the way they're
thinking about it and so they there
there's a they're thinking about things
like why is anything the way that it is
or they're asking a question about why
is it that we subjectively experience it
as blue and does that relate to what is
objectively true and do we all
experience it the same way if you don't
know you're gonna go into answering it
the way you think they're asking it and
then you're gonna find them get bored
pretty quickly and then you're going to
get frustrated and try and get them to
pay attention and so it's pretty
important to actually pay attention to
what is the real inquiry and then not
you go find the answer as if the answer
already fucking exists they might be
asking questions the answers don't fully
exist - and you get to like be in that
process of discovery together where the
answer matters less then the
investigation the inquiry of the
thinking about it and some of the best
questions or when they get to things
where we don't know the answers and
their intuition about it might be as
good as anybody's yeah that's that the
whole I guess the the stereotype the
picture of the friend of mouths of babes
thing where you start seeing the world
from a new angle just because somebody
is asking a question which is
unencumbered by years of cultural
conditioning yeah and you know if we're
asking about so what's fundamentally
real is consciousness real and this is
all arising in my consciousness is is
matter fundamentally real and my
consciousness is an epiphenomena of
neural networks if we ask a question
where we were the real answer right now
is we don't fucking know this is the
best thinkers in the world
mentally disagree on this then it's a
place where you get to actually have a
dialogue with them really on equal
footing because you actually can't even
though you can tell a whole history of
Western philosophy and Eastern
philosophy on it you that still just
brings you to I just told you a whole
lot of things about why I don't know and
so if you can come back to the like
fascination and the interest you and
you're in the same place as them and
they do have they are touching it for
the first time in different ways how do
you think we can get to to detector the
other point that I mentioned is how do
you think we can get to the point where
we're not worrying about admitting our
ignorance maybe it's not such a big deal
to a child but I think that we in in the
West loosely speaking it's it's seen as
largely not okay to admit oh I don't
know even though I feel that I should
yeah so I mean you can see what a great
tool to control other people that is yes
and you can see how little real freedom
you have and how little real ability for
peace or intimacy or honesty with other
people you have well that bullshit's
running in you now let's step back and
think about it like this for a minute
let's think about the field of the
knowable and the field of the unknowable
as ontological or ease well the thing of
them is epistemological categories for a
minute he expels what the difference is
yeah so ontology is in philosophy the
the inquiry into the study of what is
fundamentally real what exists and
epistemology is how do we know like you
do we think this exists because we're
measuring it in all getting the same
thing because we're experiencing it
because we're intuiting it because we're
doing math like what is the what is the
right process of coming to believe
anything that we might believe and so
there's this deeper layer
between what we think is real and how we
think about anything and so those are
some some of the deep categories and
philosophies so let's think about the
knowable stuff and the unknowable stuff
now Heisenberg said a limit on no
ability at the quantum mechanical level
right said the position and the momentum
of a quantum particle are not
simultaneously knowable and here's the
big deal it wasn't an epistemological
emmett it wasn't we just can't get
enough information about it it was an
ontological in if they don't both exist
at the same time at the level of the
quantum it does not actually have a
fixed amount of momentum and a fixed
amount of position it has something
weirder than that like a probability
distribution about how much of those
things it has and so there is a limit to
the knowable and then you say okay well
how many quantum particles are there in
the universe and what are all the
interactions between them and how much
unknowable is there from that and it's
like okay that's you know that's a
profound set and girdle's incompleteness
theorem said set a limit on the knowable
when it comes to mathematics right the
foundational axiomatic set of math is
infinite well we you can't no infinite
shit
the knowable is always finite but the
unknowable is infinite so it's important
to get first that the unknowable is a
larger class than the knowable
fundamentally and then within the
knowable you have the known and the
unknown and the known is I have a
reasonable confidence margin through
whatever process that my understanding
of this is pretty good and the unknown
is this is hypothetically knowable stuff
we just don't know it yet and there's
plenty of that within that the unknown
is also a larger class than the known is
within it knowable now why why am i
specifying this I'm specifying it
because if I think that I should know
most things then I actually just don't
no the deepest things about the nature
of no ability itself and so that idea
like Oh someone asked me something I
don't know there's something wrong with
me like to just realize how ridiculous
that fucking thought is yeah and its own
ego and to instead say okay well the
there there is an infinite class of
things I don't know and couldn't no and
then there's a bunch of things that I
could know that I don't and that's
forever and that is fascinating right
that is in in enthralling it's like you
get to touch a sense of awe in that and
so I think that reframe of just really
getting how vast reality is and how
complex and how deep in and then being
able to have a totally different
humility in relationship to it there's
an emotional and even spiritual element
to this I think that people find I found
if you study something in depth when you
go into the subject at first you can
make all sorts of strong and sweeping
claims because you don't know enough to
know how complicated it is and that's
quite exciting and then the more that
you learn you realize oh I feel like I
have to equivocate over everything all
the time because everything's so
complicated I wish I could go back to
when I knew less but then the
transformation can happen where you can
become comfortable knowing that you
don't know much yeah so this is a mr.
fun process right so we will see you'll
go to academic conference and you'll see
the top scientists in a domain almost
tripping over themselves you do not make
any real statements because they don't
want to say something wrong and firm all
the other people that probably know a
shit ton of stuff that they that they
don't know that is relevant where what
they're saying might be wrong and then
you look at people who are radically
less educated about a field and you know
adamant passionate about it so now I
basically I shared half of the story so
one half is
this is actually the this is a fun story
so related to the knowable and the
unknowable and the known and the unknown
within the knowable our subjective
relationship has to do with certainty
and uncertainty and think think about it
like this in the in the pre-modern world
and most of the kind of religious
traditions and maybe not some of the
mystical interpretations of them but at
least in in the dominant expression to
the religious traditions certainty had a
pretty high value right I have certainty
that I know who the right God is and I
didn't get the wrong God and I'm
dedicated about what I'm doing the right
things not the wrong things and like and
if I get it wrong like I go to I could
go to hell instead of going to heaven or
I could reincarnate badly instead of
reincarnating well and I'm certain
enough that we can burn women as witches
and do Crusades and whatever we need to
do because we have enough certainty
about that rightness right right now
science started to emerge and have a lot
more success in in really important
things like aiming canons and you know
do practical physical things which is
actually a part of why I proliferated
one and it acknowledged certain kinds of
uncertainties but it also gave us the
capacity for more certainty plenty of
questions like do heavy things and light
things or dense things and non dense
things fall at the same speed we were
able to start solving some of that stuff
right and earth being round or flat or
we and and so even though within the
philosophy of science the purely
uncertainty holding it as very deep a
lot of people carried the kind of
emotional orientation toward certainty
into the way they did science and wanted
to like be pretty sure that the world
started with the universe heard with a
big bang and you know matter 1st and
biology and consciousness emerge from
neural networks and and this this isn't
actually the philosophy of science
section emotional structure
of associating certainty with security
and value and associating uncertainty
with insecurity fear and lack of value
which create which is an emotional and
existential bias leading to a cognate
bias so then post-modernism saw these
flaws and it said shit look at all the
things that we fucked up in the name of
over certainty all the things we were
certain about what we were wrong late or
even within the sciences when we were
pretty certain we had it almost all
figured out around the time of Maxwell's
equations and modern physics fucked it
all up
and that's just happened so many times
we really shouldn't ever be certain
about anything because historically
we've been wrong about all of it and
whenever we were whenever we were over
certain we could do really terrible
stuff II and so then post-modernism said
we should actually embrace uncertainty
about everything and kind of all
certainty and of course I'm radically
simplifying all of pre-modern ISM and
then modernity and then post modernity
but a move towards embrace uncertainty
and any idea any narrative is just one
narrative and isn't fundamentally true
and we don't know and so then it kind of
pathologized certainty and made
uncertainty laudable and I think both of
those are untenable and you know we we
can actually see some major problems in
the world from certain interpretations
of postmodern that have led to the post
fact world that have led to increased
likelihood for strongman leaders to come
in in a post fact world but I would say
part of maturity is having a mature
relationship with certainty and
uncertainty inside of ourselves and it's
it's what you could call it epistemic
maturity which is I have a reasonable
confidence margin for certainty about
these things based on the appropriate
processes that I went through to come to
it and I have less confidence margin
about these things and I have no
confidence margin about these things but
my security and universe
and my self-worth aren't coupled to any
of it yeah yeah and that's that's a big
point that people become so emotionally
wrapped up in there and as you were
talking about that post-modernism there
I thought of someone who we featured on
the site quite a bit Jordan Peterson who
has a particular kind of gripe against
who he calls post modernists and yet the
people he's talking about seem to have
gone kind of full circle where they've
become very certain about their position
where things they're saying well there
is no inherent truth in anything and in
particular we'll talk about say cultural
relativism or cultural appropriation but
they've suddenly become dogmatic about
it which seems to totally contradict the
original point if you read Foucault
where Derrida or some of the good
postmodern philosophers there was like
real insights there right there were
there were key important insights and
they were not equally like the critiques
were not about all of the sciences
equally if you look at say the way we
did social sciences and all of the bias
that affects how we do social science
that is gonna affect the way we do
chemistry less right not none but less
and so you know there are there are
important insights there but when you
look at so let you know let's take a fun
case let's take the conversation between
Sam Harris and Dan Dennett about
freewill and consciousness these guys
are on the same team when it comes to
you know atheism and the problems of
superstitious ideas and religious
metaphysical ideas but then when it
comes to foundational ontology itself
they actually disagreed on the deepest
things one could disagree on right sam
says consciousness is real but there's
no free will
and Dan said no there is free will but
consciousness is not real like the ears
are the deepest and they and they are
both philosophers of science and both
have read the same books and both
understand critical thinking it's like
well how the fuck could they come to
things that are bad different
and it you know and Sam actually said
something really important in the end of
that dialogue if and if you if you've
read it but it was a fun one
he said it seems that we just have
fundamentally different intuitions and
or she is something to that effect and
that that is actually like nai there's
this thing called the symbol grounding
problem how do we get the symbols to
ground into experience right when you
when you think of an apple you know
things about the way an apple can be
tart or sweet or melee or its skin can
kind of peel off or it can snap or like
you have so many interdependent
contextual things and you've taken it in
through a tongue and a nose and your
fingers in so many sensory organs plus
the abstraction layers of it that the
symbol has grounded right the symbol
Apple has grounded through all of those
sentry channels and so if you haven't
had some of the same sensory channels
you're not going to get the symbol
grounding in the same way so I'm
studying the chemistry of an apple but I
haven't tasted it no matter how much
fucking chemistry about an apple I've
got and I know what the EEG patterns of
people tasting it are I still don't know
what the fucking Apple tastes like and
so there is a place at which as much as
we're trying to be totally objective and
logical what what when we hear it can
land as true or not has to connect to
some experience set that lands as true
has to it is not a purely those axioms
are reasonable and can be later reified
by the process and this this was a good
process for deriving other things from
those axioms I accept it then one of the
main sources of our cognitive bias isn't
just the normal logical fallacies
everybody you know those are easy to
study it's a bunch of emotional and
existential level biases that affect the
way we process and that's where the
really subtle work comes in
few examples yeah remember the first
time that this hit me was so clearly a
very long time ago but I was I was young
I was talking to someone about their
religious persuasion they had moved from
being a kind of New Age Hindu to a
fundamentalist Muslim and that seemed
like a very and they did that while in
mmm
California upper class I'm like that
seems like a very interesting step that
doesn't make that much sense to me and
so I asked them questions about the
theology of Islam and if they really
believed these aspects of the theology
and and it wasn't getting anywhere like
it I there was no place where they were
really willing to look at the aspects of
the theology I was pretty sure they
probably didn't believe and but in the
process of the way I was asking I was
actually damaging my rapport with this
person and in damaging rapport I was
damaging the ability to actually have a
meaningful conversation about this or
any topic right and so I stopped and
then I came back to let me see if I can
just create rapport about anything we
get rapport fast forward about a year
because it takes that much time to
repair the rapport from an issue like
this and I ended up finding out that
this person comes to Islam and their
particular belief someone saying this
would be true for everyone I'm saying
this one case this was a place of
realizing this person's past was that
they actually couldn't say no and they
couldn't set limits or boundaries from
themselves because of like family sexual
trauma that had happened in their
childhood and they got to a place where
they were there were some things that
happened in their life and because they
couldn't say no to some fairly terrible
things that led to their relationship
breaking whatever and they they're like
oh wow I'm gonna die basically because I
can't set limits or say no and then
right around that time they met a friend
who had just joined Islam and they were
talking about it and the rules in kind
of the
absoluteness of the rules and that they
didn't have to hold boundaries
themselves they just being someone who
believed that got to follow those rules
and at a survival level that told this
person oh she could actually survive
because she could adopt a rule set that
she now she could say no with that
reason it but it bypassed her childhood
reasons of not being able to say no and
so what I realized was it had nothing to
do with theology even though later the
theology back felled itself has a
rationalization and so I was addressing
it at totally the wrong level because it
wasn't the level at which the decision
was made the choice was made by a deep
rational introspection and study of the
theology compared to other theologies
and so then when I talked with them
about basically just childhood and their
ability to say no and set boundaries and
construct those capacities inside of
them rather than try to deconstruct a
belief once actually felt they had that
capacity they ended up deconstructing
the religious belief on their own their
critical thinking couldn't kick in
because it was if their critical
thinking kicked in or if they allowed
anyone else's critical thinking to kick
in it would hit a survival level fear
for them of a belief that was meeting a
need and maybe it's the need to get to
still be part of your family because if
you leave the religion you won't be part
of the family or you won't be part of
the community or or you're too afraid of
death and so you know there's an extent
whatever it is or it's it's a situation
where if you say this particular thing
inside of academia inside of the
sciences you will be shunned for saying
something that is so non-standard model
that you lose all kinds of opportunities
so there's like all these little subtle
and not-so-subtle sources of bias that
affect the process of how we go about
understanding reality it's it's also the
same sort of mechanism and thinking of
when you make a big change in your life
or maybe you leave a place of employment
and people become angry
with you because you're changing you're
not what they expected anymore because
for them there's they could receive it
as an implicit implicit criticism of
themselves and their choices and that's
all happening kind of as a subtext and
people are getting angry and they maybe
don't know why they're angry yeah yeah
so now you come back to the cultural
relativism and you see okay someone
might have taken postmodern philosophy
and used it as cognitive backfill to
positions that largely came from other
places they didn't just come from a
emotionally neutral existentially
neutral study of the topics and that
this was the very best thinking they
could come within the topic it might
have been their own trauma or witnessing
a trauma in the world that was so
problematic that they took it on or
resonated with it and that's affecting
then the way they are you know what
they're resonating with intellectually
and how they're processing it do you how
do you think we can become more aware of
that in ourselves if we if we start from
the point that we're willing to become
more aware of it a lot of these things
just sort of well up as emotions and
sometimes that's useful and sometimes
it's not but maybe if we take the
example of cultural appropriation which
is such a hot topic at the moment how do
you see that playing out for people
emotionally and how how might we be able
to have a more productive self
reflective conversation about it well
one good thing is I want to see if I can
take both sides or any side of the topic
well enough that I really get it II and
if I can't if while I'm trying to take
the other side I feel like I'm mocking
it the whole time because it just seems
so stupid then there is some bias that
won't actually allow me to see reality
through that lens and see if I'm missing
anything needs and so then part of
earnestness would be can I actually do I
know that
seeing what they're seeing or am i I
might not be but I actually like notice
how many times there's a I want to stay
in with the people who share a belief
similar to me or coming to this belief
that I had answered some really critical
things that made me feel more okay or
like I had my shit together a safer and
universe or smarter and leaving that
feel scary you know you know you notice
all those kinds of things and so I would
say the degree to which we can identify
with our own earnestness to learn and
explore more than our current position
about things that's a much better
identity to the degree we need to have
one mmm I think with with the example of
a cultural appropriation when I try and
think into the mind of someone who
thinks that it's pretty much always a
bad thing it goes I have sort of two
rough pictures of what that can be
driven by and one is the more negative
kind of wanting to virtue signal and
want to be right on and sort of a cruise
the sort of certainty we talked about
before that I know that this is the this
is wrong to do it's morally wrong and
therefore I'm a good person and the
other I think comes from a place of pain
that it's hard to want to identify with
that if you feel that you your culture
or the culture of your parents and
relatives has been taken and abused
that's quite a deep hurt and you're
coming from a place where you feel there
is no understanding of you it's a deep
alienation pain and that's also very
uncomfortable to enter into yeah so I
think this is a good process right where
you're you're not making everyone who
believes that cultural appropriation is
an issue in the same category you're
acknowledging that there might be
different epistemologies and different
processes that bring them there which is
key and then you're kind of feeling into
what those could be and some that you
can really empathize with this is not a
topic that I would say I have very deep
molarity or expertise was but but as I
just think into it right now with you
there's a bunch of things that come up
right as I think about someone who says
cultural appropriation is wrong and why
that would be
I can imagine reasons mmm
deeper than just even the pain of a
culture that has been damaged by another
culture II I can imagine very real
reason so let's say we take hey white
people shouldn't wear dreadlocks oh they
shouldn't wear hindu bindi so they
shouldn't you know where hari krishna
chika ponytails or whatever whatever it
is right well then you say well what
were those things well there's a
superficial answer which is they were
some aesthetic whatever right but then
you go deeper well it was actually a
signaling mechanism of people who had
went through so say say in getting that
that brahmin string or getting that mall
or getting that whatever it was they had
actually went through specific ritual
specific processes practices world view
where then they could see anyone else
who had that and they could know here's
a person that I'm gonna have a certain
amount of shared experience with and it
created a signaling that was actually
relevant not only maybe for survival
which it very much might have been in
the world where in-group out-group
dynamics have determined those to
survival but also their ability for
deeper connection trust coherence and
they're like okay that that that
actually meant something sacred II and
now if someone else is is taking that
thing without all that it meant now I
actually don't know my signaling system
is broken and I don't know if these are
people with shared experience or not or
and so you you think about like there
might be layers of depth that you're
just completely missing in an argument
when you come to a position on it and
I'm not saying I think cultural
appropriation is always wrong I'm saying
I as I start to imagine in I can think
of a lot of things
and I would want to listen a lot and I'd
want to see can I be earnest about it or
does something come up in me big starts
to get blocked and if it does I want to
look at that well I think that's that's
a great attitude is both self reflective
and asking questions but also not
seeking to have a certainty at the at
the end of it and what what comes up for
me when you're describing those sorts of
single as symbol systems and how we can
read those things is is it at the core
that we have as humans trying to
understand each other and improve
ourselves are we kind of tripping over a
kind of an innate nature which is tribal
and wanting certain systems to make
sense and apply to everybody is that
something that we can overcome they
question a dumpling is there different
questions let me separate are we tribal
and signaling mechanisms in human nature
sure signaling mechanisms were actually
part of what helped us go beyond
tribalism because if I'm in a
hunter-gatherer society pre agrarian
society and we're below Dunbar number
right typically below 150 people maybe
meaningfully below that I actually don't
need signalling mechanisms because I
know all the people like I firsthand
actually know them all I've lived with
in my whole life and I know if it's the
people that I know and can trust or
other people that I don't know and so I
actually don't need symbolism because I
don't need an abstraction layer I'm
actually in my instantiated experience
right okay and now if we want to get a
number of tribes to be able to come
together into villages and then kingdoms
and the nation-states or you know
religious associations or whatever
larger kind of entity that has some
coherence then the question is how do we
have coherence with other people that we
don't know but that we've chosen to have
coherence for coherence with in a
situation where that
was survival relevant mmm and now
signaling mechanisms were a major part
of how that happened
right so now you know your red team
where blue team the fact that you've got
a red shirt on even though I haven't met
you like I know that we're put that
you're playing on my side that's called
the what flag are you flying right and
so you notice with regard to cultural
appropriation like there are people who
get pretty bent out of shape of someone
who isn't a citizen of their country
using their flag in a certain way yeah
it's a it's a similar thing right I mean
it's it's a related topic of wait this
is a way that our group was able to
maintain some coherence against forces
that were arrayed against it and you
know you think about like how would US
or or UK military deal with if someone
was fucking up their intelligence system
right and the signals that were coming
into their Intel like that would be a
problem if you see someone like the
crime of being dressed as a police
officer if you're not a police officer
or being dressed as a military official
is actually a crime because that system
of signaling is very meaningful and and
so one thing I would say is like now
many of those systems have have
interspersed so much that we then have
cultures like the u.s. that doesn't
really have a culture right that's the
mix of a whole bunch of different things
because it's fairly new and and and so
then of course it makes sense to allow
those cultures to come together and to
make new emergent things from one
perspective from another perspective if
some of those subgroups feel like they
are still needing to maintain some of
their identity for survival or thriving
reasons then it's like wait fuck this is
a real issue and oh yeah by the way the
US was built on slavery and on the
genocide and if that hasn't even been
addressed like there there are there are
issues with some of the appropriation
that are on the pain side so I I know I
went off topic a little bit but I don't
think that this
I don't think the signaling I think
that's actually an abstraction layer to
make larger cultures cohere that's not
tribalism now if by tribalism what you
really meant was in-group out-group
behavior i guess everybody did
but beyond the Dunbar number now that's
a different question are humans so are
humans capable of moving beyond the
Dumber number obviously right like being
able to have some sense of coherence
with abstracted people well that's what
what nations and religions and whatever
been and they've had they've mostly only
been able to do it through hierarchical
systems that where the there was loss of
freedom of individuals within those
systems to maintain coherence now
Machiavelli you knows enemy hypothesis
said that the only way to get a group of
people to cohere sustainably beyond the
Dunbar number is if they have a shared
outside threat that is a bigger threat
than their reason to not cohere with
each other that has been true for the
most part right like we've we you can
get you can have infighting between
Shiite and Sunni until they have the
West as a big enough you know shared fo
the - unify against that that's been
true I think there's a dynamic that's
about to happen that is different than
anything that has ever happened and I
think so I think this actually an
important piece of changing social
science axioms for a minute so how do
you get the whole how do you get
everyone on this little spaceship
biosphere to recognize that they are all
inside of the same spaceship biosphere
and now we're affecting things at the
level of the whole fuckin biosphere
right it's like climate change and
biodiversity loss and like all those
issues and if we have catastrophic
threats from the way we develop
exponential tech like AI or nanotech or
like these are not local issues so they
so local governance doesn't make any
sense if we're affecting each other
completely like China and India in the
u.s. can't can't think about climate
change as countries in a meaningful you
know sentence without what each other
are doing so how do we get that to
happen well either you've got to have
some aliens attack so we can all unify
against a common enemy
you've got to abstract the enemy and say
climate change is the enemy we all need
to unify to keep ourselves from going
extinct as a species or AI is the enemy
whatever the fuck we decide or you can
actually unify you so the first part is
you can unify against an abstract threat
right it does not have to be an agent ik
threat so something like environmental
destruction or catastrophic risk of any
kind could be a unifying imperative it's
harder but it's possible but the next
thing is we also can unify towards
shared goals where it is more useful for
us to do that than not and this is a
important thing and I think right now we
have a situation where if we continue in
group out group dynamics there is no way
to not move into catastrophic and even
existential risk zone and so we
absolutely do have abstracted enemy
hypothesis drivers of our need to be
totally cohered but we also have you
know the the kinds of opportunities that
are most interesting to all of us are
only realizable that way why do I say
this
if we think about it from a game
theoretic perspective those early tribes
would cohere with each other as a team
to then if when they needed to compete
against other tribes in a win-lose game
model and they would compete either for
resource extraction of scarce resources
or direct head-on competition through
war right through military complex and
if there was enough abundance of
resources materials that it was easier
to take shit from nature from the
Commons and fight each other then they
wouldn't fight if the there started to
be scarcity and fighting each other be
directly or indirectly became a
necessity or an easier thing to do then
that happened
and then of course if there's a larger
tribe and we can't actually fight them
competently then we might unify with
some other smaller tribes but then now
we're bigger that's gonna have them do
it now we're at villages and then
they're gonna keep unifying and creating
better now we need signalling systems
right now we need culture larger and so
will eventually get nation-states and
economic trading bloc's but as as we
think about this kind of what we've
called civilization growing from tribes
into what we what we have now of you
know kinds of large conglomerated
superpower dynamics where the ability we
were our ability to compete with each
other for extracting scarce resource
from the earth is actually getting us
towards the points of making the earth
not habitable across major regions and
where then you start getting you know
massive refugee human migration issues
that start to collapse grid
infrastructure that can't handle it over
the next little bit Syria was already an
example of that droughts leading to
people moving from subsistence farming
areas into the city leading to resource
shortage leading to the war and the
escalation that happened and it was
basically a small one but also even then
you know these groups in war with each
other
we don't we can't use our weapons right
like are they China and Russia
in the u.s. like we just can't get into
a war with each other so we will try and
deal with them as proxy wars or whatever
but we have weapons that are powerful
enough that winning would again see
other one since the other one also has
powerful enough shit winning would
require destroying the whole playing
field for everybody when you get to
enough power in a game theoretic
situation where winning requires
destroying the playing field so it
equals losing even for the winner and
win lose game theory becomes Omni
lose-lose because there's that much
power then you either have to get off
game theory entirely and this means
in-group out-group dynamics or you go or
you go extinct or very near
right you have a massive step down in in
capacity catastrophic are essential risk
I think in the next very little bit very
short number of years we either continue
competing for the extraction of scarce
resources moving the biosphere towards
more you know critical fragility and
keep competing with each other and heads
on fashions that end up and competing
for more powerful tech that leads to
exponential tech that is autocatalytic
and can run away from us in a number of
different ways and we we we will have
then a radical step down in civilization
either no civilization or a radical step
down if we continue doing that or we
actually figure out what the fuck Omni
win-win on a little-bitty biosphere
where we're all in it together means and
it means it it means something where
nations are an obsolete idea they might
have served evolutionary relevance but
they don't anymore and it means
something where private balance sheets
that where you want to accumulate more
shit on your balance sheet because it
leads to new capacities but scarce stuff
that other people don't have and where
nature doesn't have a balance sheet so
all of the economic incentive is to
externalize cost to nature take shit out
of nature and compete with each other
for it that shit served evolutionary
relevance but can't go further either so
there is some you know the a post win
lose game theory a post in-group
out-group mentality requires a complete
shift to economics completion to
governance complete shift to culture
religion all the way down to a shifted
identity where I'm not even a fucking
separate being in my mind of course I'm
an individual and actually even a
totally unique non fungible individual
but I'm an individual that wouldn't
exist without the whole rest of it they
wouldn't exist without an atmosphere
with oxygen that wouldn't exist in the
way that I am without other people doing
a gazillion functions that my life
depends on and when I get that we're all
these emergent properties of an
interconnect
whole and unique emergent properties
that are not replaceable at that
identity level we can start getting
something that can transcend in-group
out-group dynamics this reminds me of I
don't know if you've read a book called
finite in infinite games yep James
course yeah it's a great read for those
who haven't read it there's he outlines
a perspective on essentially everything
in human life where we can see it as a
game and a finite game there's winners
and losers and a clear outcome and it's
it's finite it's not going to be
something you could repeat it you could
do multiple times in the series but each
outcome is kind of set whereas the point
of an infinite game is to keep playing
so like a relationship or we would say
the human species if this is the game
we're playing what we want to do is not
to have winners and losers but to be
able to enable the game to continue
rolling along and yeah it's it's a great
foundational book and I highly recommend
it for everyone and it has so many
layers of depth and meaning built in
that if you're if you're reading it
it's a treatise on economics and
governance and spirituality and human
psychology at the same time but that
core idea that finite games are meant to
be won and when you win the game's over
and infinite games are meant to continue
the game of play it's a it is a so we're
looking at a shift from win-lose game
theory to omni win win or a different
concept even of what win means from
mostly zero-sum to increasingly positive
some from finite to infinite there's a
whole shift but that new thing isn't
even anything like what we have called a
game previously yeah and if and if to
win is to play then this brings us to a
couple of points of ideas that people
have talked about I know you talked
about the Commons as a key reference
point in your work where things that are
common like the common resources or the
things that are common to everyone like
the environment but then we face the
problem of say hardly anybody who uses
Wikipedia actually contributes to it
and how can we change that perspective
and then there's another obvious example
which is the idea of a universal basic
income which would enable people to keep
playing their lives without feeling that
if they don't do certain things they're
simply not going to be able to play at
all and I wonder if you could comment on
the usual objections that come up
against those which tend to be people
are selfish and they don't care about
others how can we reconfigure AI
people's ideas of what the game is that
they're playing yeah so you're asking
questions that to really deconstruct a
lot of our ideas around evolutionary
biology and evolutionary psychology and
what we think of as human nature
genetically and economic theory and then
adequately reconstruct new things would
take enough time that I'm not gonna get
to do it I'm gonna just push push
buttons of all of those I think that we
have got human conditioning that is
actually relatively new but that has
become very ubiquitous because it was
successful in a win-lose game theoretic
structure and it's so skubick witnessed
that we've done pretty much all of our
social science within that context and
so we stopped factoring the context and
call it human nature we've we've done
almost all of our social sciences within
capitalism we've done almost all of it
within nation-states right within those
kinds of structures done it within
win-lose game theory in a mostly
post-industrial definitely post agrarian
world most the history of our species is
pre agrarian definitely pre nations say
and you know pre agrarian also meant pre
capital pre private ownership of surplus
because there was no fuckin surplus and
so there's a totally different
relationship to those things so uh and
then we say okay well the way that we're
behaving since it's ubiquitous must be
nature rather than nurture so then let's
try and look for the genes that
correlate and make it a genetic answer
and this is where I think our our biases
lead to bad science
so I won't go further down there but I
will say that most of what we call
Analia Balu 'men nature I think is our
nature expressed through a certain set
of conditions and different enough
conditions can can have what is nature
expressed differently now I'm gonna come
back and say the whole nature-nurture
what is fundamentally possible to the
human condition it we can ask a thought
experiment about it that's different
than we've been able to ask previously
because CRISPR is is making the
conversation of human genetic
engineering a real not that far off
possible conversation right it's a big
fucking deal because if we say ok well
maybe maybe there is something that is
genetic and maybe we can change those
genes then it brings up D instantly now
we're in deep existentialism around oh
if we can actually change something that
we thought of as nature what is
fundamentally desirable outside of what
we thought was a fixed context eh should
do we want to then change the genes
where everyone is a hyper competitor do
we and and they're the most violent and
largest alpha men possible only do we
want to make it toward now alphas are
irrelevant and everyone is a super
cooperator do we want to make it to
where people are happy all the time and
we have done the abolitionists
imperative and got rid of the ability to
suffer and feel pain or do we like are
there evolutionary and psychological
purposes that stay relevant to like now
we're in a very deep existential
philosophic and it's important that we
go there now as soon as we can start to
you know ask those questions then we can
come back to ok well here are some
things that are meaningful about the
human condition what of them might
actually be possible even without the
genetic engineering but it does make us
start thinking that the what we have
thought of as human nature that was a
hard unfixed limit we can at least think
about it more flexibly which i think is
a useful thought experiment but
if you have us if you have a situation
where there's a lot of shitty jobs right
like what tarring roads is just not that
fun and you know etc etc so it doesn't
mean that nobody would would never want
to go do some touring of a road or
different kinds of labor or different
kinds of rote tasks but most people
wouldn't want to do 50 hours of it a
week for 40 years right yeah and yet the
society has needed people to do a bunch
of that shit
and so when you then see people as the
vector for getting societal things done
you have to have an extrinsic motives
system to get people to do it so if we
all pull our resources and then make
sure everybody has resources we call it
communism then then why would anyone do
the shitty job so now the state has to
force them so we call it imperialism and
that's why we don't like communism it's
I'm radically oversimplifying of course
but that's like at the heart of the
argument so then we say cool let's let
the free market force people because
that's better so we're the state's not
going to force people but if but they
don't get any basic needs met so if they
don't go do one of the shitty jobs they
starve now we'll say that they have the
freedom to get better education and
hopefully not have to do the shitty jobs
but of course it's not a real argument
since a lot of people are gonna have to
do the shitty jobs because somebody has
to write and those who are born into
families where someone else was doing it
have a lot less likelihood to have
access to good education and good health
care and good training and so in a
situation where the default is having
nothing you need to get stuff to just
survive bottom of Maslow's hierarchy but
now surviving doesn't give me the next
levels of Maslow's hierarchy right like
my belonging the more shit that I get
the more I'll be able to actually get
relationships and do things with friends
that have the resources to do stuff and
and my esteem all the way up to my
self-actualization the more that I can
get shit the more capacity I have to
self express and do and like that every
level Mao's Lahiri if I want it and we
value the scare shit where you having
something then you don't have access
like a shopping cart you have possession
of it where when you're not using it I
still can't use it and so because you
possessing some scarce thing there's not
enough of for everybody means that I
don't have access we're we're in
fundamental competition with each other
right and if there's something that's
abundant enough that you having it
doesn't decrease my access at all like
err we put no economic value at all on
it because there's no ability to have
differential advantage associated with
getting some of the scarce thing and
because we put no economic value on the
air will pollute the shit out of it and
burn it up because it doesn't enter our
economics calculus that is the basis of
our decision-making but we'll work
really hard to get the gold or the
diamond or whatever it is that we
perceive as scarce enough that if I have
it gives me some differential advantage
over you but then I'm gonna take that
gold of them in and put it in a safe
that is doing nothing for anyone other
than a Fiat purpose right and then
because it's scarce now this is
important to get because the value is
proportional to the scarcity because
we're not looking for systemic advantage
we're looking for differential
competitive advantage which just assumed
if the thing became unscared it would
have no value like air so as soon as we
start finding that diamonds aren't as
scarce as we thought they were we start
burning in a crushing and hiding them
right yeah I think that we need to
artificially manufacture scarcity so
when you have a system where if you
don't get shit you die and if you don't
get more shit you don't get to express
very well and anyone else getting shit
means you don't have it and win-lose
dynamics everywhere like if you if I
wanted to condition greed and
selfishness and jealousy and the people
the best I could
that's how the fuck I would do it is
that trading if it be this that exactly
and if I wanted to train people to be
Psychopaths right not like I put them
through enough first person childhood
trauma or they have the right kind of
brain injuries or genes for formal
psychopathy but I want to decrease their
empathy pretty radically and their
ability to rationalize harm well I would
do things like capitalism and large you
know and then the evolutions of
capitalism that happened corporate
capitalism where
if you aren't willing to participate in
something that's gonna have
externalities you just don't get to run
a big company if you're running a big
company you've got to say yeah shit well
those mines are run by slave labor but
like there's just no other mines and if
we tried to pay for fair trade we'd be
totally out of business so you got it
like crack some eggs to make some
omelets just even being able to
participate with the system that isn't
closed-loop that doesn't actually value
all the metrics that it effects requires
rationalizing harm and having a kind of
abstracted psychopathy so you know we
have a system that you can think of as
conditioning low-grade Ubiquiti
psychopathy and everybody and then we do
social science on it we call it human
nature yeah and then we can't change it
then we do stab to rationalize the
system again continuing it exactly but
like you know if I walk by a homeless
person and they have they're in real
pain right they might even be bleeding
they might be really dirty they and I
just walk by because I'm busy I got shit
to do and maybe I give him five bucks
but I you know I walk by there is
something wrong with me at a human level
there is some way that I was able to
turn my empathy off where this
disappointment I got to get to that is
trivial as fuck in comparison to this
other person's whole life I just I can
and I can be fine just continuing to be
worried about my busyness like what the
fuck how could I do that well because
there's so many homeless people I can't
fix all of them and then that then that
rationalizes none of them right but
that's that systemic that is a system
where empathy isn't even viable in the
system and so everybody has to turn it
down or go crazy it's also like a
personal if I don't know if the language
makes sense but it's a personally
systemic thing that if you think you
can't help all the people then you won't
help one then you never helped anybody
yeah
and so well you know cuz it doesn't you
say alright I can try and do this like
I'll help this one thing but then if I'm
if I care about this one enough to
really help them i turn my feeling back
on right then on the day my feeling back
on now what about the next one and the
next one and when do I stop but also and
when do I decide that actually upgrading
from my last year's Mercedes to this
next year's Mercedes is worth more than
helping a couple more of them who are
you gonna say my time well in this
system when you do help that other
person you might depends on the extent
you help them but you also start risking
your own safety and future so if you if
you you really want to help them you
want to give them all the resources and
you already have you yourself live in
scarcity which a lot of people do like
you have to take care of your own shit
first before you can help anyone else
but that's the story right that's the
that's the story that we tell and then
of course now this is a very painful
thing to say but most people then if you
look at at the end of their life the
amount of shit that they've consumed and
what that did to the environment what it
did to however many animals that were
involved how many species went extinct
related to those supply chains how many
animals in factory farms and then how
many migrant workers how many people in
sweatshops have etc and you and you look
at all of that and then you compare it
to what that person then did once they
got ahead well enough to help other
people like there they are on the
liability side of nature's balance sheet
yes now the answer is not obvious
because the answer doesn't exist within
this system the answer is actually
needing to build new systems that don't
take complexity and make it simple or
complicated right they don't do win lose
game theoretic structures so when when
you look at this it is it's actually
there aren't obvious answers that are
good and meaningful about how to like
okay how do we
prevent war and have a world full of
peace like why the fuck do we still have
war it would seem like world peace is
something everybody wants okay well how
do you have a for-profit
military-industrial complex as the
largest bloc of global economics and
understanding the laws of supply and
demand have a world that doesn't have
war like how do those two things get to
live together they don't they don't
right and so then when we say well we're
working on peace are you working two
obsolete having a for-profit
military-industrial complex because if
not you have no chance of addressing it
because any system of supply has to
continue to maintain and protect and
grow its source of demand and that's
even just the directors following their
fiduciary responsibility to the
shareholders of the company I mean like
that so the point is it's a the system
as a whole is a paperclip Maximizer and
there's there's an identity problem here
at the core to you that if you're trying
to say obsolete a military-industrial
complex the people within it don't want
to be obsoleted within the same way that
somebody who has spent their whole life
tearing the roads and that's the only
skill they feel they have they also
don't want to be obsoleted because
there's that sense of existential
confusion and angst over well well what
am I then I'm being forced to become
something else and that's frightening
right right so the shift that has to
happen doesn't include a macro
structural shift but it also includes
individual both trauma and attachments
level shifts and identity level shifts
right because most people's identity
like that not most people everybody's
identity was conditioned by a system and
it's adaptive within it and it's
actually maladaptive to making something
else and then I guess we come back to
the question of still wanting to have
control over your life and how things
make sense but if we're talking about a
radical shift in human development and
something that we've come to think of as
human nature which he said likely is
something we call human nature because
it's been the case for long enough that
we think it's fundamental the we have to
overhaul some very basic structures of
thoughts here so looking looking forward
at that process do you think this is
we're a chrysalis about to turn into a
butterfly or are you kind of more
worried than that I think that if we
just okay first I will say that we have
what I might call kind of naive Tecna is
Amaya they're much of Silicon Valley is
famous for right and that that narrative
is also connected to kind of this that
dialectic of progress that we used to
have these short brutish nasty lives and
should has just been getting
continuously better with capitalism in
tech and industry you know on a on a
consistent path and it's gonna continue
forever and every problem we have that
ahead we don't really have to worry
about because human ingenuity always
figures it out I do think that this is
radically naive I I think that is a more
dangerous world view than fundamentalist
religious worldviews interest because
the fundamentalist religious worldviews
can't create new tech that gives us more
power and having more power
exponentially more power to affect shit
without having comprehensively better
decision making means exponential
externality equals catastrophic risk we
have a scenario right now where
exponential tech is means we are
exponent we don't know how to make an
intuition around exponents because we've
never had them right we we've got we can
maybe make a sense out of like curves
that are slightly inflected up for a
short period of time but not really
right so with an exponential curve our
intuition can't really make sense of it
but we have exponentially increasing
capacity to affect the world around us
Tara Lee and through supply chains and
through extraction technology and there
are positive applications because
thermodynamics just works that way right
like there there's one way to put all
the pieces of a cell together where it's
a cell and it respirate s' there's lots
of fuckin ways to take it apart and so
and it takes a year to build a house or
six months but it takes a few minutes
with a record ball to break it down
entropy is just easier so when we
develop new technological capacity that
negative applications have higher
probabilities if I'm just looking at an
even playing field of probability so we
have to factor that so if we're two
things we're exponentially increasing
our capacity to affect the world around
us while simultaneously decreasing the
quality of our decision-making in many
areas because exponential increase in
information technology combined with an
economic structure we're having
information having data is competitive
advantage in a system where I need
competitive advantage so I want to both
hide things that are true and I want to
even share disinformation right like
fake left and then go right to make get
the competitor off of that we have all
sorts of incentive to diss dissing form
but with exponential information
technique then we get such a glut of
noise that you can't even identify
signal clearly and so this is why we're
in this kind of post fact world where
it's like okay how long do we have with
climate change before the coral died
nobody fucking knows how much uranium is
Fukushima really releasing or how close
is it to a to a reactor meltdown or or
10 North Korea's nuke SRIA Lee hit North
America or not or or did Russia really
meddle in the election or like we
actually don't have the ability to make
sense of fuckin anything that matters to
whether we survive as a species or not
because
that dissin firm so we've had this
escalating disinformation for reasons
that make sense right for just
competitive advantage on information and
reach and incentive to do dis inform him
but that means decrease capacity to make
sense of the world which means decrease
capacity to make good choices with
increased capacity to make powerful
choices so techno up Tamizh I'm why I
say it's a dangerous world view is
because it is actually capable of
advancing the tech that within the
current structure is self terminating
and so we do need to say ok shit nature
does this complex self-organizing so
adaptive resilient thing the era of
evolution is defined by it how do we
make a complex human built world that is
that has closed loops that doesn't have
externality that is continuously
adaptive rather than a complicated one
how do we do it in harmony with the
complex system of nature rather than you
know with nature as a finite consumable
substrate we have to figure that out and
that that is of course even more
advanced tech and more advanced science
but fundamentally different oh so you
were asking I'm sorry the question does
are we gonna make it are we not gonna
make it how's it look well if I just
plot the current curves the current
curves don't look good ii-if if we look
at any of the groups working on global
catastrophic risk assessment next
essential risk assessment the
probability is of really problematic
stuff our way to highway 2 near term now
that said you know you asked this
question about caterpillar into a
butterfly this is a really interesting
question because if I didn't know the
caterpillar was gonna go into a
chrysalis and do the butterfly thing and
I was just watching the caterpillar grow
and I was forecasting a
I would assume that it just kept
becoming a bigger and bigger caterpillar
and eating more and more shit until it
decimated all the plants and ate itself
to extinction
yeah and so I can't keep plotting that
curve because it's not gonna do that
curve it's gonna do that curve to a
certain point where it's actually eaten
enough stuff meaning the caterpillar is
a net consumption machine right like it
doesn't pollinate stuff all it does is
devastate everything around it consuming
but it's getting the raw materials the
minerals amino acids to make a butterfly
so but as this consumption machine it is
devastating the environment around it
but once it eats enough stuff that it
has the fuel and resources necessary to
make a butterfly the imaginal cells the
first butterfly cells start kicking on
triggers the movement into the chrysalis
at which point the caterpillar ends up
dissolving like all the organs is
alright dissolves all the way down to
sub cellular structures and then gets to
reform right at an amino acid at a
peptide level reform to a butterfly it
is not a retrofit of a caterpillar it's
it's a fundamentally different thing of
the fundamentally different code but you
wouldn't have predicted that discrete
phase shift by just continuing to
forecast along the caterpillar curve any
more than you would if you just took the
forty weeks of in utero development and
said it looks bad right like if we
didn't know birth was gonna happen
it's getting really cramped around 42
weeks around 44 weeks it looks like it's
just gonna like get too big and die
right and this the same can be true said
true for a little bird developing inside
of an eggshell ray like they're all the
developmental phases are defined by net
consumption and net growth in a finite
self terminating way to get to the point
that of course if it tried to continue
it would go it would die but it's to get
to the point that it has the capacity to
go through some discrete phase shift the
chrysalis the birth out of the uterus
and the cutting of the umbilical cord
the emergence out of the eggshell and
then on the other side of that discrete
phase shift is a totally new curve and
so then
the question is could there be a
discrete phase shift that where all of
what we've called humanity or
civilization so far has been a
developmental phase where we were
focused on with capitalism military
industrial complex all the civilization
structures we're focused on gathering
the parts necessary to build a truly
global sustainable regenerative anti
fragile complex civilization but now
it's not going to be an extension of the
current system it is a dissolve and then
restructure those technologies those
capacities for a fundamentally new
reason for being and that is I would say
the the hope and the possibility is a
world where win lose game theory got us
a lot of capacity to actually not just
be a tribal people but a global people
but now we actually have to transcend at
the place where we've gotten so much
power to win that that power actually
can't be used without destroying itself
we have to now transcend win lose game
theory right I guess so that's a last
question for this this part of
discussion then are you optimistic about
that do you think this is going to be
the chrysalis moment and that we're
going to just be creating or turn into a
new paradigm of some kind
is there enough cause for hope that we
could feel that way it's a tricky
question there there's a utilitarian
answer which is depending upon what is
going to move people more it's important
for them to hold both sides right if if
getting that it's not a given that we
make it can shake someone enough from
just wanting to win at a dying game then
they might need to go through that and I
think probably most people do and it's
important but then not stay stuck there
and then say okay well now I don't want
to win at a dying game or a game that is
causing the death of what is meaningful
itself I want to help birth a new game
now
what is that it's if you think of it as
inevitable then it doesn't necessarily
compel your participation if you think
of it as impossible it doesn't compel
your participation either if you think
of it as possible and not yet determined
and influenceable by how you show up I
think that's the right way to think
about it so I have one last question in
this regard what can we do then on an
individual level to make this shift
happen yeah so I'm gonna answer that in
a meta way first ask that question
earnestly a lot and really work for
answers without assuming that any
authority already has them and not
assuming that there aren't places that
have a lot of answer that you want to
study right but like for whatever faults
we can assess there Gandhi did some very
meaningful things that have have not
been done at that scale maybe maybe ever
and one of the interesting parts of the
story when he said you know in South
Africa the first time then India later
he said okay I'm gonna I'm gonna stop
this I'm gonna get a home rule for India
and people said how he said I have no
idea mm-hmm
but he said like I know that it's right
I know that these people being enslaved
by another people is not right I know
that's right so I'm committed to
aligning my life to make it happen fully
before knowing how there's a decision
before the problem solving and so then
it was like then because of that and he
said so my how I'm gonna just sit here
in Journal and think about it and
meditate and pray and do whatever
process I have to come up with a how and
then when I give that how I'm gonna try
it and then when it failed he's like no
I didn't say I just learned something
kind of like Edison's light bulb and try
again
we have to take something an approach
where there is a where there's a knowing
that we don't actually know how to do
this
mentally new phase yet we want to learn
from all the people that have been
thinking well about it and we want to be
thinking well about it and we want to be
adding our energy to it as best as we
can and we want to get really fucking
earnest about that and notice wait where
am I actually just kind of mostly trying
to win at the current system and and
what does that mean and think more
deeply about it so the first thing I
would say is is really that like rather
than yeah rather than you know me give
an answer do this thing it's activate
yourself as an agent of sense-making as
a capable being that can actually make
sense of shit and think about it and and
work on something and so the the answer
what can you do I one thing that it is
not is donate some money to charity and
go do some volunteer work sometimes and
recycle and like ride your bike to work
all of that is lovely and we we still
hit catastrophe if that's if that's the
best we're doing because it's not like
decrease our personal consumption a
little bit try and do some good stuff
changes anything at scale Oh like people
have to take a deeper level of
responsibility for how do we actually
change these meta systems what could a
future of economics post capitalism
that's viable really look like so then
you say well I don't know let's start
studying and study post capitalism and
and study different systems that have
been proposed and then look out what are
groups that are working on things and is
there something I can meaningfully
contribute all right well that system
makes sense but I have no idea how the
fuck we get there all right what might a
transitional system that's intelligible
to the current system but vectors
towards that so maybe aspects of The
Venus Project and resource-based
economy's are not fully dialed in but
there are parts of it that are right but
how do you vector there may be some
parts of crypto currency blockchain is
also inadequate but maybe convector that
you start kind of really dialing in what
are the closest things we know for how
to think about both what a viable
civilization could look like and how we
can vector there
and yeah I mean that that's what I would
really say is think about it earnestly
educate yourself and work on it and
actually realize that it matters that's
really helpful thank you yeah I agree
that's definitely it's keeping an it's
an active mind and not just looking for
quick fixes which I guess is part of the
core of what well your work is and what
neuro hacker is trying to do if people
want to find out more about your own
thinking and writing as well as neuro
hacker where can they go to find you you
know all of this work on kind of
macroeconomics and since making in
governance and infrastructure there is
no place that that's hosted on the web
yet but there is about to be we you know
we have some kind of think tank like
organizations that focus on these things
but they're not publishing at some point
they might I'll let you know I'm about
to put up a website in like a week or so
and I'll give you the URL it'll be
civilization emerging calm or something
like that
but you know for right now there's
people can come make friends on Facebook
and maybe see some things and neural
hackers not really focused on you know
future of macroeconomics whatever
directly but it is focused on can we
develop can we you know take complex
system science and develop better
technologies to help humans have the
capacity to participate in these things
more meaning please so if you're
interested in that topic then no hacker
has interesting resources
yeah that's neuro hacker comm for people
to check that out and looking forward to
a future conversation talking deeply
about optimizing and improving our human
capacity so then from which point
hopefully we can tackle some of these
bigger issues we've been talking about
and I guess learn how to play a
different game in the process so yeah
thanks so much for your time and for
sharing all of this Daniel I've I've
learned a lot and I've really enjoyed
the conversation
should likewise these were these were
fun questions and topics and I
appreciate it and you know on the topic
of what can we do to help meaningfully
transform civilization looking at the
model did that y'all are working on
which is you know what I say this people
should work to educate themselves
meaningfully and study and explore both
outside education and mining their own
thinking where are the sources of good
information that are relevant and I see
that that's what you all have been
working to do here is that we do bring
together resources so that's I'm very
happy about thank you thank you so much
you can compliment thanks for listening
if you appreciate the high existence
podcast the best way to support it is to
invest in yourself by acquiring one or
more of our self development tools at
story existence com use the code wisdom
and check out to get a huge twenty five
percent off the thirty challenges to
enlightenment course you can also leave
reviews on iTunes or share it with your
friends on social media thank you so
much for tuning in and cheers to a high
existence
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]