[Music]
I'm very excited about this conversation
I have butterflies before each each time
we we speak who anticipating
anticipating it was was very it was
germinating for me it when I was walking
this morning I and I had been in trouble
wisdom yesterday doing all this work I
actually ran the deal logos workshop and
you know talking with Jordan hall and
with Nora Bateson and so and then all
that was in my mind and then all the
work that Chris and I have been doing
and then our previous dialogue about
soul all of that just sort of came
together for me and so I wanted to
propose something to you I don't know if
you got a chance to read that email I
said yes and III love the idea that you
might have a theory about Hans Hans or
something to do with beauty right yeah
well no I what I want to do is so I have
two I have two motives for this Mayo two
reasons I think they're more than just
motives I think they can justify them I
think they're reasons so why is I think
it's an argument that's designed to try
and not completely answer your questions
but leave at least give an integrated
way of it answering the questions that
you posed so I thought it would act as
an excellent platform for the discussion
because it's gonna talk about beauty and
soul and do logos all of that great um
and and then what I also wanted to do
was I wanted to start playing and I mean
in serious playing with you know what
does argumentation look like now within
dialectic right what does that look like
because right now we're doing a lot of
this other stuff and like we can talk a
little bit later about you know what we
what I did in the workshop if you want
and and it's all great you know you're
doing this amplification and you're
doing all this work and I was already
getting people to start moving off of
propositions into I proposed that and
you know and that kind of move but I
also want to try and start playing with
okay but what did like what cuz argue
argumentation like deal dialectic is not
for closure right and it's not about
coming to a conclusion so what
argumentation have so what the thought
that came to mind is exactly what I'm
proposing here that the an argumentation
is kind of like a setting forth of a
platform that is supposed to you know is
supposed to lead to something beyond the
argumentation as the dialectic unfolds
well guys I wanna maybe I can just step
back just a little bit haha and say that
our last conversation was about I
proposed this notion of soul yes is and
I asked you to speak about that and then
John came up with the idea of reinvent
geo would have the Latin word for
reinventing and and reinventing which
also means discovering right yes have I
got that right and I also wholly
rediscovering because these notions are
very old
so what we're inventing and we're
discovering at the same time and I then
after our conversation I thought jeez we
could reinvent everything you know soul
we can reinvent beauty we can reinvent
the world you know I don't mean to be
inflationary but it's like if we're
moving into a new paradigm we have to
reinvent how we see practically
everything right that's exactly right
and you I think we inventio is one of
the central functions of dialectic is we
invent here that's a reanimation if it's
going to be a meta psycho technology it
has to be able to reinvent you all over
the place if it's going to be effective
and functional for us I think that's I
think that's a pivotal point you just
made there I don't think it's
inflationary at all I think the the
right the the job of this is is to
exactly allow us to return to where
every we want to speak and find how to
reanimate it and bring them bring the
logos to it because all these concepts
become lifeless and innocence and they
become clich√©s and they become truisms
and they stop meaning something and yet
we have a sense that they're deeply
meaningful on some level but but we stop
we stop using them in any meaningful
function and the only way we could bring
them back is by let's say redefining
them well so it's not just redefining
the words its redefining how we see the
world
yes yes and Andrey and reforming
ourselves in the face of that what kind
of transformation do we have to undergo
to conform to the reality that's being
disclosed because whenever there's a
disclosure there's also a demand on us
in that we need to conform to that new
disclosure we're gonna realize it and so
I think what I want what I think you've
provided me a good way of reframing what
I was saying earlier I think this is a
better way of saying it I want to try
and reinvent you argumentation so that
it's no it's no longer what it is become
which is you know you know just the
logical coherence of propositions in
order to just establish a conclusion
that's supposed to defeat your enemy I
want to try and understand what was
going on in this Socratic use of
argumentation because very often those
arguments don't come to conclusions in
fact the arguments devolve into
something else
yeah and the problem perhaps with
arguments generally as yeah as you say
the rival risks you know they're painful
whereas I probably a good argument if
you come into the right spirit probably
has some kind of a joy associated with
it
if the two like people are having a
wrestling match you know you might
disagree but I think we're afraid to
kind of disagree and we're in the social
media age were afraid to wrestle with
each other on some level so you know the
plato's use a nickname because he was it
means broad shoulder because he was a
wrestler late on right I'm a martial
artist and so yeah the point I was
saying this in the workshop yesterday
the point is not being right the point
is to come into right relationship both
with the topic and the other person
that's what respect originally met
respect spec t arrests to see the thing
properly it doesn't mean the same thing
as the Uni be and I said what we're
trying to do is steer a middle path a
very Buddhist notion between merely
attacking people or merely agreeing with
them we're trying instead to afford each
of us getting to a place where we can't
get to on our own right because if we
have too much agreement then we fall
into a bubble of some kind yes yes you
know and things get very dull and
and cliche but if we're too antagonistic
then we just you know then it's just
bloody blood everywhere and well nothing
that's nothing we don't develop
friendships and and that kind of thing
well there's no conduction to respect
and I want to I want to reinvent yo that
because it's also been trivialized by
some of the social dusts just as this
course and but notice again to resonate
with another topic we're going to
hopefully bring into discussion today
notice how both agreement and antagonism
lead to an ugliness of speech right the
one is the ugliness of dead conformity
the ugh the other is the you know the
ugliness of confrontation and threat and
again trying to instead get back to what
it is to beautify speech I want it I
want I want to try and get argumentation
that and Chris and I were talking about
this is like that but my thinking isn't
set and then I speak it to convince you
it's instead as I try to articulate to
you my thoughts my thoughts I'm actually
reinvent healing my thoughts that in
speaking them I discover something in
the speaking that I didn't have before I
spoke them to you that's what I'm really
trying to get out so this metaphor
mm-hmm the rest thing metaphor works
well for that purpose to because if you
think every particular proposition every
proposed speech act and the way that you
and I have talked about it John makes a
particular space and the interaction and
so the entire form of the dialogue is an
act of spatialization right that you
test the spatial awareness of your body
even as you exert and are exerted by
your dialogic partners so the co plates
or the co creative act is actually an
act of of using the form of embodiment
in this case the embodiment of speech
itself as a way of making exploratory
space to then venture ever further ever
further ever further into that space and
definitional discussions are interesting
for that reason because if we're
thinking of the definition of a term as
a multi vocalist solar dialogue or love
or any of the things that we might be
able to to put into this arena and then
rest
with our really it's I think it's
helpful to think metaphorically of each
of these definitions as spaces in which
to play that the definition is something
to be inhabited in order to then Illume
more territory around it as opposed to
something that we treat as as leading to
a fixed point of closure I think that's
exactly right because and that's where
so that's when I was doing the workshop
I tried to move people I made people
actually engage in the speaker to
remember that proposition originally
comes from the speech octave I proposed
which is not the same thing as this is
the case right it's a very different
things I try to bring that back out with
it's it's the Metin it's the it's the
metonymy again right everything is put
for something greater put for something
beyond it so everything if there's an
acknowledgment that every proposition
every gesture in the dialogue is
abbreviated knowingly and
self-consciously abbreviated then it
always has its eye fixed beyond its
point of meaning
mmm beautiful yeah yeah so it never
becomes reified or stuck yeah and and
and there's always a living force moving
through it which again I think all of
these things keep coming together in my
mind which leads to soul and beauty
because yeah well because what has soul
is is what it what is alive right what
is what what continues to move through
us and and what is beautiful is also
what is alive inand what what is
meaningful and not what is is stuck in
and frozen and broken and fragmented and
and ugly and right know that I didn't
mean to that this is right I just was
you know I was excited when you said you
know all of these things are coming
together in your mind because that's the
original meaning of logos bring things
together so that they come to belong
together
and that's something much much more than
what we've reduced it to logos is the
basis of our word logic and we've
reduced that to a coherence between
propositions but what you were talking
about there Andrew about how things come
together so they belong together and
they're in sold together and become a
live together that's the meaning of
logos and logical coherence is only one
aspect of that much richer manifold
right so we're trying to reinvent logos
yet all right to mean something not not
in this narrow logic just a logicians
kind of game um and we're also trying to
what about what about my friend
Alexander always talks about mythos and
pathos as well sure that those those two
kind of work together so mythos is the
story is the the formal form of the
story and pathos is the deep sort of
feeling aspect to it and and if you get
if perhaps if we get too hung up on
logos we lose we lose our sense of
feeling and if we get too hung up on
mythos you know the story becomes too
sealed or closed or I'm making sense
here and that all those three not to
work together logos mythos and pathos
but that's and that's what makes go for
it um okay I'll go ahead I'm just going
to say but that's that's the point of
the like when you're doing the dialectic
when you want reading one of the
dialogues the like you know discipline
ik I think it's really important to Drew
Harlan and others have made you you
don't pay attention to just the
argumentation the argumentation is where
you see the putting forth of
propositions but the drama is where you
see a putting forth of ways of life and
drama is likely where the mythos and the
pathos you that's why that's why Plato
does his philosophy in dialog because
it's only in dialogue that you can get
the wedding of the of the drama and the
discourse so smoothly together hmm yes
yes exactly
and only in and only in the
dramaturgical context can logos to have
a questing character yes there is an
implicit narrativity to the dialogues
precisely because there's a quest right
and that's why the dialogues are such a
beautiful marriage of the logos and the
mythos because the characterization of
the quest of logos is implicit to the
function of the dialogue itself yeah the
questions which are propositional are
actually just the affordance of the
speech act thinking
of questing that's exactly the right way
to put it Chris I think that's really
good yeah hmm so shall shall I begin
some of my proposals please please yeah
so maybe maybe let me go through sort of
sort of the four main things the
proposals and then we can go back and
trace through it a however you gentlemen
wish to well and then we'll just follow
as Socrates often says we will follow
the argument wherever it goes okay so
the first thing I wanted to do was I
wanted to bring up the connection so I
want to first of all make clear to
everybody who might be listening that
andrew was very kind to send a set of
questions and I thought originally I was
just gonna think about how he's gonna
answer each question better than I I
thought maybe what I should do is try
and logo so I should try and draw them
together into mutually supporting
proposals and so the first so Andrew had
some questions and he's just also spoken
earlier about you know connections
between beauty and soul and so I want to
pick up on our previous discussion about
this idea of the reinvent you of soul as
that which mediates Mattacks ooh is that
the alog in between us between more
nests and suchness so quite a bit about
that
the mediator yeah yes it was the
mediator like I don't know if you know
this movie metropolis this fairy what I
do you're talking you talk to the
mediator as the guy who brings together
the head and the heart brings together
the head and heart so yeah yeah Don has
a big poster of Metropolis it's given me
the original like a print of the
original poster from metropolis that
movie just sings to me repeatedly so
yeah it's a beautiful illusion Andrew
thank you for that okay so I was
thinking about and so when we come back
and review the first proposal
I was thinking especially what you said
because Andrew about Hans book I'm
saving Beauty because I also think it's
a really important work and so we can
come back to that but I was thinking it
so I've been thinking a lot about beauty
and of course because it plays this very
important role in beautification with
the dialogues and so I was trying I was
thinking about the correlation between
soul and beauty that you were making
Andrew I want to unpack that in this
proposal so I want to propose to you
that there's a continuum there's a
continuum in our experience in right and
now I'm doing a tone us attention right
there's a continuum between experiences
that emphasize suchness and experiences
that emphasize more Ness so overwhelming
more Ness is horror right and then a
little little less overwhelming is awe a
little less overwhelming is wonder now
let's go on the other side when you're
really picking up on the suchness people
express that with this positive term of
intimacy I know you intimately alright
and then if that's taking a little bit
deeper you people talk about being at
peace with each other and then even more
deeper a sense of being at home with
someone and you know Chris what I'm
doing here I'm picking up on right home
and horror as aspects of the sacred
right matter valency bar we get that
thing where right it's all it becomes
too enclosed right what I'm proposing to
you is the following beauty is that
sweet spot it's the sweet spot on that
continuum it's kind of a meta optimal
grip right it's it's the tone us between
being alive to the more nest and Wonder
and being alive to the suchness and
intimacy and this is picking up on
scara's notion that when I encounter
something beautiful I both get a sense
of wow then she gives the example of the
tree right all right you come across a
beautiful tree I didn't know trees could
be like that there's a sudden more nests
but this tree is also not like any other
tree it has a suchness to it an
individual to it that is right
non-repeatable there's a hereness
announced that's precious
so the intimacy gives a preciousness of
you'll allow me not sorry it's not my
golden but I shouldn't write to them in
the morning
so the mortise is not an abstract
conception it's its presence right into
the suchness
so you see what I'm trying to do Andrew
here I'm trying to propose to you that
the
faculty of soul that mediates between
more nests and suchness is actually the
Faculty of the reception of beauty that
because beauty is the aesthetics the the
forming of our sensibility that's
finding that sweet spot between the more
nosov wonder and the intimacy of such
and so I think that picks up on scurries
notion of how beauty is actually a deep
kind of training for us ok so that's the
first proposal the first proposal is
that there's a deep so I'm trying to I
think you had a really important insight
there Andrew and you see what I'm trying
to do I'm trying to propose I don't
unpack it and that's what the arguments
doing it's saying here's some things
that I think come from that unfold from
that so that's the first proposal is
that ok yeah here's the second proposal
the second proposal is a notion of
wisdom that I get from Socrates though
of the relationship between wisdom and
virtue that each virtue is just a
particular way of being wise in a
particular kind of situation so being
wise in this situation is to be
courageous to be kind in this so to be
wise in this situation is to be kind to
be right so the idea is that virtues our
particular instantiations pick
particular ways of fitting right to
particular context so now making use of
Aristotle's notion of you know a virtue
always being between too much and too
little
mm-hmm no now I'm gonna try and draw
them together here's the logos in the
proposal I think that wisdom has a has a
more honest aspect to it a self
transcendent aspect and the Greeks had a
word for this aspect of wisdom this was
Sophia this is the mourners but they
also had another word that's often
translated as wisdom and we've lost this
right in our translations as we
translate them both by the same word
they had phronesis and phronesis was the
ability
to fit yourself well to a particular
situation right so Sofia is the morning
and you see what I'm doing here it's the
ability to pick up and resonate with the
more nests phronesis is the ability to
pick up and resonate with the suchness
very small and the very big well it's
the it's the most intimate and the most
comprehensive okay yeah so then the
House of M is so help me a spousal the
espousal of particular virtue in fitness
to a particular situation is precisely
the furnaces dimension of wisdom that's
right right but it Ignace the fitting
nests of that's right but the picking up
on how there's always so much more
behind any aspect of wisdom right that
there's so much more to being kind that
what then what just happened here that's
the Sophia because the kindness that I
show towards Andrew is not the kindness
that I show towards my son and it is not
the kindness that I show towards my
partner or the kindness I show towards
my student right there's more to
kindness but notice that's the Sophia
but being kind to Andrew in the right
way as distinct from how I'm kind
dispenser right
that's the phronesis did that work did
that make sense
mm-hmm absolutely okay so now I can put
these two together virtue is the beauty
of wisdom because Verte beauty is to get
the more nests it's a sweet spot between
the more nests and the suchness and
wisdom right is virtue is where you
bring the more nests into the suchness
that's what virtue is so virtue is the
beauty of wisdom virtue as this is why
Plato says you start first by looking at
the beauty of physical things and then
what the physical things in have in
common and then he moves this move which
many people of thumb is serious for the
Endo's to say then you consider the
beauty of virtue that's because that's
the move that gets you in that's the
best the form of beauty that is
particular to wisdom and this is the
beautification this is the kind of
beauty that we're trying to make right
in dialectic okay so that's the third
proposal that virtue is the beauty of
wisdom so this leads me to the fourth
proposal and you see how this is so this
is right that this is also an instalment
process and ER this is a simile Gnaeus
ly right because virtue virtue it is
again that process of mediating
appropriately between war and the sons
okay so dialectic here's the proposal
the fourth proposal notice how this is
not a strictly logically coherent
argument it's an argument but it's at
logos argument on gathering things
together and then gathering together and
gathering together right dialectic is
the beautification of thought in speech
in order to conform to virtue and this
is how we practice wisdom so dialectic
is the beautification of thought and
speech in order to conform to virtue and
this is how we practice and wisdom what
does this imply dialectic is about
virtue in two senses virtue is always
the topic of every dialectic and it is
every dialogue is about a virtue and it
is look the topic and it is the enacted
tonus we are supposed to be talking
about courage in a dialogue but we are
also supposed to be enacting courage and
Socrates always exemplifies that in fact
the enactment of courage takes precedent
over right the topic anything that is
spoken about courage the speaking and
the enactment right the topic and the
tono's are wedded together because the
ultimate goal is to conform to virtue to
love the beauty of wisdom so that's the
those are the four proposals okay I have
one question about the word virtue
because it seems to be a word that's
been kind of abused and has a moralistic
tone to it yeah that's actually a bigger
word than that it's it's a more virtuous
doesn't mean being
two shoes or something you know it
doesn't mean just being good no no not
at all I'm more to it than that so I
think maybe we should unpackage define
and we should reinvent virtue as well
right what that mules let's let's pick
up on something that everybody's
familiar with virtual reality the
virtual world why do we use that term
because the remote the meaning of virtue
is actually a power right it's a power
in act it's a it's a potential it's not
just mere possibility it's actually a
living potential that's being enacted
right it's being actualized so the
virtue of honesty is to have the
potential the set of skills sensibility
and sense of self that when it comes
into a particular situation will be
actualized as courage or actualized as
honesty that's what a virtue means which
explains why the virtues are associated
with the Platonic forms because of the
tonic forms are these exponent powers of
knowing then the expression knowing in
virtue yes all of a sudden makes a whole
lot of sense
exactly and notice that we do that we
we're knowing in virtue of we're doing
this in virtue of exactly exactly so
what I what I'm trying to do in Andrew
I'm trying to do the I'm trying to do
this thing and I don't know if I'm
succeeding or not it's like an open but
you see what I'm trying instead of just
giving you you know sentences about your
particular question I'm trying to logo's
them together I'm trying to bring them
together so they belong together and
they unfold and they take on a life of
their own and and and and they afford
exploration they afford more discussion
they afford more conversation I'm not
trying to foreclose on anything hmm yeah
well when you were talking about
potential and relating that to virtue I
was thinking about soul again yeah and I
was thinking that
the soul is kind of an echo of the
future of your future potential of the
the be that you could become yes but
that's well said notice what you've just
done you know when you said you know the
of your potential futures you're
gesturing towards the nor more Ness but
you're talking about what you could
become like so the morning is the
mystery of participation it's how we
unfold into being but the suchness is
the mystery of our individuation how we
become what we particularly are what we
individually are and Tillich's great
insight right is that that's that's that
that's the fundamental grammar the
fundamental tonus of human existence
we're always in tension between
individuation and participation and
beauty is a way in which we enact a and
become virtuous within that tension
within that tension hmm so sorry
actually argues in her book not that
beauty is truth or goodness
she says that beauty and this is one of
her core arguments and inspired what I
was staying here the beauty is basically
where we practice being just and we
practice looking for the truth we
practice the show we Pro what she's
basically saying is beauty is where we
practice the kind of seeing and being
and talking and thinking that prepares
us for for you know moral virtues like
honesty or bling which is perhaps also
an intellectual virtue and also
intellectual virtues like you know you
know wisdom and things like that it
prepares us for both of those it's it's
basically the schoolhouse for both the
intellectual and the moral virtues and
that's what I'm trying to bring back
here because I think she's articulating
something beautiful that was a central
idea in Plato I mean that's kind of
counterintuitive to how we think of
beauty we kind of think of beauty as
something primordial that has nothing to
do with you know you know any kind of
moral virtues it's just it's just it
doesn't have moral virtues it's like
it's a it's the it's just a flower it's
it's just bare bare truth that brings up
Han right that brings up on so notice
what what Han sang with the aesthetics
of the smooth
how he said how we reduced beauty to
things being smooth right because smooth
is comforting it challenges us in no way
no so what but he stand what to use my
language one of his complaints is
because he uses alterity he says we've
lost the more I'm using my language now
but I think it's perfectly consonant
with it
we've lost the morning so beauty and
within the payflow also yes
and so we dismiss smoothness it works
about Jeff Koons and his like balloon
his balloon dogs and they're all there
they're very cute and they're they're
colorful and but there's obviously
they're not like a Rodin they don't have
that gravity right no there's no they
don't have this like intense gravity
that that that the beauty also has like
it does pull you
it doesn't just send you off into bliss
it also brings you into into the earth
as well I think that's exactly right so
what I was picking up on and horn is
smoothness I mean think about like the
smoothness of caress so smoothness marks
out a kind of intimacy but it's intimacy
without challenge it's an intimacy and
this is Hans point it is deadening right
it's deadening because they're the the
way in which beauty right a finds the
suchness and the mourners to each other
the educational aspect he deuce to draw
out that's being left out of beauty
that's Hans main completed beauty as a
veil it's not a it's not a it's not
everything being presented to you it's
always behind a veil that's right
because it's always got mourners to it
think about the veil again the veil
again it connotes an intimacy but it
also right there's a beyond this right
there's a there's a way in which it has
the mortise it recedes from you and it
challenges you it draws you forth it
puts a demand on you every disclosure
from it puts a demand on you to go
through transformation to keep in
conformity with what has been disclosed
and that's the training for virtue
that's the training for truth that's the
training for goodness beauty and beauty
is what actually trains us it's like
it's it's the common educational
ancestor of the pursuit of truth
and the pursuit of goodness yeah he also
said Han that within the smooth right we
don't even have a notion of ugliness
anymore that's right there's no gravity
to ugliness either so and it occurred to
me that in order to understand beauty
right we also have to understand you
know the ugliness of our world you know
our the ugliness of when we depart from
beauty like we need that contrast we
need that dialectic we can't just you
know again this is we this is why you
probably mentioned horror you know in
some sense because there's there there
is there's beauty is is is tearing you
to pieces on some level maybe it's taken
too far right I and that's what Rilke
said right and I think what you're
pointing to Andrew and then I'm gonna
shut up so Chris can talk but what I
think what you're pointing to is what
I'm trying to argue for notice that when
you when you started bringing in and you
if you and this is what I think Holly is
doing when you want to bring in that
contrast and you want to enhance it
you're talking about a normativity
you're talking about judgments of
there's something deeply wrong with
ugliness there's something contrast of
ly deeply right and I think the only way
we can do that without props falling
into the sealed definitions is to
realign beauty with virtue again
ugliness is conducive to Vice as virtue
is canoe as beautiness is conducive to
virtue to virtue that's what I want to
say mmm-hmm that's gives it back its
gravitas that gives it back its gravitas
I think in order for that to to be
possible that that particular reinvent
EO of beauty it has to be understood it
has to be understood transitively it
can't be it has to be a property of the
relation with being and not a property
that presents as an object of the world
right because you know much of what we
consider to be ugly on its face can be
pronounced beautifully within the right
frame of perspective within a frame of
perspective that is attentive
selectively to
in detail the ugliness can be bared
beautiful you can see beauty and decay
for example absolutely you can see
beauty in the an absolute squalor and
but but in that case beauty beauty is
the affinity of your particular relation
to the your your like I mean I mean that
that's why that's why beauty emerges so
so naturally within dialog because it's
a it's a it's an affined property of the
relation between the eye and the bow and
in the same way that it is and the in
the matrix of the dialogue between
persons so it is between so it is
perceptually right in terms of your
relationship with your being in the
world itself it's a property of that
relation that you strike well I think
that's exactly right
and I was trying to port n that when I
was talking about it as meta optimal
grip and I'm alluding back to the
previous discussion the three of us had
about soul as the Faculty of faith where
faith isn't any closure right faith is
actually maintaining right relationship
through change and I say that's what I'm
trying to say beauty is it is exactly
it's it's a faithful right relationship
it's transductive between you it's not
in the eye of the beholder nor is it in
the object but it's it's is your
relationship to the world a virtuous one
or a vicious one that's right that's
right it has to do with your mind too
renewing when you brought faith in I
thought it's it's renewing your vows
constantly it's renew yes yes yes yes
it's exactly that it's I mean we're
exemplifying it here the reinvent yo is
that renewing because we're constantly
trying to breathe new life into these
terms so that we can do exactly what I'm
talking about here exactly that's right
great mm-hmm that's right that's right
there's no the logos cannot gain
traction cannot gain any traction in
realism without beauty for that very
reason so it's really interesting
because when I was doing the workshop
with people well because what so what
what I when it came to me Chris it's a
practical consequence of this because
I'd always wondered and you know
one furred and others have made sir this
weird thing about Socrates always
wondered why the dialogues always figure
on virtues either moral virtues or
intellectual virtues and then I realized
that's not happenstance that is not
happenstance the deal logos has to
always be about the topic of virtue and
it always has to be the enacted tonus of
virtue though that that is not
happenstance that's how you get the
metonymy what you're talking about is
actually right metonymically related to
what you're actually enacting that that
is not a coincidence in this it's a
necessity of the very constitution of
dialectic we have to be talking about
virtue as we enact it as we and we and
we resonate between there's no other way
right in order in order for the meaning
and the meta meaning to be properly
affined into relation in order to in
order for the in order for the meaning
of the logos to become conversant with
the meaning of the logos the higher
order meaning of the logos that gathers
the entire dialogue it you have to start
with its you have to start with this
method emic child in order to then
aspire to the parent if I can put it
that way
no I think that's right so what has been
happening with people other people have
been doing some of these experiments
about trying to bring argumentation and
they just bring in a topic like a
problem and it doesn't go anywhere but
when I told people I meant in a sense of
instruction I said no no this is what
you're gonna do we're going to break up
into groups of four right and then what
you're gonna do is you're gonna do for
ED you're gonna choose a virtue and then
one person is going to begin by saying
and I propose let's say honesty is this
and the other person is going to amplify
it they're gonna say well can you say a
little bit more or I noticed you're
making this gesture they're gonna try
and reveal the beauty of how the person
is enacting it and use that as a as a
scaffold for getting them to say more
and more and more and then the second
person has to come to a place right
where right the first person sort of
said I'm done and the second person says
well this is how this is what I
understood you to be saying and they
have to make sure that they understand
them right they have to hurt the other
the first person has to be heard and
then they have to the second person has
to say what they appreciate about it in
the not only in the sense of
understanding but what was valuable what
did they see that they didn't see before
and then then they have to say what was
missing yeah but was mysterious what
went slightly off and then what they do
is when they and that they do that and
they turn to the next person they do
what was off what was missing and then
they make their proposal about what
honesty is and you keep cycling that
through people and then what you do is
you get the groups and you bring all the
groups together and this group is doing
courage this group is doing honesty and
you get all the groups and you say okay
now what is virtue itself and you and
you know what everybody keeps talking
about about how how they were amazed by
how this the topics just exploded and
they felt deeply engaged because they're
enacting and then they're seeing them
and then and and then they're all
willing to do this what normally people
say they don't like to do they're
willing to go into this abstract
discussion about what what is virtue
itself it's an acog a that that's what
you're describing is a simulation of the
an agogic process well it's a simulation
of both the sensibility transcendence
and the an agog a because when you're
doing that into that yeah appreciation
that's the sensibility transcend I'm not
sure if I understand that in the term an
agog II I'm sorry
before can you clarify that just a
little bit what you mean by an agogic
yeah yeah G is like making an analogy no
no although I think for all kinds of
reasons they're deeply they're deeply
interpenetrating but no what I mean by a
nagashi is the kind of the ascent to
theosis that's associated with graduate
orders of ontological abstractions so
that would Plato talks about that that
the questing eros ventures from
beautiful bodies to beautiful customs to
beautiful ideas it's the reciprocal
opening that's also a kind of
ontological transcendence right right
and so the idea then being that the
reciprocal opening that happens
interpersonally between die ologists
symbolizes the process of the reciprocal
opening that happens anagogical e in
your relationship with the world itself
that that somehow is those two logos and
Agoge is the trend trance continual
transcendent movements yes yes okay and
let's say and then there's the other
movement which is the grounding movement
what would you call that
that's the intimacy that's the stability
transcendence session I really getting
really mutually fitted to each other
really mutually fitting each other more
and more and more right so and that's
where the amplification process it's
like breathing in and breathing out and
it's very much so nicely we're smiling I
mean that you know before it became an
ambitious term that's what conspiring
meant it meant to breathe together yeah
which is which is also why you know
which is also white you know the diet
the diagnosis of despair as Kierkegaard
figured it had everything to do with
asphyxiation and hyperventilation right
not being able to get a purchase on your
relation your proper relation with being
the the particular sickness of the soul
that is despair is precisely not being
able anymore to respire in this this new
language now John perspire between your
suchness and morna's yeah exactly
exactly so then they reinvent you the
processor then this this anamnesis of
reinvent eeeh that were undertaking is
in some ways a process of renewing at
renewing our respiration
britta bringing breath you know into the
everything breathing life would be the
more and that's the original metaphor
for a souling right yeah cuz the soul
soul soul is related to the breath isn't
it right the Numa yeah Numa very much ya
know when people were in this practice
like yeah of course it was the first
time I did it and you know I you know
dialectics should be you know on top of
a whole bunch of other practical ecology
of practices and there should be a whole
educational program before you get into
it but in never so Daniel it's the first
time so it's very clunky in a lot of
ways but nevertheless the way people
were clearly resonating the mourners and
the suchness and they were willing like
they were getting they were starting to
get caught up in the beauty of it and
and you know and it was interesting to
see how people would say start the
they're starting to catch on the light
of their eyes wait wait you know and
because it's making its making virtue
come alive to them but
as a topic but as a way of being right
it was very it was very exciting and a
multi-dimensional way of being rather
than just you know however whatever our
very reductive versions of all of these
concepts are um I guess when you enter
into the the the their aliveness that's
pretty that's exciting that's like okay
wow there's there's yeah there's life
here it's not it's not just you know a
world of dead dead language or something
that's exactly and notice the poetic and
as you could feel the poetry of it
right exactly it's police's no they like
to think about when a poet I mean I read
poetry right when you win you're writing
poetry it's exactly that process of like
like that that it's reinvented because
as you're speaking these words you
discover a fought in them that correct
that comes back to you from the words
like that's what's happening when you're
doing poesis and and notice that the
connection that that's the connection
you were intuiting Andrew between the
aliveness the insolvent and the beauty
we're doing all of those together but
these are just three different aspects
of the very same thing mm-hmm
it also happens not only when you're
doing when you're writing poetry but
when you're writing dramatically happens
right because the whole probe the whole
process of rendering character is
precisely that you're giving such a form
to the two to wait like you're embodying
the virtue and in the embodiment of the
virtue as such you're giving it a
particular formal a particular
particular the formalization in context
of virtue
I think emerges as character no that's
great yeah that's so important too we
really need to bring we need to reinvent
art as well because we need to bring
narrative art back in absolutely and it
is yes that's how we embody the a lot of
these things that's how we go to the
next next level perhaps
yeah that's one form of gathering the
logos right gathering the logos is
precisely the process of dramatic
characterization you play through in an
exploratory fashion you play through the
embodiment of virtue and that's why deep
deep forms of characterization are
justly celebrated because they disclose
and unconcealed dimensions of being in
virtue that are otherwise unavailable to
us that's why good that's what good
storytelling does that's why we Revere
good storytelling is because it it
immerses us it immerses us in an
embodied enacted fashion into the
morning in virtue this connection
between character which is the Faculty
of virtue and characterization and drama
that's brilliant Chris I hadn't thought
about that that's exactly right
you know that Keith Utley he's a he's
one of my colleagues at the University
of Toronto has all this research showing
that you know working with drama working
with literature is our primary way of
training ourselves to be more virtuous
absolutely yeah yeah which also means it
doesn't mean again I'm trying to get
away from this sentimental idea of verse
because because in draw drama is usually
about going into the human darkness
right going into the horrors right it's
often that way I mean a tragedy is that
right in any case you know Kurtz goes
into the the EC's the horror the horror
and that's what Marvel's so there's no
it's not just beauty as as some kind of
really terrible sort of like sentimental
version of reality it's something else
but look at what I always want to bring
gravity to these concepts when we talk
about them because because they have
become because you know if it becomes so
Disneyland yeah yeah where virtue is the
power to lead a good life in all the
dimensions of goodness that's what
virtue is it doesn't mean the moralistic
you know think of following rules right
I'm thinking of you know I want to live
the kind of life that Socrates led or
the boot
or Jesus of Nazareth LED and that can't
be captured or reduced to following this
rule or that ruler or this rule well
it's an adventure isn't it
it's an adventure to look out to look
beyond right and and think about Marlowe
in the heart of darkness and think about
the beauty of Conrad's prose I know the
heart of darkness is contentious because
of colonialism racism I'm gonna put that
aside because that's another thing to
talk about but in I mean think about
what Marlowe represents Marlowe
represents virtue in the face right of
this he because he practices
self-restraint and he that's not
reducible to any sort of fruit you know
he's not a prude he's not just adopting
you know a moralistic set of rules he's
constantly continuing the journey he
keeps good faith in that sense with
Kurtz but he he dedicates himself to
remaining right true to his humanity he
practices he keeps talking about
self-restraint he doesn't get swallowed
by by the horrors but but he doesn't he
doesn't avert his gaze either I remember
like what was it Kurosawa when he was a
kid he walked through Tokyo after the
earthquake and there were corpses
everywhere and his brother said his
brother said look look you have to look
because because you know you know the
poet doesn't avert his eyes or yeah
Marlow I think Marlow finds the sweet
spot I thought I'm talking about mm-hmm
he's he but he's also but he's the
self-restraint as he maintains that
intimacy with himself he made he does
his sickness and he maintains those two
and that is what actually affords him
going on the journey the quest and and
and how does he like one of the ways
formally in which he does all of that is
think about the form of the novella
itself laying the story to a chorus of
of onlookers bearing witness to the very
to the very character that he's
conveying right that's a story within a
story
yeah that's why that particular device
the in framing of the story with its I
mean we were talking in our last
conversation together we were talking
about the function of the heavenly host
to the choral function of the the the
the morning of the choral function of of
witnessing transcendently without being
enclosed by the the perspective of the
character that's playing through and
that and that the way that the novellas
structured lends that kind of
higher-order perspective that sees the
narrative in virtue of its possibility
of its possible implications of its
possible meaning beyond its meaning
because he relays the story to the
people on the boat right and they're and
they're not saying anything they're just
being they're silent but there's they're
bearing silent witness to the very
dynamic that he's exemplified and so is
the reader because the story starts
reading personal narrator and then takes
you into that yeah that's right there is
it all the playing with that framing
that's really good that's a great
observation Chris but well I mean it's
tips to your point and you to and you
it's like that there's a reason why and
there's a there's a reason why there's
such sublimity to that and similar
narratives it's it's precise and it's
precisely there inexhaustibility right
that that the way in which they enact
that the the narrative as such in acts
patterns that intimate the morning the
narrative as such and then that more
nests beyond the narrative as such is
precisely what is enclosed and borne out
by the witnessing presence that
surrounds it both the reader and perhaps
the ancillary characters and onlookers
and that's why right Conrad has Marlow
and he's closely says that that the
Marlow is sitting there like a Buddha at
the end right oh that's that's in the
dark too by the way the dark well yeah
yeah yeah yeah I guess
there's the scene where the Buddha meets
Mara or something and it is him exactly
exactly
you know he's mmm so Andrew right this
was my attempt to was not like I say I
wanted to way of like can we bring when
somebody is asking us questions can we
reinvent you argumentation not as I'm
gonna like establish things but what I'm
gonna do is logos I'm gonna try and
gather a whole bunch of things together
so they belong together they sing
together they start to beautify each
other and then they afford discourse and
discussion and involvement that's what
I'm trying that's why I'm trying to
reinvent EO argumentation here the
making of proposals and the
consideration of how they fit together
and belong together
beyond just logical coherence I was also
go go ahead Chris um I was just gonna
say it's interesting because one of the
things that happens is when you bring
you bring these you bring these
particular definitions in proximity to
one another
they okay I'm going to personify them
for a minute but I don't think it's
inappropriate to given all a discussion
about character they begin to the
virtues when they're brought into within
range of one another
allow us to see they allow us to to I
mean the the the way in which they
become in conversant is that the virtues
begin to know in virtue of one another
yes right so the so so so one virtue
begins to know in virtue of its of its
neighboring virtue and is then so in is
then so articulated its it's a virtue
knowing in virtue of another virtue
which sounds like a mouthful but
essentially at once you bring these
things into proximity they begin to know
by means of one another
and in being so known by means of one
another they're the shared reflections
of depth begin to appreciate this is a
point in both the Neoplatonic Western
tradition and the Buddhist Eastern
Commission so the addition its indras
net right yes you mentioned that
in one here I think I think Andrew you
mentioned that in one of our previous
yeah everything is reflected in
everything anything is reflected faith
is reflected in soul which is reflected
in virtue which is reflected right they
all become eyes unto the world
yeah the Platonists says right that all
of the forms are have exactly that
relationship to each other
they're all like indras nets they're all
reflect and each one captures the
morning in its own particular suchness
and but it for right for us it has to
unfold in time but for in you know for
Platonists that's that's happening sort
of in eternity and the logos of eternity
that sort of holographic intelligibility
we have to try and capture it in the
sequential logos of speech as best we
can and that's exactly what so that
metaphor is exactly the resident
metaphor the way that virtue speak to me
Chavez speaks right the ground of
intelligibility itself which is then
again echoes with the analogy of the
dialogic practice of the two
conversation partners so as as we as we
do as we do between ourselves as
conversation partners so then do the
virtues in forgive each other
exactly exactly I like that turn of
phrase the virtues in virtue of each
other
that's beautiful Chris the way you do
that is so impressive well I'm just I'm
just riffing off of you riffing is
exactly the right thing as of this the
Jazz of this is you know constitutive of
its beautification it's not just riffing
it's integral to what we're doing here
and that was what's really and when when
we did the workshop and you got two
people at the end they were riffing off
their own particular virtue that they
discussed courage or honesty but they
were they were jazzing they were they
were finding residence and convergence
right and divergence but in a harmonious
fashion between each other they were
doing with the deep learning
they were converging in
and converging and varying it was
beautiful yeah and and sometimes you
know I like it when some jazz music just
falls apart psychedelic music are
sometimes you know what I like I listen
to these like the Grateful Dead they
just fall apart and the whole band just
disassembles itself completely and and
then they kind of find their way back to
each other oh yeah I think that's an
interesting process but the falling
apart and coming back back together like
we're covering for Manipuri a-- yeah
good and instead of going always for the
high right yeah music is always like an
orgasmic trying to be an orgasmic type
of experience or complete orgasmic bars
whereas the the jazz is a deeper thing
because it doesn't always go for the
peak right it it falls into the valleys
in it that's beautiful you know it did
it lingers like and that's another word
that Hanh uses I think yeah you're
lingeringly when it comes to beauty at
lingers a while and then it just it's
lets itself go and then it and then it
becomes intense again and but that's
that's the Emporia is criticality you
know in self-organizing systems they get
stuck and what you have to do is you
have to put you have to lift it
you have to perturb them you have to
disturb them yeah they get to a point of
criticality where they're almost
breaking apart falling apart and only
venture them or something doctor or me a
puncture is the word that came to mind
yes yeah well its equilibrium yeah when
you were when you were describing
initially John you're open precis about
the you know the the equilibrium between
the suchness and and the more nasai
think of the the complexify and I knew
assimilation and the medic and the medic
combination that you talked about within
within the cognitive science
nomenclature and it sounds like virtue
and phanzig and maps are more or less
identical it does I think virtue is very
much about sort of getting that's why
it's a meta optimal grip on right meta
assimilation and met accommodation right
totally and that for those of you who
are watching I mean this is discussed at
length in some of the videos within my
within
awakening from the meeting crisis and in
some of the stuff that Chris and I have
written I think we talked about this in
the zombie book don't we do we I don't
know I don't know how I don't think we
get week we do I don't think we get too
too deeply into the thief in cognitive
science vocabulary but yeah it's in
there somehow yeah
do you guys know that the work of Rene
Girard because one of my question for
from before John was and one of my
thoughts about what beauty is it's
beyond mimetic desire on some level it's
it's when you when you when you
experience uniqueness that is beyond
imitation of some kind it goes on this
is sort of and that's what we're kind of
looking for because we're always trapped
in a memetic Hall of Mirrors on some
level we're always we're copying each
other and we're we're stumbling around
with with concepts at least I am and and
then and we kind of break through and
then we have this fresh moment that's
that's that's beyond yeah mimetic desire
does that does might does that make any
sense makes total slips and Gerrard's
thing I think is an apropos here and his
idea of you know of Jesus on undermining
like Jesus being the criticality and
think about the word critical in crisis
and cross and how they're all related
Jesus being the criticality that
disturbs that that whole mimetic self
enclosure I think that that's exactly
right because right the poor that so the
thing to do is remember that there's
always not always silent but often
silent partner cuz if Gerard is I mean
his prototypical instance of what you're
talking about mimetic desire is
covetousness right it's envy or jealousy
envy yeah he said Envy is the most
hidden desire the one we don't admit to
ourselves so we're always being dragged
around right and V so good appear nd to
admiration which is a virtue what is it
when you admire somebody and you don't
envy them right is it instant so think
about arrows as so when I want to be one
with someone I can reduce that to
consumption I'm gonna be on one by
consuming you more it can be an arrow
that is turning its face towards agape
I'm gonna generative as because Plato
says I'm gonna generate beauty within
beauty
so I'm going to try and create a life
that you know that is in some relevant
sense similar to Socrates but not
Socrates hmm it's my I'm not trying to
take from Socrates I'm trying to
generate in admiration and so I think
this is exactly what we're talking about
here right if we have a beauty that's
just a smooth that is just the act of
assimilation consuming making it one
with me in no way disturbing me in no
way being a critical moment for me but
if I have genuine beauty then I'm going
to be drawn beyond myself yeah but the
critical moment also is recognized her
happens Envy at times rather than just
trying to aspire to to an ideal you know
state of admiration is that that we
notice that we feel that in that way at
time but that but that's exactly the
point right it this is to add to what
you're saying about how we're trying to
reinvent your virtue
Socratic virtue is always inseparably
bound up with self-knowledge right and
it's the kind of its this is this is one
of the great Socratic insights there's
aspects of myself that I can't know by
introspection or even reflection I can
only know them in interaction with you
because they call forth both the
potential for virtue and vice in me then
I can't call forth of myself or make
available to myself but if I pay
attention if I come in good faith to the
dialog I can become aware of my Envy and
I can open myself up to a different
possibility therein yeah because at that
moment you're no longer seeing through
you're no longer seeing and knowing by
means of your envi when it becomes
opaquely knowable to you as such
possibility of transcending it becomes
then available right by knowing it
that's a bit like the shadow as well
isn't it about absolutely yeah yeah
shadows by how you put you have to pay
it if you just think you didn't give
your shadow by just doing active
imagination and sitting inside your room
you have missed Jung's point you're
going to get your
when you realize how you're projecting
onto other people
yeah it's only when you recognize your
projections and hear the other person's
right what way like hear the other
person behind what you projected on them
when you open up to the other nough
speed or projection so they can break
through the projection then and only
then do you realize your projection yes
and then the process of doing that could
just they become dialectical of course
of course so so the beauty is is perhaps
also a moment of deep sincerity right
rather than let's say it's a pretension
or yeah I totally totally I mean that so
you know Socratic humility is important
I think that's the proper I we talked
about this last time the proper response
to beauty is reverence and Brett
reverence has humility within it right
it's reverence is is this bi-directional
realization there's right there you
recognize who you are there's an
intimacy with who you are and there's
also a recognition of the mourners
beyond you that can nevertheless afford
your transformation and and beauty
beauty is such - that it it even as it
even it even as it contradicts Abreva in
adequacy it also saves you from it
exactly if he heals you and it rescues
you from the interminable death at the
same time it is it is it it inflicts
upon you death without without the
undying death yeah that makes me think
of Ulysses you know there's the Homeric
version of Allah sees and then there's
James Joyce Ulysses and the character is
so flawed he's he's so human right so we
have this ideal and then we have our you
know both those things and he becomes
the hero just threw his mmm I don't know
I guess there was authenticity
on some the the yeah that's just what
came to mind when you were speaking
about this yeah no I like that I think
that fits very well so so what about the
specific proposal of because we because
there's also a specific proposal I made
about under which is part of the
reinvent EO of beauty and also
simultaneously the re inventor of virtue
to see virtue as the beauty of wisdom
and this is a different way I'm trying
to propose a different way of thinking
about both virtue and beauty in light of
or in virtue of wisdom itself what do
you think about that as a proposal
because there's it's always been
mysterious to me in Plato when he talks
about the beauty of virtue and why we
should care about it and why it's
superior to sensual beauty but if it's a
way in which we refine to wisdom itself
then I can understand why it should
matter to us so much I think it makes it
existentially available it provides an
entree into wisdom what that is
ordinarily the the so who know entree
virtue the virtue right so the V because
virtue is both speakable and possessive
all its participa
right it straddles both levels of
signification so you can speak about
virtue that's right and you can inhabit
virtue and my body virtue and so because
of that it provides a kind of access it
provides a kind of it provides a way to
inhabit beauty so when you were talking
about the the idea of that that that
beauty when a being in right relation to
beauty is such that you can't you can't
have a consumptively mimetic
relationship to it which i think is a
profound point and yet also being in
right relation to beauty is somehow also
mimetic in the sense that is that
mimesis of that which is not
imitatable i don't know if that's where
it imitatable let's go
if-if-if mimesis of that which is not
able to be imitated is precisely what
induces the a paretic experience
oh and there's something about
inhabiting the virtue that is a a it's
an effort it's a it's an effort to
imitate that which is in them innama
table that's where in imitable it is it
is the imitation of that which is
inimitable and that is precisely what
induces the a Perea but but the attempt
to embody the virtue makes available the
a poetic experience that is beautiful in
its nature is that why you would wear
masks in theatre and in a sense yeah
yeah I think that yes yes absolutely
because you're trying to imitate
something the beauty of doing that
that's beyond you on some level
absolutely I mean theatre but also I
plain I think of liturgy as well write
in a more overtly religious sense right
you are trying to imitate that which is
inimitable you're trying to you're
trying to affect a gesture toward a
meaning that cannot be espoused in
gesture and yet the precise that kind of
a poetic effort you're teetering on the
precipice of intelligibility at that
moment but precisely that at that that
precarious point that precarious edge
that that beauty walks that as John
described it that optimal balance of
beauty between the horrific and the
confirmed I have to admit I'm having a
hard time connecting Beauty to wisdom
those two things don't don't go together
for me on some level
well perhaps again this is my romantic
disposition because I always think that
it's it's when you cast off when you
cast off any pretense of wisdom or non
wisdom it's it's just a full full
embrace of some kind but well some
wisdom feels to me wisdom feels to me a
step removed
um I've got does that make any sense but
for us perhaps this is me being
argumentative this is a good point this
is a good this is a good point
I think I think so maybe one place to
start is that beauty beauty becomes a
way of effecting profound changes in our
advertent
attention right beauty is what calls out
and directs our attention and attention
can be subject to all kinds of
self-deceptive patterns patterns that
recur patterns that are enshrined and
entrenched into forceable habituated
modes of being or modes of having I
suppose and what Beauty does is it
somehow Beauty can debilitate those
patterns precisely because it can
recover our attention and repurpose it
and refocus it so I think maybe that's
one way to start is that I think of
beauty as like the Herald of wisdom
right it's what calls our attention to
it it's not necessarily identical with
it but it is the very thing that it is
is the very thing that draws out
aspiration because it's capable of of
laying waste to the particular patterns
by which we see and know at any given
point like the sirens that are calling
to like the sirens right which is a
great example of how it can be used
Cyclops versus the call Ulysses to his
doom and somehow he has to make it home
to us that's right to his wife who has
been surrounded by suitors and all that
so it's like yeah so yeah there's always
this I get beauty is is is bound up in
seduction and pathless right but it's
also bound up in insight mm-hmm right
and like we talked about this last time
about the machinery and the attentional
machinery of beauty is also the same
machinery especially if there's been
criticality in it right you have to
break out of a frame
right that that being struck by beauty
there's insight and and so if we if we
get the training of attention and the
affording of insight these are integral
to the cultivation of wisdom they're
integral to the cultivation of wisdom
that's I mean that's why you know that's
why meditative practices have been
associated with the the cultivation of
wisdom yeah it's precisely what you're
doing is training attention and
affording insight yeah yeah yeah yeah it
allows you to spew tea somehow the onset
of beauty allows you to recast you to
recast your your recast the mode the
fort recast reform of life recast your
mode of being in relation mm-hmm I think
if we think of it as a fundamental
relational dynamic then it can read it
can refigure the way in which that is
framed for you at any given month you
must change your life you must change
your life okay says that's what beauty
does it tells us you know very directly
that you know something some radical
shift this is necessary that's right
virtue is the ability to appropriate
with to take responsibility to
appropriately respond to how every true
disclosure was a true demand on you
disclosure demand is exactly
proportioning the relationship between
more nests and suchness which is what I
propose to you what beauty is and I
think insofar as we're trying to get the
Sophia of wisdom and the fermitas of
wisdom that's virtue and that's a kind
of beauty virtue was a regulation of
beauty hmm get struck by beauty in a
sense yeah and then the virtue is is how
you navigate that pathos how do you
navigate that I would say so I would say
that that thing that is that that can
bring out all the you know the demons in
you and and and also bring out your most
heroic soulful being right it can again
it can do both
I think so and this is what Plato I mean
so right philosophy is the virtue of
what I like it's the appropriate virtue
to the experience of wonder and reverent
just like reverence Woodruff argues is
the appropriate virtue for the you know
for the experience of awe hmm but is but
as philosophy ax is philosophy M one
among the virtues John or is it the
harmony of the virtues themselves well
and I think a philosophy and a
higher-order sense I think of it as the
orchestration of the virtues oh it is I
think it's it's but but philosophy of
begins in wonder wonder has a special
role for philosophy a photonic vision
because wonder is exactly the moment of
what we've been talking about it's the
moment of so if we compare if we it's
thought if we contrast wonder to
curiosity where curiosity is there's
something missing and I want to have it
you know which is good but where wonder
is I'm willing to call myself in my
world into question there can be no
pursuit it's it's a wonder has I think
in a special role I think you're right
philosophy is about all of the virtues
but to use your term
I think wonder is the entree it is the
right right philosophy of first of all
is the virtue of appropriately wondering
because if we can't call ourself and our
world into question none of the other
virtues are attainable for us mm-hmm can
I throw another formulation here just
for yep just for fun but in the Buddhist
tradition you have sutrayana which is
about renunciation it's about training
in moral virtue and it's about you know
it's about taming and controlling your
emotions and desires and and becoming
becoming wise and compassionate in the
world and then the next level tantrayana
you step into another kind of world
which which isn't isn't it's no longer
it's no longer a process of training
it's it's it's more like you're hit
directly by the by the energies yeah and
so so though those two things
so so and of course once you enter Don
Triana you also have to eat you too to
have embodied sue Triana
like you have to become a morally
virtuous person before you can you can
you can wrestle with those those more
direct energies it's deeply analogous to
the Neoplatonic ascent right so the the
Platonists has you know buddy calls the
Civic virtues which is the virtues and
you know this is the virtue of being you
know living with others what we normally
call the moral virtues but they're much
more like we said here the understanding
that this that the even the the moral
virtues are not in purely individual
projects they have to be done in
community and in concert with other
people and then you have what he calls
you know the the cathartic or the
purging virtues these are the virtues
that take you beyond moral virtue
because now what you're trying to do is
not you're not trying to be honest or be
good you're trying to see that about
which the depths of you and the depths
of a reality afford this there's this is
a trans moral sense of goodness and this
is what takes you to all so you can
always thinking rational trans rational
yes exactly exactly that's exactly what
it is in Platonists that's exactly what
it is you take you take the you take
rational or what we could call here
argumentation as far as it goes and what
it's done is it's basically a scaffold
that brings you up to a place where you
can now see and be opened up that you
can so I sometimes think of it like
building a structure
have you ever been in one of the
pyramids in the Mayan jungles you climb
up the pyramid and the point of the
structure is to get to a place where you
you you are struck in a way you can't be
struck when you're in the forest and
you're open to calling yourself in your
world into question mmm-hmm
argumentation is the building of the
pyramid but when you can then be open to
the sky and to the forest below you and
you're willing to call everything now
and do question that is that is that
moving fam√≠lia logic propositional sort
of understanding of things to a more
spontaneous and let's say
dynamic it's moving a feeling of things
respectable and participatory or does it
yeah it's like the teleological
suspension of the ethical and although I
think it moves more into beauty guys it
does it does Beauty becomes more more
beauty and play you become become more
important where in the beginning you're
you're just slogging away and trying to
understand and you've got your machete
and you're cutting your way through the
jungle and yeah but the thing you have
to remember is is there's a I mean for
and this goes back to back to the stuff
we were saying earlier about how Beauty
you know how it kills you in
resurrection like you know you're never
gonna become a God in play-doh at most
you're always gonna be godlike and and
and you come out of the clave and see
the Sun but you were turning back into
the cave so the moments in my practice
where I touch the one or the Sun or the
ground of being
they then feed back into when I'm doing
the right the propositional or very sort
of thing right no yeah and of course I
think of that then you know the comes
back to the marketplace with yeah
exactly you know what's about the I
forget that you know there's in you know
the the the Zen parables were where he
you know he's he's chasing the the bull
and then he's looking for the bull he's
riding the ox and then and then and then
there's nothing there's emptiness and
then he comes back with with gifts you
don't exactly so you know some you know
those moments those moments of trans
rational they they shine into they in
power they in soul will they alive and
they beautify the rational moments and
then the rational moments have
appropriate reverence to what is
disclosed in the trans rational moments
okay that's nice mmm-hmm although I
guess I guess for someone like Allard
that the entire process we've just
described is rationality per se well
yeah the aspiration to rationality in
the aspiration to trans rationality is
itself proleptic rationality
yeah so far as we're aspiring to any
even beat not even just a virtue but
it's the ender said to something that is
beyond virtue right the good beyond
moral goodness
I think we're engaged in the in some
kind of proleptic process yes for sure
yeah weird anyway we were engaged in
aspiration and the other thing I was
thinking about is how normally think of
beauty as something very high high up
there yeah very sublime and we're very
very up here you know it's it's it's
associated with high culture and and you
know all that sort of stuff but it's
also you can find beauty in a rap song
you can find beauty everywhere like
easily and the lowest you know in the
most you know but now things it's it's
not something that is necessarily
hierarchical or isn't that the same for
virtue mmm we find virtue in our highest
ideals but if that's useless if you
can't find it in then my new show of
your life right yeah well yeah it's like
that it's it's like the in the way that
the well not by analogy by identity the
way the Neoplatonic hypostasis are
dispersed ontologically dispersed
without somehow being diminished yeah
right yeah the Sun shines but it doesn't
but it's not diminished by it's shining
yeah even or close it says that's not
true but i get i get i get platonist as
metaphor at least right exhaustive who
cares about the physics the one
overflows or or or or like the top hm
right the the the dow is a well that you
connect you and you can just continually
draw forth from it yeah yes mm-hmm yes I
should get going soon gentlemen and I
think we're seeming to fall into kind of
a wonderful convivial silence anyways
yeah yeah there's a silence descending
on the conversation somewhat I agree and
it's a good one though it's a really
wonderful one so what are we getting
we've reinvented beauty and we've
reinvented the soul and and
so what are we gonna and we've
reinvented virtue so what are we gonna
reinvent next well like I said I've been
trying to reinvent rationality and not
now today I was trying to bring them
together with reinventing argumentation
within dialectic I just want to keep
going because a great synthesis John
incidentally like there was a fantastic
theoretical synthesis that you opened
with very very well thank you for that I
mean I'm trying like I said I'm trying
to get at what would die illogical
argumentation look like rather than
monological argumentation I'm trying to
get more the sense of logos as drawing
together the affording insight that
moves you to the next proposal the draws
together like it's different than just
premise premise premise but it's
embodied in feeling isn't it it's it's
it's it's broadened into the the entire
realm of feeling in the body rather than
just upstairs very much very much it
goes back to your metropolis thing we're
trying to link and and heart and head
together right in this sense of
argumentation and so and trying to in
soul and and heartening and and you know
make make beautiful all of these things
because notice that we were willing I
mean we came a good faith and we were
willing to probe and push and move and
challenge but all that did was afford
right it just afforded more and more and
more and that's again III and like I'm
I'm working my way towards this I I'm
not complaint I'm not claiming anything
complete hearing but I'm trying to get
what this would look like for us yeah
well it's it's I also want say Andrew
that it's very helpful because John and
I John and I do this all the time and
because there's a certain shorthand and
there's a certain shared vocabulary yeah
one thing that you introduce that we
don't really have as much on our own is
you introduce the kind of more the more
sort of interrogative challenge that's
actually very helpful which it
diminishes it diminishes a little bit
because once you become very very very
fluent and how can
you are with another person once there's
such a shared once there's there's so
much of a shared vocabulary that things
become you you don't realize how like
when up won't clairvoyance or so engine
yeah when John I speak just the two of
us there's we're standing on so many
unspoken presumptions and so many sort
of shared axioms that a lot goes
unchallenged simply because there's
there's there's so much you know there's
so much underfoot that sort of goes
unacknowledged but one thing that you
add to this one of the many things you
add to this is that you challenge some
of those some of those presumptions used
to challenge some of those sort of those
those unspoken premises that were
standing on without realizing that we're
standing on them whether they be having
to do with vocabulary or having to do
with the use of certain terms etc and
that's very very helpful to in the
proper sense of the term to humiliate
the conversation and we're all it into
proper question and you I think you
bring that beautifully and very and very
definitely and I think you guys are
really teaching me something here about
about listening and finding that the
right moment to interject and I do feel
like I'm stumbling around a lot of the
time but but a bit less so I feel like
there's a harmony coming into these
conversations that that that you know
each time that that's a little bit and
that just kind of strikes me and makes
me you know go wow you know that's
amazing you know something is really
happening here
to me so so so what you were saying
about dialo goes being this process
where something is being brought out of
you that you you that you couldn't find
on your own I think that's happening to
me so yeah yes that feels that feels
really exciting yeah yeah and a lie that
was maybe the most important thing that
was just said over this whole comes what
you just said there for me that's
exemplifying everything that I'm trying
to bring to life what you just said that
from
using golden moment what you just said
hmm so thank you for that oh well thank
you guys so much here here