welcome to meditating with shaumbra
Vicky we do this every Monday morning at
9:30 a.m. Eastern Time
with Monday's alternating between your
lessons on the day and review the whole
ecology practices and poetic
please remember that next Tuesday and
Wednesday we will not be meeting due to
scheduling difficulties I'm hoping that
you guys will meet on the discord server
and keep up with the continuity practice
but if you're just for the first time
you're most welcome I recommend you
check the notes in this video and you'll
find links to previous lessons and sits
and go and immediately do lesson one
well you can continue to meet with us
about once or maybe twice a week to do
another lesson and then you'll very
quickly catch up and integrate with us I
would ask you all to please like the
video screen to increase its visibility
of the YouTube algorithm try to help as
many people as I can and that helps and
many of you been helping me very
consistently and reliably and it's been
effective and it's also much appreciated
so thank you very much
at the end of every set we do have a QA
please limit the questions during that
time to anything from this course that's
fair game anything from this course but
for more encompassing questions please
join us on the live stream on YouTube
every third Friday of the month which
will be next Friday July the 17th at 3
p.m. Eastern Time
I think that's everything in terms of
announcements I just want to briefly
review one more time we've been doing it
all week but it's now a continual part
of the practice what's going on in the
chanting and then we'll set the timer
I'll chant will chant hopefully you're
chanting with me and then we'll go into
the sonnet set and then we'll have some
time for Q&A so let's remember that
we're trying to make this
as much a whole-body experience when
we're chanting you should be trying to
feel you know what it's like to feel
music in your body alright there's
obviously a physical aspect in what
you're feeling music but there's also
the psychological aspect in which you
you're catching the rhythm you you're
picking up on the cadence right and so
you want to be feeling it in your body
in both the psychological and the
physiological sense and so it's
important for example when you're doing
the ohm right that there's the deep
resonance and you and what you're
feeling you feeling it both
psychologically and physiologically and
it's that deep resonance and then you're
feeling that grounding and right that's
the sort of embodied aspect of it the
embedded aspect and then deeper the
ontological it's an enacted symbol for
how everything is emerging from the
ground at the end it tends to put an
emphasis therefore on Eastern philosophy
when we do the one and you're trying to
resonate you're trying to pick up on the
oneness of all things it's a higher note
and in that sense it's enacting the an
agog a and then what you're trying to
feel there is right that oneness and how
it's the overarching logos the
overarching principle or source of
principle from which everything emanates
you're getting the emergence from the
ohm and the emanation from the one of
course these are metaphors and they
should be understood as that through
which we are ascending with our
attention not anything we are grasping
in any kind of comprehensive cognition
so as I've said I think Lexi o Divina
just also principles of designing an
ecology practice lectio Divina and
chanting of a complementary relationship
so I think I see
as taking us from the linguistic
conceptual into the depths of mindful
awareness and attention and then I see
Lexi o is helping to bridge out of
mindfulness practice into a
propositional symbolic but ultimately
also police's poetic motive cognition so
I hope I hope that was a helpful review
and please set your disturb get yourself
in your basic position
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Laughter]
[Music]
[Music]
this is some practice
you
slowly come out of you practice trying
as best you can to integrate what your
cultivated in your practice with the
ergative consciousness cognition
character and communitas perhaps by
reciting the five promises to yourself
time for a few questions this is from
Gabriel Rubinstein I get relative have
you here again in deep the pasta should
our attention be as it is in flow that
is tracking all feelings processes
movements disturbances of mind
simultaneously yes but as I said the the
flow in the body goes through
qualitative felt change in that it's not
so it's not it's not so much spatially
experienced as extensive more
experienced energetically as the dynamic
ground of consciousness and awareness
and attention so you are it's not it's
not just a silent space in the sense of
privation a lack it is pregnant with the
the dynamic ground that is merging out
of your embodiment so indeed the pasta
the the ground the field of awareness
from which that more the more specific
propositional kind of thought or picture
is trying to emerge but that's what
you're meditating on but when I try to
convey is it it still has an energetic
body to it and that's what you're
keeping you're keeping faith with your
body
insofar as you're allowing your body to
be still present in the deep for pasta
and you're still that that field and
focus that's you get from float doesn't
disappear
it's just transposed into an energetic
octave if I can put it that way so I
hope that was helpful
I hope that was helpful
it's um it's hard to talk about this
without getting into language that's
really kind of woolly and so I'm trying
to split the balance here between giving
you metaphors that will be helpful to
you without misdirecting you into a
magical metaphysics that is ultimately I
think antagonistic to what we're all
trying to cultivate together so I hope
that was helpful
angry sloth hello a hi job if not too
specific what parts of the Bible would
you go to for Lexie Oh Davina I think
the best place to start for Lexie Oh
Davina in the Bible is to start with the
songs on the songs
um really cry out for Lexie oh dude you
know they really cry out to be recited
and felt an experience that way and then
you may want to juxtapose like the
Psalms are your poetry the perhaps the
Proverbs as your prose and and and also
Ecclesiastes as your prose and to move
between the two of those originally as a
resident fashion in a resident fashion
would be where I would recommend on
starting lecture Davina off with the
Bible Kelly Meyers hi Kelly
from Etta I have been using Massie more
in X and may I see how I how X shines
sometimes they shine but sometimes I
feel like I'm just going through the
motions yeah that's again that's part of
what is always going to be the case when
we're doing these practices it's because
we're always toggling towards right
effort all right viii will pass I
it's very profound and right effort is
it's an achievement it's not something
you just simply do you know the story of
the Buddha listening to the the master
and the apprentice musician on the barge
just before he's remember he's starved
himself to death and the young girl has
saved him which is a complete inversion
of social status and he's broken his
ascetic vows his ascetic followers have
abandoned him he's sitting there close
to the edge of despair and despondency
and that's where the idea of great
effort at the middle path come out
because he hears the musician telling
his apprentice no no no the strings
can't be too tight or they can't be too
loose and this is the middle way at the
core of the middle way is this right
effort and this is something we're
always toggling towards and so sometimes
you're trying too hard
and sometimes you're not trying enough
and sometimes that will feel like it's
you're close to that that optimal
gripping point and it's just shiny and
then sometimes it feels dry and
sometimes it feels like you're just
projecting and so be patient with
yourself you're going to be constantly
toggling back and forth as you try to
get on the right effort and the right
you'll be this ongoing dialogue between
the prevalence of right effort in your
life and the sense of your inner Buddha
coming into presence in your life and
your practice your inner sage they very
much talk to each other
and grow each other another question
from kalamarez I realized that as some
teams need more cues for my inner coach
to get me back into contemplation that
goes towards again just what I just said
to you Kelly I'm not trying to be
dismissive I'm trying to indicate that I
think there's a unifying theme with
those two questions
it's right it's very much like an you
know in Tai Chi you're always moving
between the EMEA to try and get the DAO
that's beyond a beneath
both being in the egg or people like to
use the surfing metaphor when you're
constantly toggling constantly adjusting
because our point our point is
continuity of contact with with what's
most real not any kind of final closure
or comprehensive holding of it we are in
love with it and so that that same sort
of thing I think is what's going on here
sometimes you need to make you and
that's what I meant about how the inner
coach and the right effort talk to each
other
Kelley it's right at the center of your
question right and so sometimes we need
to you know speak a little bit more
sometimes a little bit less and we and
it's going to constantly shift and
evolve but I think you could go to
questions indicate to me that you're
actually zeroing in on a key issue so I
want to encourage you to keep going keep
going so for my dad I have tried to q
how is he different from my other dad or
how am I connected him besides this my
dad
this kind of q sometimes works still
exploring I think that's good I think
you should not give up experimentation
exploration as long as it's not trigger
on and not triggering theorizing
justification explaining as long as it
is empowering exploration through
attention and increased respect Acacia
sness in your awareness finally Kelley
mutters any suggestions how to connect
more with the technique should it matter
whether the DAO my contemplation shines
when I practice Metta so I'm I'm hoping
that the answers are given to the
previous three questions actually have
given you an answer to this summative
question and I think the the way that
the shining of the doubt the phenomenon
briefed me originally needs to shine
will shift around for you because you
have to remember
and this is something that hunter is
very good on but also people like Harmon
The Shining is always interpenetrating
with the withdrawing when we really
relate to someone as a dhow they shine
their morna's shines and they're more
intelligible to us but that's
simultaneous with they're always
withdrawing and there's always something
that which is a mysterious that's with
with always beyond our grasp so the
shining and the withdrawing are mutually
interdependent and so sometimes the
shining aspect the glory aspect comes
forth and more but sometimes that
withdrawing my aspect the the sacred
darkness aspect the this is the yang the
shining and the yin is that withdrawn
and so sometimes it might seem like it's
not shiny precisely because the
withdrawing aspect needs to be more
prominent unto you so I hope that was
helpful
Cara hi Cara I know this is stronger
just a cough right when starting to
chant is it okay to take a sip of water
before starting to make sure there's
enough moisture that's actually a really
good idea of care that's a very
practical a good idea I do the same
things that glass of water right there
and I take a sip right before my wait
you said for exactly that reason so I
think that's an excellent idea
thank you for sharing that I recommend
that to everybody but I should have
recommended that earlier and I apologize
for not thinking of that especially what
I am myself and doing it so thank you
Kara for bringing it up everybody should
be making use of that as a way of
enhancing the chanting
Karima hi Kayla good to have you here as
always
I meditate sitting on a couch tender
knee spine is straight hut 180 but how
much tension should be maintained in the
core
I use a small pillow in the center of my
back my mid and upper back becomes
sensitive but I rest into it at times is
the hard chair gather um well the thing
to ask is
is your posture feeling like your body
is open and expressive to you and that
you are deeply embodied it and that it's
enabling baby breathing with a sense of
stability because if you're doing that
if if your posture is enabling the
mind-body connection to affording it
opening it up and me bullying it then
your posture is working then your
posture is working so it sounds to me
also given many of the other comments
you've made that you have that embody
energetic embedded flowing aspect in
your set and so I wouldn't be working
towards you know the idea of the heart
chair and perhaps bringing more
attention into your body as long as it's
not conducive conducive towards
sleepiness or drowsiness or a neglect of
your embodiment but instead doing the
opposite opening it up affording it's
energetic presence so much so that you
can take it into the the heart of deep
for past night as I was talking about
earlier then your posture is good and
your posture is good this slight
discomfort helper to learnis I have no
problem meditating but wonder about
challenging myself on the challenge the
I mean you don't want to get into sort
of an aesthetic aesthetic orientation
towards this I mentioned that earlier
there should be a sense of challenge but
the challenge should be that challenge
that is you know on your attention to
get you into the flow state the
challenge associated with right effort
again so the dink about it yeah demand
such that that you know you're
challenging your attention to grow but
it's the demand that's also always
trying to hone in on homing on that that
that sweet spot of right effort that
puts us into a resonant relationship
with the realization of reality
manual post-observation thank you for
sharing an observation in proj nut I'm
imagining being imbued by the Holy
Spirit coming into my body informing me
retreating into the nothingness of the
south on the out-breath that's wonderful
that's wonderful
I think there's important connections
between that sense of the Holy Spirit
and the marriage between right your
inner teacher and that energetic ground
and it also reminds me of Paul's
statement that we are to conceive of our
bodies as the Temple of the Holy Spirit
and temple a place of sacred
manifestation mindfulness meditation and
contemplation are there in the
invocation of the temple so that seems
to me like a wonderful connection that
you make I'm happy to hear that that is
vibrant for you Kyra another question
from Kyra Kruger during metaphor someone
that I have difficult emotions for I
noticed that the person sometimes signs
sometimes seems to be in my space in
somewhat evasive way I feel like I'm
hiding any suggestions for that so can
you remember I don't know how far you
are into the pasta but do you have the
moments in deep the pasta when you're
released from that sort of self
narrative because I found that when I'm
facing challenging devotions that I feel
like the person if this is like Taoism I
think the idea is instead of hiding
right or or toughening and body armor
it's - it's to go through this sorry I
don't want to sell
preposterous or pretentious but you
become like water you shift and so right
that it no longer you you come to
realize that at least in this space you
that you can't be harmed and that's not
sorry I don't want it I'm not being
dismissive I don't want to be dismissive
of any way in which this person has
actually harmed or traumatized you or
neglect that but - I'm trying to get you
to remind yourself to remind yourself
that apart from the person there's what
the person means to you and that is a
different thing and you can remember
Satya
a state in which that is no longer
something that is threatening to you
because it's only threatening to you to
degree to which you are reduced and
identified with a particular meaning of
yourself external meaning only cuts you
in terms of the meaning that you have
for yourself and if you can change that
meaning and open it up then the way in
which this used to cut you changes it
loses its power and so that's been very
helpful for me I hope that wasn't
obscure but realizing that which i think
is that the core of CBT and stoicism
that we shouldn't confuse the meaning
with the event or the or the person and
so that that that be kind of remembering
that if if I open up and become more
watery as a metaphor the meaning of who
and what I am then the meaning of these
things can't cut me or get a purchase
and meet the way they used to and then I
start to see them differently as well
these were really excellent questions
everyone thank you for them thank you
for joining now I want to thank my dear
friend and techno mage come are always
making things happen my beloved son
Jason always here pinch-hitting for
unexpected contingencies please
subscribe to the channel to be notified
of the next video you'll also find links
to the lecture series awakening for the
meaning crisis and the Villalobos series
voices with form a key where these
themes and related themes are explored
in more depth is situated within a more
comprehensive framework please invite
others who might benefit by sharing this
series please consider joining the
discord server to chat with others Brett
is here pleasure about community is
there and they are offering so much and
I hope that the Sangha and the discord
community continue to grow into a more
comprehensive community mitre that we're
doing this every weekday morning at 9:30
Eastern time we will not be doing it
next Tuesday and Wednesday during to
scheduling
I hope again and I encourage that that
the psycho finds a home on the disc
grits or discord server on Tuesday and
Wednesday
please remember that continuity of
practice and you would all starting to
see what continuity means this toggling
in this this that this you know this
constant evolving continuity of contact
and ongoing shifting conformity to what
is most real the continuity of practice
was more important than quantity of
practice remember and it really is
singing to me right now because of all
of the Q&A there is no enemy worse than
your own mind and body but there's no
friend no Ally no true companion
on the path better than your own mind
and body be lamps unto yourselves and to
each other I'll see you all on Monday
take good care everyone