welcome to the stola the stoah is a
digital campfire where we go here and
dialogue about what matters most at the
night's edge what's happening now
[Music]
okay I have to say this now again
welcome to the stoah it's a place for
dialogue around what matters most at the
night's edge of the moment I was talking
to Peter here yeah now you know why I'm
not a weather person because we in a
sense it's supposed to be like one offs
but there is a sense that we're building
on things and when you build on things
you know you don't want to be in a
situation where people get lost in what
you're doing so yeah
does anybody have I'm just gonna I'm
just gonna talk for a couple more
minutes around this one does anyone have
a kind of energy or impulse of where
you'd like to go today if you've been
here for a couple of times or yeah what
this could be for you today just to help
me organize amongst the potentials that
we might do so anyone have any questions
you're holding from the like what the
hell are we doing here or need some
clarification I've never been here
enjoying this picture behind you and
like the way the light is kind of
reflecting off in the kind of shapes
that are forming out of that and I'm
finally finding it kind of yeah I'm
feeling excited like playful yeah so I
check out that for my birthday this year
in April and it's the artist is Jenny
Baird and you know I put it
intentionally there because I think it
really speaks to me it speaks to like
how I'm trying to hold this space yeah
so thank you for
for noticing it
Jenny berry Bai Rd just fabulous stuff
in her gallery so okay so what have we
been doing we started with deep clothes
what's starting what we're trying to do
is as clearly and simply as possible
understand ourselves the way we make
meaning the way we make sense making
we started with deep cold which kind of
unpacked these large concepts such as
power and trust so that was one way to
take complexity and kind of get a handle
wrap wrapped some conversation around it
and then we started doing actually some
interior work some phenomenology and
asking ourselves what's what's under the
hood like how does this work so we
worked with in her talk and we looked
carefully at what inner talk how inner
talk is composed what is it composed of
and this consideration consideration we
got to was that inner talk is actually
sub-threshold micro actions of talk that
when that happens when I say water and
if I have a sub-threshold action little
bit action electricity that pattern in
my my jaw and my mouth and my tongue the
perceptual function of my brain has
anticipates that it comes with this
sound water so it completes it down
retro actively someone said it's like
burning a CD it completes the other side
so we likened it to burning a CD we also
likened it to this notion of well what
burns in her top and we talked about
well if I have if I if I close my eyes
and I imagine raising my right
hand right okay I can I can recreate
that in my imagination and what's the
foundational experience that enables me
to recreate that it's raising my right
hand so the same thing the foundational
experience that Prime's the organism for
inner talk is actual talk in actual
speech we also made a analogy about
phantom limb syndrome right because
certain intentions always come with a
certain feeling then if I have my limbs
severed I can in fact have the feeling
that I'm moving my arm because these
things what we call covary so your whole
life there's certain things that almost
100% Kovach can you can expect something
almost 100% coming from those things so
when I say water I can expect that sound
watch her coming from those things if I
say water I can expect the death coming
from the feeling of my tongue doing that
and this is how we teach or I don't
teach but people can teach people who
are deaf to speak because they you
investigate with your hands what the
mouth is doing and you do that the mouth
and the breath and even though they
can't hear themselves they can speak and
this is also why when we start to lose
our hearing we can read lips
because of these near mirror neurons so
this is also part of why people can read
minds so you can do an experiment where
let's say I give someone a card and it
has the word water sky and ambulance
okay so those are quite different in
terms of their sounds and I have like
what and the person has a card and picks
one of those cards so websites and
and I asked them to say the word in
their head without moving their mouth
and then I asked them to spell it in
their head without moving their mouths
and I have someone watching them I'll
get a better than 30% a lot
predictability that the person can tell
what word is in the person's head
because very very subtly there are
mirror neurons and you're subconsciously
picking up on very subtle cues in the in
the context right so this is like a game
that some of some some people play you
know you hear Dan Brown and people say
you know my guru my mentor he could read
my mind
part of it is picking up on these subtle
cues but also understanding that there's
something quite a lot of patterns that
compose compose people and meditation
teacher understands not only there are
patterns but there are certain stages
that people are in so they can guess
pretty well what kind of package package
you're in so we're just trying to play
around with touching base on some of
these so what would be a next step what
would be a next step to investigating
what's under the hood let's talk about
emotions and let's try to get a handle
on what the literature on emotions is
highly is messy so you have emotions you
have the word feeling feelings and in
the literature unfortunately in the
literature unfortunately some people use
the word feelings in a certain way and
emotions in another way and other
authors use it in the opposite way so
like DiMaggio
and I think pants that use them the
other way so first of all if you're
reading the literature this is maybe why
you're confused so just to make sure
that you understand when you're reading
the literature which which way is the
author using this and if it's transposed
from another author than in your mind to
compare the two you have to you have to
do that semantic mapping but work for
our purposes then we are going to agree
on defining these things in a specific
way
so we're going to use the word feeling
as bodily sensation I feel hot I feel
yeah I feel hot I feel like I'm gonna
get a stomachache I feel butterflies in
my stomach I feel how this is soft
everything is really more in terms of
bodily sensation so that's how we're
gonna use the term feeling and then
we're gonna use this term effect an
effect yep
okay yep very close so ethics we're
gonna say is more subtle than feelings
and we're not gonna get into this today
but in my work I'm map it onto jack
pants Epps 6at well there's seven
effects dreams they can become making
and Jean Russell showed that they come
in pairs so there's there's three pairs
of effects dreams and then another one
so what we mean by ethics are this
something changes in my body okay the
word feeling means I can feel something
in my body I'm conscious of it okay
effect is is whether I'm aware of it or
not so my heart rate might go up or down
it could be so subtle I can't
aware of it you know tiny little murmur
ations my adrenaline levels all the
neuro cocktails are constantly changing
my vagus nerves constantly processing
information my pupils may delay to
contract some nerves become tense others
become relaxed there's so that's what
we're going to call effect it's this
kind of interior almost yet static or
responsive mode our state or state of
intention how my body is primed in any
given moment right so I don't know no
they're different than feelings because
I'm not necessarily aware of them I can
train myself to be more sensitive to
them but an effect is that and pANSA cap
uses this notion of effect because the
way it works in our body is consistent
with all mammals okay so those that's
feeling after and now emotions so I'm
going to say an emotion is an effect
plus a story okay so some kind of we
talked about other stories like some
kind of mental model we talked about
which the energy comes up and it
reproduces a mental model of some kind
of the mental model can become a story
in your head yeah so an emotion is an
effect plus a story now let me give you
an example of what I mean we know in
early childhood when a child falls down
right a child will fall down in their
body their body since their body effects
will change their adrenaline will go up
they might have a startle response right
this is very easy but they turn to their
primary caregiver to figure out what
will effective tone to put that in to
put that with it's just at first just
something that's happening in their body
they turn to
who's ever taking care of them and they
look for a marker and if that if you
fall down and bump your knee and your
mother is scared
then you're gonna couple this notion of
threat to those kinds of bodily
sensations if your mother goes oh let's
see are you all right then you a couple
that with curiosity so that's what so
that's so so this is a many of the
curiosity becomes stories or the threat
becomes stories but the actual body
sensation is neutral to a story the
effect is neutral to the story in those
ways so let me give you another example
and this is where I wish pants got
hadn't used these words one of our
primary effects streams he calls fear
now when it when he investigates that
certain things happen your adrenaline
levels go up your you know your
parasympathetic and your neuro
sympathetic and your vagus nerves your
pupils open up some muscles contract
some relax this is exactly what happens
to a deer when it's in the woods and it
hears something but for the deer it
Prime's them for action they're not
sitting there like shuddering oh my god
like we think they are we project that
onto them so the very same kind of neuro
chemical electrochemical effect Laden
body response is in the deer who's
primed to run in a sense in their power
and into you but then when you add your
story of threat or worried it becomes
fear in the human sense
and this is why when you're working with
people you as coaches you want to turn
to what is actually your body doing try
to move from the story now just like we
have downward causation and inner talk
and phantom limb eventually the story
can downwardly cause the body to change
its effect configuration now you're
 now you're really so this
is why what we want to really try to do
is be have you know try to get rid of
out of the habit of the story affects
like everything else in the universe
they come and they go and they take the
time they take some of you may have
noticed especially I mean I'm gonna make
this is kind of hyper this is kind of
stereotypical but you know when you you
know get interesting I'd be interested
in a male version of the same story but
when you have when you're a young woman
and you have your period menstrual cycle
you noticed how your ethics are changing
and you learn not to interpret the world
from the fact that you're you have a
threat response all the time when I had
my hysterectomy I got very Acorah phobic
it was like oh my god it was gonna rain
when these people were coming on the
weekend and I was sitting there in bed
going like what if it rains and all this
threat response would come and it was
just because my my hormones were all
messed up and so you know you you
learned the if you have erratic hormones
at certain times to get the stories that
are served up it's so obviously out of
sync with the reality
it's a it's an opportunity to learn how
to be with the effects and not import or
impute the story that may or may not be
relevant or accurate to the actual
occasion on Tibet is there a male and
something analogous okay so moving on
Jane Russell I think that's her name
my last name is Russell I don't think he
might be doing in Russell she's a
student of Jack pants cthe and she said
so pants get says there's there's fear
care panic anger fear care panic anger
really
rage and play thank you I know not
seeking and play I'm sorry yeah yeah and
these are common like he talks a lot
about seeking and playing or and can be
argued to be more fundamental in animal
nature you know like yeah you know why
the cat is curious he could get out of
everything he wants at home but this is
seeking there's always this movement is
very fundamental to animal nature it's a
very primordial it separates the plants
from the animals that we seek and move
okay so G this woman Russell I think
it's Dianne Russell she noticed
something interesting she noticed that
the seeking and the fear had the same
quality of energy but one was more
expanded than the other and she talks
you call these the tremulous energies
you know when we're seeking for
something if we're you know
these these piece that these that sci-fi
these horror movies where the woman is
gonna like open the door and she hears
all this horrible stuff on the other
side of the door and children's the door
eaten by the aliens or something this
this is a good portal to understand her
notion of seeking she calls a tremulous
energies when you're seeking something
it has this notion of excitement that's
like fear and then she says and then
when you're contracted and studies are
now she's looking for studies that show
the seeking and the fear have to do with
vague vagal tone because but at the edge
of seeking there's a boundary between
seeking and fear so when you're looking
for something and so as a coach what I
work with is Isis is when I see if I'm
working with fear you move it you say
it's in the same direction as seeking so
you always move fear to curiosity well
let's take a look maybe that's not the
case do we really understand what the
government is saying do we really
believe this conspiracy theory we always
take fear and move it toward curiosity
or seeking there's the same relationship
between care and panic panic is the
experience of losing some someone or
something you care for so the child's
panic at separation anxiety right and we
know this is very close when you have
your first crush you really care for the
person and you're like on the phone like
24 hours a day to make sure you're not
gonna lose them right so this notion
between panic care and panic this is a
great exercise if you're like me and you
take care of orphaned wild animals
because you care for them and then you
have to let them be wild animals and
you're so afraid that they're gonna
gonna be eaten you know so she talks
about how she calls care and panic the
connection energy
the connection energies and so what's
interesting is again as a coach and
instead of moving people around if
they're panicked about you know being
abandoned or separations you lead them
to where that shows them that they
really care if they really care about
something because it's in the same
stream does that make sense we're gonna
get to rage I know and then play and
anger the same thing it's like watching
my used to have these two big Murray
mushy dogs their guard chief and they're
very territorial and they would play
they would play me playing the older one
had a bad back and as soon as she got
hurt she just like the play turned into
anger so there's like there is something
very close between anger and play the
contracted form of play is anger so
there's that so they're there again so
when someone's angry you try to move
that toward playing we see this all the
time in the martial arts in sports that
boundary right between my sister and I
used to play this game where we would
take brushes this is America it's not
recently and we would hit each other on
the leg and it would be playful with a
little bit of bite you know and then all
of a sudden it would get it return it
return and you'd get angry right so this
notion between clay and angries about
boundaries so anger is the contracted
form of play so you can work with them
as three effect streams and of course
what moves them into contracted forms is
often a story right so you're playing
your very playful with someone and then
your energy or the capacity turns into a
contracted form and then you're like he
was aggressive or he would think he was
mean or it's his fault and you start you
start justifying that that switch with
these stories instead of just
understanding that there are these
there's this toggle at the edge of how
much energy you know these these energy
signatures and we all have to work we
all have instances of working on this
consciously like when you're a mother
and your child is starting to grow up
you're constantly toggling that right
you want to care for them and support
that but you can feel your panic you
don't want them to get their first
driver's license you don't want them to
take the car and you know that you it's
not good to keep falling into the
contracted form and they're very very
close that's okay so now there's an even
more contracted form in each one of
these situations so seeking is the
tremulous energies the contracted form
is fear but then there's dread and dread
is these very contracted low energy
states well I wouldn't say low energy
states they're very boxed and red is a
very boxed in state you can't it's very
hard to work with them because the
energies bound it up but that would be a
pathological state in terms of the
connection energies care is expanded
form panic is the contracted form and
grief is the very serious yeah Karen
panic okay these are the words that jack
pan step use panic is merely the
[Music]
experience of losing something you care
for right so maybe panic is too it's too
severe reaction but it's this notion of
fear of losing something your care for
so if you have yeah that's why it's
called the panic grief system because
grief is the loss truly they lost it
them something you love right so you
like lose a child like they got this is
this is grief so you get moves and
needle into there's more serious
contraction and then play and Russell
calms play in anger the mastery energies
it's how we master and we know this is
true in a lot of martial arts and sports
play is the expanded form anger is the
contracted form and rage is the bunched
up repressed form okay a rejected form
so when we when we have someone who's
quick to anger growing up and you
repress that then they can move that
into rage so you try to move that into
play you try to hook them up with people
who can constantly help them master a
sport or master and exercise and create
that kind of movement toward all this
energy and me you know like boxing and
and these are these are powerful
methodologies psycho technologies for
that energy signature if that you have
an energy signature now the interesting
thing is most people can identify what
their energy signature where their
energy sitting there most lies upon like
what is most mostly their signature yeah
so yes that just as an aside the seventh
stream and pan escapes ethics is lust
and it's it's it's an interesting thing
it doesn't it doesn't be interesting to
see if it follows the same matrix that
was set up by Diane muscle but I'm kind
of just trying to give you some
established established science let's
say so I'm just I'm following that a
little a little bit I do have a way that
I talk about less but it's kind of made
up it's not not not in not in line with
the way it's it's being used in these
methodologies so but okay you know some
most people can find where they spend
most of time in like they spend a lot if
their energy is free do they spend a lot
of time carrying when they're contracted
and they come toward anxiety of pink and
panic or are you a seeking person who
throws yourself out there but then that
means you take a lot of risk and so
you're always working with risk and or
are you someone who's very playful and
needs to play a lot and very sporty but
gets angry a lot and has the potential
for rage so there's there's many people
maybe not this group because I work
mostly with people who are highly
nuanced personalities but in general
there is an energy signature in most
people that tends to spend most of its
time and in one of those streams
what is the relationship between energy
signature and personality okay from a
Taoist perspective they're very very
very close because we try not to import
too many stories a caricatures or a
language around energy signature we try
just to work with the energy signature
it's a it's a it's a very strong when
you can work with at this level with
either coaching or a business or in your
own life there's a lot of leverage point
the deeper you can get it becomes more
simple I mean I only have like nine
boxes but it requires a lot more
practice and sensitivity and settle
sensing right but it's very powerful so
and again in my work we started this I
think the very first day I explained to
you that all my works about trying to
take huge amount of complexity and
trying to get at these fundamental
leverage points that are simple but
powerful ways to make progress either as
a coach on a spiritual path or in your
life or whatever you're trying to do and
I've worked with very complex I would
say egos and really I find it very
helpful just to keep with the basis so
you'll you'll see you'll feel you'll
hear your client or go into all these
stories and you'll feel the temptation
to follow them into the story but
basically you're wondering where they
toggling are they talking calmly between
seeking and fear and how can I then move
from the fear to the seeking or
highlight the attractor toward the
seeking so that's all I don't really
care about the story or care about the
personality I'm always just trying to
allow first allow the energy to
understand that if you have a
panic then you have what it takes to
care deeply right it's in this you have
the tool already you don't I don't have
to put something else in there if you
have a lot of Rage I see the potential
for great mastery in you because I see
it in the same direction so I don't want
to repress that it's energy for free its
energy that I but I that I want to work
for if you listen if you davon blue
what's how big Gotham Oh some some of
you might know him he created a cycle
technology called intensive short-term
short-term intensive dynamic theory it's
it's has to do with intensive and
short-term he worked with a lot of like
serial killers and really sociopaths
that had a lot of rage and he showed how
energetically the rage has to be
expressed before it can move into anger
and then beyond so a lot of what we do
in schools today is we're so we've been
so conditioned that anger is bad that it
should not appear that it doesn't have a
place in public space that we constantly
repressed that and unfortunately it's so
bad we even repress ruffhouse play in
public space and pants gap has proved
his research shows this is part of this
gets a phrenic nature of children today
and boys are hot at higher risk for this
so to me we can meet a whole lot of
psychology whole lot of theory but I
think that ultimately at the end of the
day you know working with some simple
but powerful parts of the human
experience that actually map on to our
deeper evolutionary potential now we did
talk I think last week that we're not
just animal there's some kind of
correlation between
the potential for social social
relationship that makes our childhood
more precarious than an animal right
were more the window of opportunity is
longer but it's more precarious perch
I'll have a at that tone set in a very
problematic way more than but animals
are the same someone came to my house
just the other day she
it's very sad she adopted this lovely
Staffordshire Terrier pit bull terrier
as a child as a puppy it's seven months
old now it's like this with her I mean
it's a beautiful relationship but it's
so territorial to this woman that it
attacks everything that comes around her
and so they wanted to see if I could
work with the dog and I had to be honest
it was not something that I could work
with and so this is a case of you know
some of this deep in flexibility in some
of some of these energies energies and
of course even an aspect tone that set
very early on is subject to quite a lot
of flexibility even as adults we have a
lot of neuroplasticity he gets easier in
the case yeah well that's you know it's
interesting that Eric you said that it
required we were talking about what kind
of person could work with that dog and
it really requires someone of that again
it certain kind of energy signature so
for me it was I have a lovely dog who's
not dominant and his male I took like I
wanted to see if I could socialize it
her to him and it wasn't gonna happen so
all right
so now this is the nine boxes now I'm
going to map the nine boxes on to more
of a spiritual kind of formulation how
does this relate to spirituality so we
have the tremulous energies which are
seeking fear and dread we have the
connection energies which are Care panic
and grief and we have the mastery
energies which are play anger and rage
and then you know I think I'll add at
some point then we have a tantric
energies I found a place for lust in my
nature so yeah so that's cool thanks for
yeah you have to go somewhere else and
we do talk about it but I haven't really
set it out in my matrix here okay so
then we have the tantric and energies I
believe so what I think love is I just
might answer it I'm gonna call the
tantric energies they are all those
other things trying to be reflected onto
another so they intensify right so
microcosmic orbit between people so care
I can make a court cosmically orbit care
with you and the connection and build
this this notion of connection mastery
same thing there's a kind of lustfulness
and kind of like what are the two tennis
players
damar your back and the other guy it's
like there's a bromance happening there
so I think lust is something that's
applied to all of those it's a context
of new context for all of those to play
in a certain way but that's just my
story this is not part of any
established truth okay so we call them
the tantric under energies now
I think there are spiritual forms of
these ethics dreams so for example the
tremulous energies seeking fear and drag
that Maps really well on to the
spiritual or mystical experience
experience of awe on the face of mystery
I say you become the perfect seeker
you'll have all this seeking energy but
you realize there's there's it becomes
infinite curiosity in this sense of awe
and those are the tremulous energies and
you hear a new mystic experience that
there's always like the trembling in the
face of God like there in that same
direction so again you can work with the
same kind of fundamental you know all is
in our animal nature in the human push
to the human form so in terms of
connection that has something to do with
like I hate the word unity because it
sounds it's conceptually like
hierarchical but this notion of
experience what South is inter being and
you realize that you care for everything
but nothing ever is lost and nothing is
ever gained there's no panic associated
with this notion of interbeing of
complete participation the interweb of
everything changes the nature of the
care panic it becomes a mystical
experience of that effect stream
and then in terms of the mastery a
stream that play anger and rage I don't
have a good word for this but it's
something like wool way the spontaneous
alive skillful action its unencumbered
it's what you get if this stream is what
what you discover in the martial arts
that flow you would say flow could be
parting Lantana tea spontaneous risk
yeah spontaneous isn't it flow is in it
has to do with like a mastery though you
become a sage it's ageless you know but
sage without the wisdom it has to do
with you know we're talking about play
anger and rage this this kind of like
can have trickster energy to it I call
it well where it's not part it's not
perfect but it has all that flavor to it
but I think it's just it's the
excellence in that that affects train it
comes along with it that's where the
energy signature comes from so this is
just as a psycho technology that you can
work across all levels of all
individuals you know we're we're are we
working with where's the potential for
movement in this direction also to
notice when you you know it also it's
very similar to the some general notion
of Buddha bodies so for example when I
said earlier if you notice you have a
certain energy signature you might be
someone more in the mastery stream or
more in the seeking stream or more
in the connection stream you tend them
to become a spiritual adept in that area
right so you become a healer for example
even the connection and you become a
martial artist in the mastery stream or
you become a mystic in in a more
conventional sense
in the seeking the seeking stream so
these this shows the continuity all the
way from animal nature to Buddha nature
a seamless continuity it's a very
intervene interpenetrated kind of model
where you could then call for example
and it's backed by science reductive
science and neuroscience and well that's
a whole nother thing to understand that
the play of molecules and how molecules
in your gut bacteria the whole ecology
of the biome and physical molecules in
you accord for all of this it's not even
about you that and your your experience
is obviously with your early childhood
news your experiences in context of
being human now I built it up from the
bottom up if I were in a spiritual
community I would present this from the
top down as they do those transcendent
types okay I had to get it in there so
we have the basis the path and the goal
I think it's easy to see okay so what
I'm describing is my model I teach it in
my master's course I teach it for
coaching it has elements of neuroscience
Jack pan SAP and then this woman I think
it's Diane Russell she noticed that they
were she was a student of pants caps
she's noticed that they were
there's research on whether or not the
contractor expanded thing has tested
with vagal tone which would be really
cool so it's a it's a powerful thing but
now that I'm talking about this matrix
this is this is my work this is a model
I teach okay so in the spiritual
community we have these three things the
basis the path and the goal I think it's
intuitive to see which is which so the
basis is the connection stream this is
the basis of all wisdom and liberation
path is mastery play the basis is care
compassion is the word for it
the path is mastery play and the goal is
to stand in the mysteries to be a
perfect seeker curiosity still hunting
seeking with it out an object allowing
being in the seeking and allowing it all
to manifest it for you all the display
so with this with this simple but
powerful source code right we're doing
source code I think they think it could
be yeah I think it's a very powerful
approach I think it there's there's an
interesting thing where it doesn't work
where I find resistance is that people
want it to be more complex they feel
like it reduces their human experience
those are people that too much in the
story are too conceptual it's not
conceptual enough it's not complex
enough it doesn't have a lot of 12-cell
out there Sanskrit words you know
there's all this because many people who
are not attracted there's very similar
to shenzhen Jung's work which about I
think sit-ins and young you know it's
more based on this is this is he doesn't
have a lot of effect work he has a lot
more perceptual we can look at
perception later if we continue this
series but the effects are constantly
very complex dynamics are constantly
priming the organism
in sub-threshold ways yeah and then that
can be moved into effective tone then
that moves into symbolism or story and
then you get the story builds up energy
and then you talk in your head
yeah the AMIA grams and this I don't
know one of the one of the you know
there's an invitation to play with this
one of the nice fun things about doing
source code is that then you can map
them on to other things and you find
distinctions and contractions at a
certain point this this I do a lot of
these are called heuristics in my course
and there's a certain type of person
that person who's got high pattern
recognition cognition and they try to
map everything onto everything you know
the way like when Wilbur came out
everybody mapped everything on it calls
it the a qualification or everything you
know so it's more meant to be very
useful useful tool in servicing yourself
and being service to yourself and others
and groups you know constantly try it's
a it's a they're placeholders for what
some of you have learned the hard way to
do energetically so instinctively you
have these these ways of making these
distinctions and discernments but it's a
really good plate you know it's it's
offered as a placeholder to not only
support that but to accelerate your
expertise or your ability to to work at
that leverage point
is there a name for this model yeah no
they do have a name for this model not
really I mean it's it's a module in my
course that I call the effective
dimension of self we do aspect we do
perception we do spiritual wisdom yeah
so is there a balance point between
expansion and contraction that's really
interesting that's actually a technique
it's a valuable technique you can
experience yourself as holding that
whole range like I'm both fearful and
still curious at the same time and what
you do is you hold open until the body
resolves that you'll either be too
afraid the body made that decision or
you'll take the next step so holding
that balance point if you feel you're
right in between you let the body see
the body because the body is creating
complex dynamics and it's not one or the
other and you can feel that you're
somehow in between so we work with the
horses for example and sometimes like
the stallion get really mad at someone
and there's this palpable sense like if
one wrong move and you're and so
you can feel you try to release like
especially horses you know if you're
more toward angry you'll start to punch
up and the horse will say oh you know
that game that's a foul so but you don't
want to sink away into nothing and you
just hold and hold and there are same
that's a kind of yin energy it's also
true the Mayers will get very narrow Zi
with women if the women nag them that
says this is stereotypical but the women
nag them they'll get so they they reach
out and spot them they want to bite them
and that makes the
angry and they want more control and
there and then it just you just stay
with that and you wait sometimes it
takes 2530 minutes
the horse is holding on body's holding
on to it too and you can't find an
opening you just stay and stay and stay
until it's resolved and it's a great
great exercise for this kind of work
because you know the horse does not hold
a story so that's what we say when
you're caught in the limo and the
in-between it's kind of like being in a
Bardo state and but but you can count in
this case you can count on impermanence
it's not can't stay there forever so
it's gonna come and go and take the time
it takes sometimes what's interesting
when we do the coop my course we have
people work in pairs and we're saying
it's described experience situation
where you feel most caring like these
energies as caring energy is pouring out
of you
now Wow it's share with your partner
what kind of thing makes you contract
what is it that makes you contract and
some people notice that they contract
into panic but they might contract into
anger and you start to see something
very interesting about this the way this
thing's moving around some people go
from care to anger instead of care to
panic so you can move the contraction
can move you into a different box I mean
is this a useful tool but then you
notice something about yourself and but
usually if then you keep working this
people will notice they went from care
to panic there they hold a story about
panic like they're ashamed of being a
wuss and they'll go to anger right so
this usually if you watch and you're
honest they usually follow a little more
closely that matrix
yeah so think that's good
Shawn it's very close to what Danielle
spottin burger calls generator functions
except the reason why I don't use that
word is because I'm not saying there is
an actual theory or causal relationship
in here to be very careful so in my
source code it just means I call them
cognitive widgets it just means there's
a pattern there that's very useful to
work with
whereas Daniel does a lot of work on
really finding causally the causal the
causal chain right so yeah so that's why
I'm called you know that's it's very
similar but that's why it's a big
difference you know his work a lot more
sophisticated Theory have in between all
of those - a method a lot more of a
methodology but very similar if you read
my paper I put Mountain burgers
generative functions
Jordan Hall's deep coat in my source
code all into the category called
hacking that David Chandler writes about
as a move toward releasing complexity
the paper is actually an appendix to the
paper why metaphysics matters it's
called the six ways to go meta and I
think I have a podcast on it but anyways
there are distinctions but it's in that
family that and family of like here's a
complex realm how do we make sense in
complexity we can look at all the
generative functions we can try to find
deep patterns or source code or we can
have some kind of a methodology here so
that's how it works up there any
questions we can have like five or ten
minutes you have questions I'm
I'm pretty me pretty much that's the
matrix the effective matrix beneath is
something that's been coming up a lot
recently in conversations I've been
having with various if people is the
importance of and how badly we do in all
sorts of ways conflict resolution and it
occurs to me this could be an incredibly
useful model to bear in mind in the
moment because if conflict can be
engaged in from a place of play and
curiosity I mean I've heard you talk
about this I talk about it as friction
produces forward motion you I think will
bet the clash of difference creating
possibility right and and and so the
managing of conflict and I thought this
strikes me as I mean I'm only just
thinking about it now it's new to me but
it strikes me this to be an incredibly
useful and simple map to have in in that
kind of domain you know and recognizing
in your interlocutor when they're
falling into fear when they're falling
into anger and and you know the more
people that become skilled at that kind
of thing it seems it resolves well not
resolves but makes a huge step towards
making that easier yeah when you work
with a model like this as the bones you
you want it not to contradict any other
technique you want to say oh I see that
in conflict resolution I see that
nonviolent communication I see that and
this this other something someone else
is doing and so it's not an alternative
it should say this can support the make
the discernment in complex situations so
when I work with a client I don't you
know when I teach I teach this way but
if you're working with someone you're
just using this to track your own self
so you're not getting lost in the weeds
right but your language might be the
discourse that you're already situated
in you know you're gonna have
to use you don't keep saying god that's
care yeah but it's it's it's a
methodology for I mean you can use it
your get it on yourself you like it but
if you're in a normal discourse it's a
way to help you track and keep on track
energetically and you know how do you
know if something's contracted well you
know yourself you can feel am i
contracted or is the other person
contracted I worked with a client once
and he said all the boss is so awful you
know he comes in and he yells at all the
employees and the employees just take it
and he built he creates all this fear in
his company but the client said it in a
way I said where's the sense of fear
arise and he realized it arose in him
like he was working in a company where
those kinds of kind of like you you
know whatever all these kind of like
playing very roughhouse play language
was happening and the contraction was
happening in him not in the employees
way so you have to be very careful yeah
so does lust so maybe we need to do the
next one and lust does let's move into
the contracted state yeah I mean it's
not a lot of work done on the last one
we got my imagination going yeah Sean
I'm trying to relate this to last week's
class I had a sense last week that the
feeling that story should kind of be
thrown away that it was kind of this
limiting thing obviously like this week
it's more like our stories can modulate
these feelings from like contracted
States to healthier states like how
would you state that
yeah so this is I'm going to talk about
in different ways answer questions so
this is a way to work underneath the
story right so if I have a story you
know but it's also where the stories
arise from and if you look at this model
you can get expanded like play rough
house playing this map and you could
have a story that's kind of generating
you just keep more and more and more and
more place fall because you like Oh play
I'm gonna master something and you'll
find that it become become pathological
because the energy is being exacerbated
by the story and you're not really
working toward mastery you're just
avoiding rage or something the
contraction is important if I'm always
playing and I never find a boundary and
that boundary feels like angry I can't
develop mastery I can't I can't
distinguish it this is when you're
trained I know examples but they're very
is cleaner example so when you train
like these territorial dogs you'll find
one as a puppy they just they're bigger
and they're very enthusiastic and
they're very playful and every every
like fight play fight there and they win
then you stand you know you have to you
know you have to show that dog where a
boundary is because without the boundary
they just become aggressive dogs they'll
just kill you know whatever this is fun
this is fun I killed the rabbit I killed
this I killed this little Donna killed
back it's just it's just there's no
boundary a friend of mine actually
thinks that the psychopathology and
advanced teachers and gurus is exactly
this that they don't ever they get
beyond the boundary they get beyond
having another human being to surf
boundaries so it does it no longer
creates mastery
it creates a kind of pathology so it can
look like narcissism or someone's out of
control so Jamie will called that
Luciferian yeah yeah even God couldn't
destroy Lucifer right there's a question
why God needed Lucifer bah-bah-bah okay
so the story can also be to a positive
you know story to not just like oh you
know control a story that makes you
contracted the question is can I live
with a body whose rhythms are adequate
to the reality there I am in and not
impute stories on them not have them
follow tracks of stories that are either
said or happier you know yeah
so now stories can be helpful in little
amounts you know
people we really don't understand this
these little playgrounds aren't but we
really don't understand how much we are
storied people so for example there's
this notion of ellipses in moviemaking
does anybody know that and ellipses is
like you'll be watching a sitcom and the
two women will be like oh I'm so nervous
I'm going out on this date tonight in
Bonn you have a conversation and then
then the next you know two seconds later
you see you're on the couch again and
one's got like an ice bag on her head
and you fill in the hole the whole
central story is this day and it's not
in the TV it's not in the sitcom you
fill it in yourself right and so this is
what happens to us all the time there's
very little going on there's very little
perceptual information going on in many
cases and you just like yeah you just
you just put all this stuff on and so
when you live in this story you up
your aspect system and you can literally
cannot see reality and when you can see
reality it's beautiful
and you miss all that all the time
so someone interestly asked about
Christopher Alexander where did that
come from because I was gonna start
today by reading a passage from the
timeless way of building so there's some
kind of like who asked the Christopher
my exams a question yeah so why don't we
just end with the thing that I was gonna
begin with I don't know what this this
happened but there's some magic in this
space okay
so this isn't a chapter called being
alive and the title of this little
section is this wild freedom this
passion comes into our lives in the
instance we let go it was it is when all
our forces can move freely
in us in nature this quality is almost
automatic because there are no images to
interfere with natural processes of
making things but in all our creations
the possibility occurs that images can
interfere with the natural necessary
orders of things and most of all this
way that images distort the things we
make is familiar in ourselves for we
ourselves are like our words the
products of our own creation and we are
only free and have that quality without
a name when we give up the images which
guide our lives yet each of us faces the
fear of letting go the fear of being
just exactly what one is of letting the
forces flow freely of letting the
configuration of one's person adjust
truly to these forces our letting go is
stifled all the time so long as we have
ideas and opinions about ourselves which
make us hug too tightly to our images of
how we live and follow up these forces
and yet until one does let go it is
impossible it is impossible to be alive
in this case the forces are these effect
strings these primary intentional
motivational States okay thank you for
being part of this experiment at the
stoah the Stoller is run by a gift
economy
your presence here is already a gift but
if you feel like you'd like to
contribute more there's a way to do that
somewhere on the website Google will be
happy to take you there thank you
everyone thank you what