[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
to the stage this is the second round of
our wheel of perspectives exploration in
the status of states I'm joined today by
Bonita Roy Tom Murray Michael Schwartz
David long and Lehmann Pascal to get us
going and for the sake of our viewers
and really because Bonnie and Lehmann
set me up to this I'd like to start with
the summary of what I took away from the
first round where each of you shared
your particular takes on the nature and
function of States and the value of
state training I won't focus here on
what individuals said but just give a
global overview of some of the major
confluences and points of divergence
that I noticed over the course of your
talks pretty uniformly there was
recognition of the value of the original
States distinction and will vary in
transpersonal an integral theory to make
some important differentiations namely
to differentiate spiritual or
transpersonal States from developmental
stages and psychological shadow in order
to make better sense of the territory
and spiritual circles that we encounter
among Arabs etc where there's often a
disparity between realization of
spiritual States and cognitive or
emotional development or mature ethical
expression there's also a shared
recognition of the importance of
formulating a generalized theory of
States distinct from or more fundamental
than the usual focus on States there's
special spiritual experiences
participants argued both for more
generalized definition of states of
consciousness as inclusive of spiritual
experiences but also of basically any
experience will domain not limited to
limited to so-called natural States or
their traditional waking crawlers and
there was also an business on developing
the more generalized definition of
States that's applicable across all
quadrants so not just limited to
consciousness there was less uniformity
and how states themselves were defined
some defined States is basically moments
of experience which can be qualitatively
distinguished and which involved
changing mix or a toggling of what is
online and what's offline what's within
awareness and outside of awareness
others approach States more as
ontological or Azonto epistemological
domains for instance describing the four
natural States waking dreaming deep
sleep and non-dual respectively as the
material qualitative syntactical and
blended dimensions of being or as the
positive economy and amines of the real
imaginary symbolic and transcendent this
relates to bigger differences I noticed
among the presentations some of you
stayed very experienced new and
emphasized phenomenology without
necessary reference to metaphysics and
others ventured more into abstraction
were more metaphysical in your
discussions across most of the
presentations I also noticed
acknowledgement of the desirability of a
more naturalistic scientifically
informed post metaphysical understanding
of states whether drawing from cognitive
neuroscience or quantum theory there was
an emphasis on not straying too far from
what can be empirically verified and
related to that there was also a
recognition of the importance of
settings from epistemological boundaries
of not sliding too easily or
uncritically from phenomenological
experience into ontological claims about
reality itself so those are some primary
takeaways that I had from listening to
all of you and I'd like to hear what you
have to say about that and what other
distinctions you'd like to make or
commonalities that you noticed one thing
I wrote down that is just a reiteration
of what you said first was just to make
sure we're talking about States or state
experience I think that a lot of
discourse
gets into conflict attention because
someone's talking about States and
someone may be talking about state
experiences I think most of us spend
more time talking about state
experiences but if we get into the
conversation just notice when we do if
we do slip into the context of states
versus state experience so for example
by metaphor analogy I can see myself
switching in first person second person
or third person perspective that's the
experience I'm having as I navigate
perspectives but I wouldn't say I'm
having I'm accessing a first-person
perspective state you know I'm not
accessing a first-person perspective
that would be to think of it as a
perspective out there so their stakes
are more alike ontological fields or
patterns or things like things and then
there's an experience I mean I can have
the experience of being a joyful state
and that's all I mean nothing
yeah I think the term state experience
is a good one for making that
distinction I usually do it the other
way and say state domain when I'm trying
to talk about an ontological style as
opposed to an experienced but state
domain and State experience works pretty
good for me to make that distinction
yeah I think that's a good point too it
would have been good to have Lex here
because I would have liked to ask him
about that because out of all of us I
think maybe he might be more prone to
disagree with us on that and I would
have liked to have heard what he says
about some of that stuff because he's
talking about things like accessing
Universal memory and stuff like that
so I don't really know where he's coming
from on that does anyone have an idea
about that I'm still chewing on the
distinctions that Bonnie made and I
clearly were we can use different words
for different things so it's more
important to talk about what the
distinctions are without getting caught
up in what we're naming them but I want
to ask Bonnie so you brought up for a
second third person perspective as a
state experience for me there's a
difference between I guess you would say
the cognitive aspect of a state and the
sort of embodied almost you could call
it a view it's almost about perceptually
what's turned on and off and so I can be
an embodied way in a first-person
perspective which means I can't take a
second person perspective like fully in
that and then I can also be a normal
waking state of an adult and take
different perspectives cognitively but I
feel like I'm still in the same space so
I'm just trying to parse parse out the
two and again for me that's we said a
stripped of cognitive out and try to get
more to that perceptual embodied place
yeah you misunderstand that I was just
using the perspectival language as a
metaphor like saying like an experience
of being in a perspective but I wouldn't
call that a state right but you're
telling it I'm still trying to get the
distinction between state and state
experience also you said takes taking
the different perspectives where
different state experiences to me there
may be different experiences but not
different yeah I'm still
I'm just referencing the traditional
tendency to say there are states you can
access they're out there right yeah and
I'm saying that's different than talking
about state experiences and to me the
analogy is just as a metaphor analogy is
to say there are perspectives out there
that you can access even if nobody has
those perspectives versus having
variants of taking a perspective I
wasn't so much trying to define what
those differences were but just to be
aware when we're talking which one we
mean so like if nobody ever dreamt would
there be a dream state oh yeah yeah we
just call it the dream state as a
placeholder to abstract from all the
times people actually experience
dreaming and yeah the traditions and
other people tend to talk about States
as if they persist or are available or
reified or something and I think that
sometimes that method or that language
game is useful but we should just be
cognizant when we slid into one
framework of language or the other
that's all I'm saying
yeah right right and this is kind of one
of the distinctions that I'm trying to
make when I am reframing the states for
more and emergentist perspective like
you're saying it's not like I think that
we're accessing like the Bardo realm or
some kind of thing that's out there some
kind of dimension that it's more like
accessing your own interior dimensions
of like archetypes and stuff like that
yeah those are like some of the
different metaphysical perspectives that
Bruce was describing around how we think
about States and that's kind of what
you're saying is that these kinds of
states are like loose metaphorical ways
of talking about what it means to be
dreaming
it's a metaphor it's like talking about
the noosphere metaphor is talking about
different experiences or areas of
understanding
the other hand I mean I'm gonna throw
the sticky wicket in there any theory of
states as experiential needs to account
for the fact that there are entrained
patterns so the dream state seems to
have a pattern in this state seems to
have a pattern and we need to be able to
account for that so I would propose
something see how this lands that kind
of to get away from the ontological
aspect of it for a moment to say that
there's a certain set of possible states
that people can have very large set of
possibilities and that set of
possibilities has different properties
one of the properties has to do with how
you consider the boundaries between self
and world and another property might be
whether you have self reflective
metacognitive access to your own state
that there are all these different
properties and some of them seem to be
more important for certain kinds of
spiritual purposes or endeavors in other
words you could take any set of
important properties and cash out these
categories that are only referenced
because you thought that property was
important so when you look at the basser
old estates and you come up with the
classic eastern states that's because
you're focusing on certain properties of
states and that kind of collapses it
into four categories so when in fact
those aren't ontological areal
categories they point to what properties
are important to you and be they point
to the fact that our experience tends to
group around a certain set of properties
about infinite sets so it's not like a
smooth distribution it's like we're
usually either awake or dreaming but
there's a place in between and so when
you put things into those categories you
miss what's in between the categories
themselves are useful tools but there's
no ontological force States when you
give an example of what you mean by in
between yeah that liminal place of
waking up when you're in between waking
and dreaming if we spent a lot more time
in that state it might show up as a
fifth state just because it's more
prominent and highlighted in life well I
would also say that for my definition
when you're dreaming you don't usually
have access to your body
like body paralysis but in meditation
you did also have body drop you have no
access to your body but you're not
dreaming so there's many many different
combinations of what dreaming is
dreaming your body is dropped and other
things so there's all kinds of
combinations right so even dream state
is kind of too broad of a category
because a lot of times we're doing like
imaginal type meditations or whatever
and we could be closing our eyes and
visualizing things but like you're
saying we're still basically awake and
we have access to our body and so you
might be dreaming and the body drop is
not happening and your perceptual
systems on so there's many many comedy
that's a good distinction yeah so it's
more of like a blanket term for a bunch
of different kinds of experiences then
like a very useful particular kind of
category or whatever yeah I mean people
can do are you're like painting on the
canvas a very dreamlike it's just like
you're interacting with something and
but it's not a dream it's yeah flow
state can be like a different state than
the waking state but it is technically
in the waking state or whatever yeah and
I think kind of what we've done here is
talked about how we can see these states
through the perspective of different
metaphysical lenses that we're still
kind of trying to figure out a good way
to talk about it and it seems like Tom
pointed us in the direction of the
importance of these states and how we
see them and how we value them in
relation to different projects given our
metaphysical assumptions yeah there is
no real ontological States out there
each categorization scheme is a tool
that we bring to bear and I think what's
important there is don't want a
vocabulary that's got 12 parts if you
got one that has four parts that's more
usable and more understandable and more
shareable so I think the important thing
is when you use a particular
classification scheme it's got four
parts
you kind of know on the side that you
are ignoring everything that falls in
between or outside of those four
categories and if everybody can agree to
that then you can move forward with the
conversation but every once in a while
you bump into something an example state
that's in between and that's when it's
good to highlight the fact that you are
using a particular vocabulary I think
that's very useful that's a really good
set of distinctions it seems to me and
that is like why do these things matter
like why does it matter that we talk
about States I think people know why we
it matters that we talked about stages
of development the world gets complex we
have to get more complex but what is it
matter that we train ourself just be
aware of States and train ourselves why
does it matter that we dream and why
does it matter that we know we dream and
why does it matter that we get into
mindfulness states where we drop certain
things and highlight other things and
why does it matter so maybe Michael and
layman can talk about this what's the
big deal why does it matter yeah I
wanted to step in since Michael hen
layman hadn't spoken yet and asked if
there was anything that they wanted to
add in relationship to the initial
sharing but then also yes I do want to
move towards our first question which is
very much in line with exactly what
Bonnie's asking for so before we move
into that just briefly is there anything
in relationship to what was just
discussed Michael or blaming that you
would like to add I think these are very
19th century issues very modern issues
and they really go to the relationship
of knowing to be and the loss of
confidence being part of inherently
meaningful universe that's a big topic
but I think States really become a crux
for human beings to explore where there
are realms that have something to do
with these expanded States or not so I
have a lot more I could say on it but
that would be my concern is that
inheriting this disenchanted universe
which has all kinds of implications for
identity how we relate to one another
where we access meaning where we seek
the status of truth and how we have
conditions of truth it's a really
important
is often under underground it's often
unconscious or sort of a pre
understanding that people carry various
ways I think States accessing the state
certain kinds of states and what degree
their interest objective into your
objective what are the causalities
involved with them what degree they go
beyond into something like a realm we
move from epistemology to something like
ontology I think that's the crux of it
and why they're really important to
really explore I like the distinctions
that were being made before and I feel
very attentive to something like a
difference between immersion and just
focusing on a facet of reality that
comes up there's a difference between
being in a state seemingly where it
comes around you like I'm in dreams
versus I'm picking out that element of
my blended experience that I might
associate with particular dreamlike
qualities for me it seems like all of
the four sets of types of fundamental
things you need to have for reality are
omnipresent all the time and sometimes
it feels like you go inside them in
various different ways and at various
different combinations and when we say
just maybe for people watching and
listening if we say it's not like there
really are these other realms that also
means the gross realms not like we're
saying there is just the gross realm and
these other ones are metaphorical this
physical one is of that same nature it's
a partial interpretation of what's going
on that is a much more complex affair
and so why is that meaningful why am i
interested in that well the higher our
answer is I just love it and I love the
people that are involved in it but the
lower order answers are something like I
feel that any kind of well-being depends
on the fidelity of how well we
personally socially and even
technologically map to reality and if
reality consists of these sets of
experiences these other forms of
experiences included in the map or the
map will consistently fail to provide
richness of experience I think Whitehead
said something like if reality is only
that which we put together based on the
waking experiences of sober Europeans
it's going to be very narrow model that
there's no reason not to sample every
kind
of state in order to form a coherent
image of what reality consists of
doesn't seem like there's a fundamental
justification for sampling only one type
of state experience in order to form a
reality model and we seem to have done
that at least publicly over the last few
hundred years even though in people's
actual lives they never stopped having
an enchanted experience personally I
feel like it's a significant driver of
beingness and overall development even
development through stages to produce
and reproduce balanced and harmonized
experiences between different subjective
subsets of your possibilities those
subsets might be quadrants they might be
States they might be different lines of
intelligence or however when we language
those things but I think that the states
are a very common very accessible
subdivision of our subjective experience
and that subjective experiences have to
be traversed and brought together and
balanced reasonably well in order for
our overall sense of being to come forth
and our overall development to move
ahead at its optimal rate and I'd like
to ask if anyone else we're looking at
this question together and nodding to
what Bonnie had said before and what
layman has just started talking about
what is personally meaningful to you
about this exploration and where would
you like to see this exploration
unfolding for our respective communities
and just in the interest of our time but
for anyone responding let's try to keep
it within about three minutes and just
get a sampling of views for how you look
at this and what's important for you
this is moving away from the sort of
Eastern model of states and just the
more general experiential field the
states that seem important to me and for
people to create discernment around are
things like curiosity and love and state
of like tension or contraction
dissociation between yourself between
you and the world between you and others
in their subjective empathic flow and
then the sort of imaginal state that I
guess that one's more like dream dream
states where judgment and certain kinds
of processing fall away so for me when I
think of like what kinds of
conversations about States are important
for my health well-being and the health
about being of the world there are
things like that how do we identify when
this is happening here that's happening
and how do we support the kinds of
states that are healthy for all of us
and I'll add as a teaser to see what
other people think is that a lot of the
states that we're talking about in the
ones that I think are important are
about letting go of certain aspects of
waking it almost seems to me that it's
about turning off certain systems so
that we can live more fully within
others more foundational parts of the
mind it's kind of an ablative model of a
lot of these states which is related to
Bonnie's developmental concept of
reducing complexity
I guess I'll jump in here next I think
states really matter because getting it
right matters understanding what's going
on in the world matters we don't
understand what's up with states then we
don't understand what's up with ontology
in the ways that I see a lot of people
getting it wrong almost in every way has
to do it an interpretation or
translation of their experience so I
think there are a lot of people who have
a lot of good intentions and they want
to do good in the world they want to be
a good person they want to live for a
higher purpose they want to be spiritual
they want to appreciate reality and
understand what's going on and that
states waking States spiritual practice
what does it mean to dream all these
kind of questions this stuff is super
important like a lot of philosophy and
these ideas they seem really
pie-in-the-sky to people like why does
it better you know like we disagree
about these things like who cares can't
we all just get along you know and
that's there's something right about
that but at the same time it really does
matter
it not only matters to us as individuals
but if we're integralists talking about
how we're going to birth a new integral
age and create new systems to where
we're going to do it better that assumes
that we think that we know well enough
to be able to create something healthy
for other people and that means getting
it right so I think it's really
important not just for our own personal
daily lives and feeling like we're
aligned with reality and that were
living the moral and ethical life but it
matters if we're thinking about try
to scale these ideas and pass them on to
other people there's a certain amount of
social responsibility as well as
personal responsibility when it comes to
these things I think so I'm really
looking forward to hearing what Bonita
thinks why she thinks it's so important
what are you gonna be quiet about it so
I think it matters because states are
powerful experiences unusual States even
ordinary kind of state experiences have
a powerful signature on a human
experience and they're part of spiritual
technologies and I just seen state
experience being used and abused first
you know spiritual technologies and for
abusive and hierarchical and all kinds
of right for people to make money this
has been going on for millennia right
it's become there's been a marketplace
for state technologies for millennia so
I think that's one that's a negative
aspect of it but I think that it's
because they're powerful and the ability
to create State experiences and people
is a very very powerful transmission and
I think we need to understand them for
the human potential that they are I
understand that you know they're part of
the human evolutionary potential of the
core self I think and treat them as that
treat them as any other human potential
and not subject to someone who's
supposedly closer to God you know so I
always teach my students like you know
if everybody was disembodied in the
dream state and then there was a few
rare people that came back and said no
like there's a real world you can taste
things and you have a body you know and
there's an object's these would be the
gurus of that environment so I think
States are very powerful but even
ordinary states are very powerful and
sacred we end up sometimes thinking like
it's just ordinary but how can we make
meaning together like how could I be on
this screen with you across like
transmission this is this is
tremendously tremendously fantastic even
an ordinary experience so that's the
caveat but I think also once we get over
that
and stop using them as some kind of a
transactional spiritual technology I
think there's something about how many
degrees of freedom that states allow you
know the more states you can access just
like the more perspectives I always say
that states are the view from which the
perspecsys arise you become less
habituated to conditioned ways of
looking at the world more reality is
allowed in that becomes reality becomes
more and more sacred more and more
mysterious more luminous there are
states that can liberate ordinary
perception so in certain ordinary states
perception is actually quite limited and
even though perception is seen as part
of the waking state like in a different
state experience you can see that
actually the capacity is much greater
than the limited capacity so I think
that there's more degrees of freedom and
much more fullness in our ordinary
capacity when we enter different states
and a much larger view of who we are and
our role in the cosmology and I think
that is also liberating so that's kind
of my answer ha thanks for asking yeah I
really like that answer and I really
like what you said about appreciating
ordinary States and not just the
heightened States because yeah life is a
blessing as it is so I think that's
great the paradox is in most cases you
need an altered state to appreciate the
ordinary state that's that's the paradox
that's a good point even though I'm a
moderator here I'm tempted to jump in
and say something a little bit in my
transpersonal psychology classes you
know I think modern Western culture
tends to be somewhat state impoverished
I like to joke to students that in our
culture we've mastered four states which
are waking dreaming drunk and high and
most people don't venture very far out
of that but if you immerse yourself in
other cultures you can see that there
are people and other cultures that
actually have great facility in
navigating a whole range of states and
effecting different kinds of things from
within those states in terms of
accessing creativity heightening their
own sensual acuity perform
heeling doing psychological and
spiritual work on others and the
shamanic cultures and some of the other
contemplatively great facility with
navigating a whole range of states and
whether we take on board some of the
metaphysical implications of some of
those states or not I think trans press
lists have done us the benefits starting
with young possibly and others going
forward showing us just the
transformative potential of state access
one to shift perspectives to dis embed
us from our conditioned perspective to
open up new horizons of possibility to
enlarge the scope of the self and its
activities to actually allow for
psycho-emotional processing that can
move through the system in a more rapid
and coherent way than just verbal
processing of the analysis on the couch
so there's just a whole range of things
there that I think you know we need to
pay attention to the gifts of states for
helping us arrive at deeper States
personal integration bringing more of
our capacities onboard and actually just
app respectable gift of dis embedding us
from presupposed world spaces to open up
horizons of possibility for us well
Bruce I really appreciated that and
echoing in these cultures that are not
so allergic to some of these other more
expansive states that are available it's
not just we're tending to frame it as
personal subjective and so on even if
you bracket the metaphysics and any
strong sense the ability for groups to
access them States have all quadrant
implications there are causalities that
occur there are abilities to have
subjectivity such subjectivity zin these
higher States energies touch one another
healings occur so I wonder even the way
we in the West frame this interact in a
course called transpersonal psychology
you have a strong bias to framing States
in terms of the individual in terms of
the personal in terms of experience and
I might learn something from traditional
cultures in that there might be
something in these expanded States that
are more interest objective inter
objective and have causal implications
which then begins to point to something
beyond ourselves that these states
involved Wow
my curiosity yeah so I'm gonna agree
that there's a causal implication state
experiences are causally have causal
implications let's say that no this is
tricky
but yeah that's affirm I would say just
for clarification here what do we mean
by causal in this context an ability to
affect our experience or collective
experience or shared experience in some
way so you mean like cause-and-effect
kind of a thing yeah that causative
mechanisms what if I can go into a deep
state with another person and be able to
effect a transformation in that person
will generate knowledge that might not
otherwise be available traditionally and
that knowledge actually ends up having
some kind of fix in ways we that begins
to suggest even if it's a probability
rather than kind of a mechanical ball
that we're dealing with something that
is beyond this notion of subjective and
something personal and the way that
these have been framed in the history of
the 19th century people what really
happened I don't think you can make a
quick leap into some strong ontological
realm claim I think it's a careful
matter of going from the kinds of
evidence that are both subjective and
objective and repeatable but then
there's something you know philosophy
calls transcendental arguments about
what does the world need to look like
for this to be occurring where do the
causal mechanisms have to lie and
consciousness studies actually do this
kind of fizzle software the work in a
very careful way and I would share a
kind of commitment along those lines of
exploring what degree we can move from
these subjective experiences States to
something about that would be my
curiosity and I think it's really
inherent in the opening of SES that's
another story
Wilbur's invocation of shelling and I
would say I'm gonna bring it down to
but it should resonate with what you
said so for example if someone is
paranoid schizophrenic that's a steak we
call that a state it has actual causal
implications because he thinks that this
paranoia is actually rising in the other
and then he takes out a gun and he
shoots them so it's causally effective
that state is causally affective it
actually apps in the world and so I
think the state experiencers or being in
certain states of awareness or these
other states change behavior at the
level that is just ordinary causation so
that's kind of the lowest bar of
thinking about causation but I think
there's other levels of how that happens
the whole area of causation is really
fascinating I'm learning about numinous
causation is everywhere no we're at the
same time and when you enter that way of
living it feels like a different state
like agency is everywhere it's on the
present in all directions and so you
start not only Oh making big actions in
the world like shooting someone because
you're paranoid but you begin to notice
how things work and then you make small
movements in concert with the way things
work so that's what I would call true
causal that things just work a certain
way and you just make small movements in
concert with the way they seem to be
working already and that's a kind of
different relationship to causality but
I'm just kind of hinting at because it's
like a big thing it's beyond the scope
of what we're talking about but I would
say that certain state experiences not
any one particular state experience but
but if you go through a lot of state
experiences they deconstruct a lot of
what you typically think is cause and
effect and they open the possibility for
relating to causality and in different
ways can you give an example of that
wouldn't that be like a translation of
the experience that's a good example of
that there are ordinary experiences when
we say if they're not right in this kind
of language this kind of causality seems
to be breaking down because if I go to
school and get good grades and
good job this is all starting to break
down the whole ability to make it then
statements is becoming unreliable so
that's one thing and then there's the
second order of causality where you say
well it's all emergent and uncertain and
there's a lot less causal links and the
third is what if there's no if and no
then how does that work how does it work
if there's no if how are we coming to
the conclusion that there is no if and
no then like for example the first thing
you know wouldn't that be a translation
of a state experience well just heavy
aryans of it doesn't necessarily make it
true right because I can have the
experience of Jesus in my heart but that
doesn't really mean that it's Gena art
implicates my whole being in the world
and that's causally just like the
paranoid schizophrenic implicates their
being in the world and that's causally
affected I think a lot of the states
that were interested in are examples of
things dropping away and so we
experience a more expansive set of
possibilities and perceptions and
intuitions and then I think what can
happen with people is then like
something fresh and new comes up from
that space and they reassign so it's one
thing to drop the planning cognitive
mind and drop certain kinds of beliefs
and drop into even a space where there's
no time or space and though if and then
and it's another to have something come
up within that space and then hold on to
it like ah now I have the answer so for
me that's a important distinction like
there's something about dropping into
these spaces including the into
subjective space and allowing fresh new
things to arise then there's a trick I
think which is a more kind of evolved or
post-postmodern skill which is not to
let
reapply or turn into six categories or
beliefs from there but to stay in the
flow of it I guess it's related that we
were saying Bonnie if you're just you're
just allowing your knowledge to sense
and respond and do this incremental
you're kind of letting the unconscious
do the thinking instead of the conscious
rational mind in a sense my concern
about this is that what often happens
with spiritual experience is that were
taught some spiritual teachings and then
we're initiated into an experience and
then we understand that experience in
the light of the spiritual teachings
that we've been taught and part of that
is that we're taught that it's like this
kind of pure experience or this pure
knowing when in fact even that is part
of the circular reasoning of this
conditioned experience so we come out of
an experience and we describe our
experience but we describe our
experience and the light of what we
think about it already so like this is
like where I think it's interesting like
the will becomes matrix like for example
Tom you were talking about in your talk
about how practicing States these kinds
of habits that you can you can work on
in practice eventually they can become
like structures of consciousness that
you can build up but I'm interested in
this because that's like saying that
states become stages but when the Wilbur
combs matrix it almost seems like Wilbur
is kind of contradicting himself because
they're he's saying that we're
translating and we're understanding
whatever state that we have from
whatever stage that we have you know
like we only have whatever tools that
we're working with at the moment to be
able to translate our experience and so
I feel like there's either some
confusion or some kind of contradictions
even within what Wilbur is saying around
some of this stuff what do you think
about this laymen I know you brought up
the Wilbur combs matrix and your talk
you were the only one who really
mentioned for me that was a really
important move from Wilbur to even
partially because like you say he does
seem to vacillate on this subject but to
move away from the traditional
hierarchical notion of the states in
which some of them are more fundamental
than others and that just doesn't seem
to be the result of my experiencing or
my thinking on the subject
I really like the Wilbur combs lattice
in the sense of putting them all on the
same playing field and then bringing in
this element of interpretation like you
say there's variations in interpretation
like the example you gave of having
Jesus in your heart that's heavily laden
with an interpretation but the idea of
not seeing a standard if-then logical
sequence for me is a little bit
different like trying to define the
logic of a particular set of states like
I might say that what I mean by the four
states is something like four different
kinds of logics of worlds where the
gross realm is the set of sequential
logics right the einstein's proposition
that there isn't really any simultaneity
that characterizes physical energy
transitions so there's an if/then
there's a sequential logic to the entire
gross realm you might say that
characterizes the gross realm so it's
not like a claim about the truth of it
it's more of an experiential description
as what you're saying yeah so some
things people are saying are gonna be
closer to the experiential architectural
description side and others ones will be
closer to something that's embedded in
their personal and cultural interpretive
reference which is either very quick or
already embedded in their perception of
the experiences they have in other
states I think that's a good distinction
it's just it's hard because I think a
lot of times people are so embedded in
their worldview they take it for granted
and they have this kind of like naive
realism like I think that whatever
experience they had is some kind of pure
experience uncolored by all of the
cultural conditioning that they've
received and I don't really think that
you can get like outside of your own
perspective to be able to translate any
experience and so that's part of the
problem of this whole situation laman I
was really struck by this your statement
these different states of different
logics I think he heard something along
those lines
remember and I couldn't agree more that
certain subtle states even when
collectively enacted have different time
spaces than say the so called gross
mouth and thank certain kinds of low
causal spaces work differently and you
might say they're a different lowboy to
the different states both
and understood not just subjectively but
all quadrant and then the interesting
thing again I'm echoing you about this
interpenetration and how they work is
what happens with these different logics
of these different states these
different space times these different
rhythms even one that Bonnie's pointing
to the suspension of course in certain
quote/unquote non dual States this
really pushes the neo-kantian character
of developmental psychology where the
sense of the world is structured through
different schema historically including
time and space I think this extends into
these states you know beyond traditional
state structures into States and for me
and actually a group that lives here in
Augusta this is one of our curiosities
this is one of the things we're actually
exploring is what is that what are the
realities and so I really appreciate
what you're saying and maybe I'm
understanding a little better maybe
where you're coming from
I appreciate yeah so I just want to
highlight now we have a working
definition of states versus state
experience because it's just like a
world view we understand the world view
is enacted by people who hold that and
we can think of world views that's that
world view and so that's that state and
I would say that a world view a world
view is born by certain assumptions and
cultures and language and this net it's
very high kind of sophisticated part of
being human but a stay is bounded by
things like much more basic things like
assumptions of a causality assumption of
agency assumption of relations in
reality assumptions and perceptions not
the idea of perceptions but literally
what you see in a world view like if you
have a certain worldview and you see
black people you see threat right those
are couple but in a state these are
perceptual realms that are different
like what you actually see is different
in different states so I would say that
if you think of them as worldviews that
you can enter
or be bounded by this is a good modern
definition of a state that is decoupled
from the experience itself that people
can enter a world view in the same way
they can enter state or vice versa so
yeah that's a good analogy and so like
the difference between the Jesus and my
heart interpretation is that's going to
be specific to a particular culture and
a particular tradition whereas a
description of like a particular kind of
state is going to be universal to almost
anybody no matter who you like we would
all agree that there are black people
regardless of what different people
might think of them in the waking State
there are black people I'm taking that
slightly differently to say well here is
like the belief that you have Jesus in
your heart is part of your worldview but
then there's something we're calling a
stay to which is what you have in common
you know you have Jesus in your heart
somebody else has rooted in their heart
someone else just as love in their heart
there's something in common it's more
fundamental than the worldview set of
beliefs and interpretations that is
shared and it's more by a physical basic
perceptual and that's what we're calling
the state right right so there's a
difference between a universal
description of the character of what's
going on versus like a particular
translation or something
yeah and that's essentially pointing to
the will becomes distinction that you
can have this experience of unbounded
love or empathy and there are many ways
to interpret that state that is in
common I've been thinking about how I
feel about Tom's ablative hypothesis but
I think Bruce might want to keep us on
track here what's up Layton what's that
mean it means to remove so that the
proposition was that you know basically
in Western culture we've developed all
this cognitive or thinking we're just
were way out balanced in terms of a
certain part of the mind that's always
over functioning and if you strip that
away and if I find different techniques
for putting it aside you have access to
other kinds of experiences that we're
talking about and the more that you
strip away maybe that we could call it
the deeper States you have access to you
know
say that I think what's important about
these states is that there are ways of
Unknowing rather than ways of knowing
their modes of Unknowing and each mode
is a place where you know more or a
different kind of thing that you which
is the assumption cognitive or just
embodied perceptual assumption that you
used to have so then give an example of
that if I find a way to not only stop
thinking that we're separate but to
experience that we're not separate and I
fall in love with you in a moment it's a
blade if something is stripped away you
know at some point in childhood time and
space were constructed it's part of my
experience but if I find a way to put
that aside and visit a place before time
at space was constructed then I'm in a
timeless spaceless realm they're all
kind of a Glade of steps that open up
yeah I think the point here is that he
loves me and ablation and then building
up new knowledge right so insight
exactly right yeah you know so we have
knowledge basic shared state waking
state and then you can actually if you
had a community of practice you could
actually build new knowledge new states
based upon starting over at some kind of
lower juncture or something like that
this is step I borrow from Bonnie's
heretical work considered she called it
inside practice so it's basically the
idea if you have laid down and open up a
space of possibilities then insights
emerge from that open space and then you
can take the next step which is more of
a constructive step and you can create
new meaning and new understanding from
that space but the important first step
is the ablative step this constructive
step interpretation what you do instead
is experience
you say like I had this experience once
of driving down to my horses I don't
know what overcame me
but literally I no longer saw them
eating the grass
I saw the grass growing horses it was
literally a complete reframe of reality
and I had to like shake myself out of it
because like if you saw you know
ultimately you would see the soil
growing grasses you know what that feels
like so the soil was growing so then I
decided not to interpret that let's
experiment like what if I acted on that
way of thinking and so that's different
than interpreting it's just to say okay
I had this gift is differently looking
at things and say there's more effort
into it right so I say no I'm not going
to do that because that's in this
interpretation I'm gonna switch it as if
it's that interpretation I think that's
how you can explore these things without
getting into some kind of metaphysical
interpretation you just say well what if
I structure my decision in my behavior
based upon this way of looking at things
versus the other
then what impulse from there and those
are actually quite interesting I just
wouldn't necessarily think of it as a
removal I think it's equally plausible
to think of it as the addition of a
counter force I'd like to make a couple
comments on that and I think again
Bonnie said something that what kind of
moves us in the next direction first
just echoing on what Michael and Damon
we're talking about I think it was
Charles tart who made a distinction that
we need state-specific sciences because
different states have their own logics
and worlds and time-space configurations
and modes of causality and if we just
try to import basically gross waking
state assumptions into other states we
may be unnecessarily limiting our
salicin he didn't have a lot of really
that I could see very concrete proposals
yet but overall his intuition was that
we need to find different state specific
modes of engaging with and exploring the
experiential worlds to see what we can
learn from them and not to just collapse
them all down to a single interpretive
frame based on gross waking
consciousness if we want to use Wilber's
language and also about the question
ablation and removing or addition one
way I think about it is kind of a not
doing exercise and that could be
interpreted both as a removing but also
has in addition in terms of you do
something that is basically not what you
normally do you stop doing something
that you habitually do and you flip
experience in some way or flip your
approach to experience that allows other
things to open up and Michael Washburn
gives some good examples there in terms
of just how mindfulness can work simple
receptive attention basically disengages
from the typical ego modes of direction
and ordering of experience and as you
kind of let go of the habitual impulses
of thought identified perceiver all of
the activity that it normally does is
thrown into relief that's our initial
discovery of how busy our minds are but
as we don't entertain that and as we
disengage from that we begin to see
disclosed domains of experience
subliminal threshold type experiences
and other kinds of experiences that are
normally obscured by our habitual
thought identified way of navigating the
world and so there is a kind of stop put
on certain behaviors or certain modes of
engagement and as we allow that to
subside other dimensions of experience
are opened up to us Michael
Washburn talks about how we can move
into deeper layers of the unconscious in
that way but I think making it broader
in terms of castañeda or TSK or various
other contemplative approaches just
experimenting identifying the way that
we hold experience and choosing to
deselect that and to entertain different
modes of using our senses different
patterns of breathing different ways of
holding attention that can really begin
to open up new territory and so to me as
layman is suggesting there is something
that seems to be both ablative and
additive at the same time in that
there's a creative element to that
decision so in talking about that I'd
like to just open it up since we are
talking about this mode of experimenting
for you how does state practice state
experimentation training show up in your
life what what do you engage in what's
important for you in terms of your own
practice experimentation learning in
this area I think one of the things
that's important for me is a kind of
confidence that you get from certain
forms of intense seeming state
experience that there are states that
can seem to be terrifying
in the transition into those states
because of the seeming difference that
you're entering and the shift in your
sense of self and the configuration of
elements you're using to anchor your
experience and going to and from those
states however many times you do it can
give you a tremendous sense of adaptable
confidence in general in life I think
you're less concerned there may be a
generalized background anxiety that
people experience about the possibility
of intense state transitions and being
able to successfully navigate some of
those transitions can really open up a
very relaxed Center confident
thing in yourself it's very pleasurable
so that's on the one side is what I
think a real gain is from having even
dramatic state change experiences I
would probably say although the
description is debatable that I do
something like a subtle energy flow
meditation each morning in order to get
myself going to make this unit seem
something like the one that I want to
inhabit and then my favorite ones tend
to be Co anak whether it's working with
cones or with a generalized structure
that I associate with the implicit logic
of cones where I'm led back again and
again to some kind of hyper continuous
of hyper contradictory experience
simultaneously over and over again until
there's a soft explosion where
everything is solved and I can't tell
things apart that's definitely one of my
favorites in particular it's one of my
favorites because when you go in you
can't be sure everything is solved and
perfect but you have no way of telling
that that isn't the case at those points
for all I know everything is perfectly
complete and solved in that state you
just can't tell that it isn't those are
two of my favorites I guess what you're
talking about layman freshly like the
super EXTREME rock your world kind of
States reminds me of a lot of my early
20s psychedelic use can help you
deconstruct your sense of self but it
kind of gives you a sort of stronger
existential confidence like you're
saying because you've been in that crazy
place
you've you've kept your cool there and
you were able to keep your mind you know
I think a lot of people they take
psychedelic drugs and their idea of it
is like I'm gonna let it take me where
it wants to take me kind of a thing and
that's not ever really been the way that
I have approached it at least not like
waking state kind of psychedelic drugs
like your LSD s and your mushrooms and
things like that
I like that almost more as like a
challenge am I gonna be able to keep my
shit together and a lot of times I would
even put myself in sort of extreme
situations in those extreme states to
sort of test myself and gain my strength
and stuff I don't really do that that
much anymore I feel like almost even
slightly more intimidated by it now that
I'm a little bit older like oh man I
don't know if I'm quite feeling ready to
have my whole world shook today I'm
really ready to take a good hard look in
the mirror like that I think now a lot
more of my spiritual experiences mostly
if some kind of karma yoga or like some
kind of a pagan self creation kind of
practice and this is actually I think
something that we don't talk about
hardly at all if ever in the integral
circles it's very much about Buddhism
and this kind of being practice you
don't really hear too much about the
creative becoming but this goes back to
that a different approach to even
psychedelics to of like whether you
think that being conscious is about just
sort of being here now and letting
things flow and going with the flow
versus being conscious as in consciously
creating so I think that's kind of a way
that I do spiritual practice that I
think is maybe different from some other
people is I have the concept in my mind
about my higher self and my attributes
and characteristics of what that is and
I've been working on becoming that
higher self through practice and in my
interactions with other people I see it
all as like an opportunity for spiritual
practice like this is a chance for me to
live it and to be awesome and to be
sympathetic and compassionate to listen
and to be godly SH to this person be
that within the Buddhist tradition or
the Christian tradition or the pagan
tradition to me they all kind of start
to overlap around sir
ideas I definitely include some
practicing the power of now and
mindfulness practices and I use
progressive relaxation techniques and
stuff to go to sleep at night so I'm
incorporating stuff from a bunch of
different traditions I kind of feel like
the ultimate goal of an integral
spiritual practice is not to find some
kind of like cookie cutter technique
from each quadrant or something but to
make sure that you're touching each
quadrant and that you have practices
that work for you in your life in each
quadrant so that way you can really have
a holistic perspective and approach so
I've engaged in a lot of state training
in many traditions for 20 years continue
to do so it's always changing what
practices work one of the latest
iterations is working with serving first
son practices finding very powerful
multi-dimensional but I would actually
say that my main practice right now is
relationships it's actually about in
coronating and embodying in a much more
effective open creative kind way in my
day to day relationships relationship
has really become my primary practice I
really like that answer by the way about
relationships I think that's what's up
for me I think the most important and
the most difficult thing that I do is
just taking as many moments during the
day as I can to stop and drop in to some
sense of what all those other practices
might reveal for me the state practices
so I like layman's word soft explosion
so it's like trying to drop into that
soft explosion of awareness and
coherence that is available underneath
everything else all the time as far as I
can tell that feels like the main thing
that's most important and then I live in
a very progressive part of the world and
I'm lucky to have a lot of opportunities
and exposure to all kinds of things so I
get state experiences in state training
and improvisational dance and breath
work and sort of like group ritual stuff
and group practices like circling and
foam dialog experimentation with
entheogens
I'm also my contemplatively days is Dan
Brown's emptiness meditation from the
end of Tibetan tradition so it feels
like just a hodgepodge of all those
things that kind of knock my states
around but it's sort of that daily
practice of trying to let go and dip
into whatever those other experiences
reveal that seem the most important I've
never been I've had many many many
different experiences been kind of an
explorer of what exactly was going on
when I'm toying with right now is could
name a couple of neo animism which is
the experience of seeing agency in Omni
direction so it's all talked about
coffee moves hundreds of people every
day and how the natural world moves us
instead of us moving the natural world
and one of the implications for that to
really kind of come to terms with us as
being an equal participant in the
natural world and not D animating any
part of the natural world and when you
walk around in that kind of state
experience than reality is certainly
less anthropocentric so just practicing
that kind of neo animism is one thing
that I do also I've been working a lot
with perception and the limitations of
perception and trying to perceive
without interpretive framework so it's
easy in nature like to not proceed
without interpretive frameworks and then
animals come to you and all this kind of
stuff happens but also trying to do that
when I'm with people and in workshops
and I'm noticing how transformative and
in fact you can have when you are
dialoguing without a lot of interpretive
frameworks and just kind of dealing with
the perceptions and in a kind of non
judgmental way so those are two kinds of
different states of awareness different
views I would call them that I'm
practicing with well I might throw a
couple more in here because it
first me listening to all of you that
most of what I do isn't characterized by
the types of states I gave examples of
earlier most of what I consider to be my
practice is a kind of blending practice
you know in the talk I gave I was trying
to make a distinction between what I
would call spirituality and mysticism
where mysticism focuses on States and
spirituality might try to balance them
out that kind of balancing whether it's
between myself and another person or a
lot of the time between what seems like
my conscious and unconscious mind make
up a big part of my regular practice now
whether it's little kind of
proprioceptive nuances in tracking the
sensations of how another part of me is
responding to information and trying to
let it be a full participant or whether
it's sort of neo shamanic practices in
which there's a mild transient location
or I do a lot of hypnotherapy with
people and very similar kinds of
processes and all these things where
there's an attempt to not remove the
ordinary conscious personality but to
have it operating roughly in parity with
some other more decentralized seeming
subject of intelligence system and
accompanying that is generally diffused
sense of intensified beingness which I
prize above any particular state then in
addition to that there is something I
like quite a bit which is trying to
bring intellect emotion and sensation
online in approximately equal amounts at
the same time and that can be in
perceiving things try to perceive my
thoughts feelings and sensory perceptual
experience of them in equal balance or
it can be just in checking those systems
in myself and that seems to create an
intensified vividness that doesn't
necessarily fall into the one of the
four states that's really it might lean
a little bit toward the subtle because I
feel like that's one of the things that
catalyzes the experience of a variety of
subtle energy flow experiences which I
also do quite a bit of whatever their
real significance of that it's hard to
say but it certainly seems that holding
roughly equivalent balancing of mental
emotional and sensory whole field
experience in the same moment creates
the kind of conductivity that permits me
have seemingly subtle energy experiences
I'm noticing that as we're having this
conversation the globe in the world is
having its own state transition and so
you can sort of see things getting
darker in the background I happen to be
sitting outside it's more of a contrast
here but see with everybody how that the
lighting has been shifting their earth
turns around us and changes its state
what strikes me is interesting when I
hear us all describe the kinds of states
that we like in the kind of practices
that we do is that even if we're talking
about trying to take a non conceptual or
pre conceptual perspective like a lot of
what we're trying to do is rooted in
these stories that we tell ourselves
about how to think about what we're
doing it's really interesting the kind
of storytelling element that's around it
like I think that's what I think about
even in the magic kind of tradition the
pagan tradition is that a lot of it is
like believing in things and willing
them to be by telling stories and sign
of casting spells and maybe that's kind
of what laymen you're talking about with
these kind of koenz and stuff like that
is like how to put yourself in a thought
experiment that produces a particular
kind of set of results well it does seem
like if I think about a Cohen for
example you take it apart you put it
back together you go in at different
angles and at different tempos but one
of the things you do is it is as if
you're tracing a path over again and
again and again moving through a kind of
a structure which a story also is and
there's a kind of computational or
algorithmic element to that think about
the fractal where you you're gonna run a
particular pattern configuration and you
don't necessarily get a result but if
you run that pattern configuration the
same style of patterning configuration
enough times all of a sudden you've got
your beautiful strange attractor for the
fractal computation so there's these
things that might pop up through a story
or through a structure that we use if we
go through it enough times the right way
then you get the bonus payoff yeah I
make music and stuff too so like one of
the mantras that I've included into some
of my music and that I've kind of sung
to myself is this all is impermanent all
is without itself and so it's like you
can say that in one way and it's like
all is impermanent
all is without itself and it's like
freeing and it's beautiful it's like an
anthem and then you could say it again
in another way to yourself and it's like
all is impermanent all is without itself
you know you you feel that impermanence
and like the kind of pain and loss that
goes with it so it's like that kind of
beautiful paradox of multiple entendre
z' and multiple ways of feeling about
like a particular idea from different
perspectives even within yourself kind
of opens up this funhouse mirror of the
self to the self how it all feels about
itself I resonated with a lot of what
all of you said and I also have not
remained anchored in a single tradition
for a long time but I have practiced
fairly extensively within the bamako
tradition especially in mother Tantra
and so Chen traditions of the lineage
I've done a lot of practice in
time-space knowledge or TSK I
experimented with diamond approach
actually I did diamond approach work for
about five years with a teacher and that
was a really good and generative period
for me mostly it's similar to what some
of you have described and that it
doesn't often show up these days in a
formal sitting period but more has to do
with how I hold and relate to the whole
constellation of my experience and work
with that in in different contexts
throughout the day so I like to live in
inquiry in pursuing questions sometimes
they're verbal questions but sometimes
they're just holding a mode of
experience and awareness to see what
else I can see there to see what might
be implicit within it or that might open
up and shift the steady practice I've
had for a long time it's just watching
the movement of thoughts or the movement
of consciousness and awareness and
tracking that and going deeper with that
that's opened up for me some of my most
powerful moments of decentralized
expanded ecstatic awareness where the
whole body and world scape seems
transformed and being a father now
watching my son approach the end of his
school years and family practice and
relational practice is really important
for me and really working with my
students I don't often really think of
them as students but as people I'm
engaging within the university and
there's a really a lot of really
precious opportunity for heart
engagement with people who are all
deeply questioning and passionate about
life and working towards their own
betterment and transformation it's
really wonderful to just engage with
people there so I think that's it
recently you know in the last few years
with some of my writings in integral
grand metrology somewhat along the lines
of my TSK practice sometimes I just look
at the different grammatical
philosophies as modes of ontological
experience and I experiment with
combining them and shifting them and
modulating them in different ways just
to see what happens to my experience
afield that's related I had a spiritual
practice for a number of years many
years ago of actually trying to immerse
myself in very alien languages just to
see what shifted in my experience of the
world as I learned to make sense of
things from some pretty different
presuppositional sets so I'm not doing
that now but that same general
exploratory sensibility is still there
it still shows up in other contexts so
yeah we're probably approaching an end
here and the last question I wanted to
ask all of you is if you could corral
our various shared insights and concerns
and perspectives into a single luminous
sphere at least momentarily appearing
one what would you do what's your take
away what if we kind of shared together
what what's the whole picture that
you're merging with at the end here and
does it suggest any avenues forward any
horizons that who may yet to explore
yeah I'll start by seeing what I say I
felt really excited and hopeful about
the ways that we intertwined and agreed
and also the ways that we diverged and
in different creative ways I just felt
so good about the way we kind of fleshed
out his face and feel like we were
developing some foundational grounding
so ya know feels good and I also have a
question in mind which is what would it
be like for us to work with different
kinds of injunctions to set the stage
for a certain kind of state experience
whether it's a Cohen or bomb dialogue
set of injunctions or something like
that and play with several of those and
see what emerges from grounding in
different states so what emerges from
the same
that's just a fun imaginary that's
floating through my mind right now I
don't have a general summary feel like
one could come but I'm not really at
that place yet I like all of you I feel
like I could spend several hours going
down this path with each of you and then
they could come back on the other side
maybe more than a statement or picture I
have the experience I've been going
through for the last little while very
tingly on my face and my palms and
there's a very pleasant pressure up my
spine particularly just behind the bone
of my nose is where it's the most
intense so that indicates to me there's
something I like going on here you see
that I know is your nose I could feel
that so that's like some things that
open up okay this is all very I think
most of this kind of thing was hidden
behind secret chamber for millennia I
think this is just the beginning notion
of States is going to be cracked wide
open probably still around yeah so I
think it's really exciting I really like
Tom's idea of us all coming up with some
injunctions as thought experiments and
may I suggest that as a potential part 3
for this series where we all think of a
talk where we like come up with three or
four different injunctions as
suggestions or something like that maybe
it could be a shorter video but I like
that idea because we've all come up with
some good ideas of injunctions when
we're talking about these practices and
I mean like I think even being a
philosopher is like a particular kind of
spiritual practice to like not make it
personal not take it personal kind of
die to your ego and just go after the
truth I'd be down to make
part three about injunctions if you guys
would be down in summation I really
enjoy the talk I guess I kind of wish we
would have been able to take a little
bit more time today again a little bit
deeper to each other's perspectives as
well I mean I got a list of questions
here I wanted to ask people and didn't
really get to it but it was a really
enjoyable talk with y'all
for example layman Michael and I all
seem to agree that the different
practices and different states were
separate and you could be good at one
but not the other I would have liked to
know if other people thought that was
true as well I don't know but yeah I
really enjoyed the talk I feel like it's
bringing some benefit to the integral
community some much-needed discussion
around this and hopefully if it will
just get people starting to realize that
there is still a diversity of
perspectives around this stuff and that
it's not just as simple as it might be
presented that Wilbur is kind of the
first voice in this conversation it's up
to us to take it up and to to take it
further and to refine it into the future
and to argue about this stuff that's why
I'm talking about philosophy as a
spiritual practice you know it's a
beautiful thing I don't know what
happened in some summary way there's so
many directions but it feels like
something began to open up and for
myself there's a sense of real
connection and Trust for me there's a
real sense of trust amongst everybody
here with everybody and so yes something
feels emergent and I enjoyed great well
thanks everybody and I also feel
something growing here and hopefully we
can continue to cultivate that in some
way so let's be in communication about
that but for now thank you all for
sharing
[Music]
thank you Bruce thank you everybody
thanks Bruce thanks everybody
[Music]
[Applause]