hello you're queued up - end of the
portal but I thought I'd say a few words
before this episode in general when we
present science in front of the public
we do it in one of two ways either we
talk in an incredibly hand-wavy way
about very speculative ideas like string
theory or we have a sort of a corpse of
previous scientific thought that has
been specifically arranged for public
viewing it's not really science the way
we do science it's kind of a denatured
version to make sure that we don't lose
anybody because the public is famously
supposed to be squeamish about anything
involving equations abstractions or
jargon in this episode we try to well do
something different I'm actually having
a conversation with Garrett here he's
updating me on where his thinking has
gone with respect to unifying physics
now it's very unusual for anyone to try
to unify physics and I have a tremendous
amount of respect for Garrett even
though I don't think his theories are
going to work I make no secret of this
I'm not saying anything behind his back
but he is in some sense Theodore
Roosevelt's man in the arena he actually
is trying to take on the general problem
of the cosmos and even though I don't
think he's succeeding he has my profound
admiration for simply suiting up and
trying most people in fact almost
everyone I know does not attempt to do
what he is doing and for that he has my
admiration and respect
now with that admiration respect comes a
desire not to be mean but to actually
push him on his theory because I don't
want to see him wasting his time and I
feel that when you're outside of the
university system there's almost no one
who takes your research seriously so
while there is an aspect of
tongue-in-cheek with respect to us being
each other's arch-nemesis there's
actually something quite serious about
it I don't necessarily like the path
that he's going down and I don't know
that I really believe that he's going to
get anywhere productive but I do think
that he's an inspiration to us all
simply for trying in an era where
everyone else seems to have given up I
hope you enjoy this episode and I hope
that you understand that it is an
experiment I'm trusting you guys to
listen in on something which is much
closer to actual science than what
you're usually presented with I hope you
like it
stay tuned
[Music]
you found the portal on your host Eric
Weinstein and I'm here today with my
arch-nemesis physicist Garrett Lisi
Garrett
welcome to the portal thanks for having
me on Eric you're a brave man well I
would say you're a brave man coming into
the lion's den so thank you for coming
by for those who don't know who you are
or what this issue of being arch-nemesis
is about what what could you do to
inform our listeners and viewers about
who you are and what our relationship
might be all right well we have a many
disturbing similarities in that we did
fairly well in school we got our PhDs
but then we left academia and but
maintained an interest in fundamental
physics and kept pursuing this on our
own however there are some distinctions
and that you went into the finance world
and I went into being a surf bum yes
that's not that similar also you are you
have a PhD in physics proper whereas I
have one in mathematics so I would say
advantage Lisi but then I have one from
a more typically powerhouse school you
have one from one that's a little bit
off of that main corridor that maybe got
up caught up in string theory and the
the fads that propel the field but I
think what's been very interesting to me
is that in all of theoretical physics
which everyone is quite interested in
you still find people publishing books
on quantum theory and all of the
spookiness weirdness and beauty that
constitutes theoretical physics it feels
to me that almost no one is pursuing
actual theories of everything when we
talk about theories of everything all
the time but that the courage to
actually put forward anything that even
remotely resembles a theory of
everything almost nobody is willing to
do that would you say that that's a fair
statement yeah it's a very fair
statement
and the the main reason for that is
because it's such a hard problem that
you pretty much have to be a
megalomaniac just to tackle it or to
think you have a chance of succeeding at
it well I think that's a weird statement
like if you're doing if you're going to
throw away your life on issues of
theoretical physics what is it that you
would imagine people would think that
they were doing like if you're not going
for the brass ring why into that field
well I think that a lot of people in
physics are doing the usual thing where
they encounter a problem and try to
solve it and try to proceed
incrementally and that's how actually I
got wrapped up in this is I identified a
problem with electrons in their
description in in fundamental physics it
was something about it that really I
didn't like it just didn't just didn't
feel right to me
and I got wrapped up in solving that you
know one aspect of this big picture I
didn't go off trying to sink oh I'm
really gonna tackle this problem of
coming up with a theory of everything
because you you you have to be somewhat
of a lunatic to take that on it's like
you know I trying to prove some theorem
and mathematics it has been stagnant for
hundreds of years it's just you know
you're probably not going to succeed and
you'd probably just be frustrated with
the attempt you have to have huge ego to
even think about it right and also
there's a lot of discouragement our
students are actively discouraged from
tackling such problems because the
professors who came before them and know
a little bit more about the field know
just how hard it is to make progress
even on small problems and that making
progress on a huge one is just
insurmountable so they tried to actively
discourage their students from from
going into fundamental problems in
physics because they they haven't had
success themselves so they're they're
trying to be protective of their
students that way so maybe just to set
this up and I should say to regular
listeners and viewers of the portal this
is intended to be something of a
transitional episode so that the entire
podcast is an experiment and you know
other other people have shows and
there's a concept of professionalism I
don't think that's what we're striving
for here at the portal this is really
untested we're going to experiment with
our advertising models we're going to
experiment with what the traffic will
bear when it comes to intellectual
discussions without spoon-feeding
everything to the audience realizing
that some people may get left behind
in fact the host may get left behind we
don't know but no it's quite possible
and what we've done is we've done a
series of interviews to begin the
podcast to just establish that we can
have conversations that people want to
tune into and get great guests in that
chair where people may not have even
heard of the person before but hopefully
walk away feeling enriched however
that's not really the point of the
podcast the point of the podcast is to
explore new territory intellectually and
it may be an academic level outside of
traditional channels and it has to do in
part with my belief that we don't really
understand how much idea suppression has
been going on for a very long period of
time within the standard institutions in
fact I've I've created this thing I've
called the disc the distributed ideas
suppression complex and its purpose is
to make sure that ideas do not suddenly
catch fire and up end and disrupt
previous structures so for example I
would claim that string theory which is
absolutely dominated theoretical physics
since what 1984 yeah since about then
it's about 35 years it artificially
consolidated the field around a complex
of ideas that did not have a huge signal
coming from experiment you know to just
to try steel home base I mean to
understand that you have to understand
the as I'm sure you do the the culture
of particle physics at the time when
string theory started to grow which is
you know up until you know up to the 70s
there had been steady experimental
results coming in from particle
accelerators where it was like a new
particle every week that theorists
rafting to really cooperate on as a
community to jump in on and try to
figure it out and exchange ideas very it
was more than 50s and 6th it was but it
continued all the way through the seven
and and from that culture of you know
community working together on
information that's coming in a steady
stream right you got this culture of
like yeah no don't go do that other
thing it's a waste of time you really
want to be working on what's hot right
because there's new information coming
in all the time and this is where the
culture of string theory started I was
also more involved in the in the culture
of John relativity and gravity okay
which is a very different culture it's
much more slow-paced you don't have new
results coming in all the time
everything's very is much more do I set
this up a little bit for our audience
and you charity if I do a poor job in
essence the - great idea complexes in
fundamental physics not condensed matter
physics or astrophysics but like
whatever ground reality physics is is
the general relativistic complex around
the ideas of Einstein and then there's
the sort of quantum field theory a
complex or the quantum complex around
the ideas of Bohr sort of fair enough
and plunk ona I don't mean to slight
Dirac and others but just to keep it
simple the children of Einstein and the
children of Bohr right and that the the
boring people went into particle physics
the boring people
well you said they're the children of
Bohr's ha ha ha ha okay so so they're so
they're in this culture that's a very
rapid fire you know moving moving things
along as part of a community whereas
genre relativity the people from the
Einstein community were more exploring
different possibilities at their own
pace and there is more of an exploratory
culture and that's the culture that
turned into loop quantum gravity so that
so first of all I'm just gonna I'm gonna
begin arguing with you there to me yeah
the issue was is that Einstein put much
more of the general relativistic picture
in place so there was less to do for the
descendants of Einstein and because the
quantum was considerably less tied up
there was much more work and so through
a system of selective pressures the more
successful community in some sense left
fewer descendants and they were less
capable
because there was less for them to do
and then you had the quantum communities
start to attract the real brains because
there was lots of work for a period of
time to go back and forth between theory
and experiment that's right okay and and
but what happened was that when they
when you think about it as a whole that
gravity has to be quantized so there are
two ways of getting there you can either
start from Bohr's children and and
quantum field theory and try to get from
there to a quantum theory that
encompasses gravity or you can start
from the gravitational side in geometry
and try to somehow get quantum mechanics
to play nice with this essentially
classical geometric theory and there
were two very different approaches and
two very different cultures I still have
some disagreements but I don't think I
necessarily want to to derail us so all
right so so anyway my the the point I
started with was that the the string
theory came out of the particle physics
community and when we say string theory
we mean the cultural explosion that
happened in 1984 rather than the
original string revolution of let's say
vinet Siana which was much earlier okay
so that in in the mid-1980s there was a
discovery called the anomaly
cancellation where two very improbable
things canceled each other and the
theory was suddenly there was a theory
that was given a green light that was
highly restrictive as to what could what
could go in that spot and that result
the anomaly cancellation gave birth to a
cultural phenomenon which was the sort
of takeover of theoretical physics by
string theory right
I mean it looks so promising at the time
in the 80s I mean they thought that yes
it naturally encompasses gravity and all
we need to do is find the right you know
high dimensional manifold to attach to
for our strings to vibrate in and will
immediately recover all the properties
of the particles of the standard model
we just have to find the right one
we'll probably get this done by
lunchtime wrapped up I don't believe
that story
well they didn't happen that was known I
think that's a even what actually
happened in IRAs in college in it during
this period and even though that's the
story that I would agree is told inside
of the community yeah I'm not sure that
I fully believe it if I go back to my
own memories something very different
happened well it took a while to get
everybody on the bandwagon I think
something's still different happened I
think that Ed Witten showed up and that
there was one human being he's his own
anomaly he wasn't he was absolutely an
anomaly he came to Penn in I don't know
whether it was 83 or 84 I left in 85 and
he started talking about what the world
was in a way that none of the physicists
could actually follow because he was
using ideas from from differential
geometry and from higher mathematics in
ways that most of the community couldn't
track he was saying things like the
reason we have three copies of the kind
of matter that makes up our world comes
from the characteristic numbers of a six
dimensional complex manifold found at
every point in space and time and these
things were so mind-blowing I mean if
our listeners can't exactly follow it
they were in the same shoes as many
people in the community there was a
voice that was clearly coming from
another planet
all right undoubtedly the most brilliant
person I've ever met in my life
the one person who continues to make me
tremble when I hear his name or his
voice and this person signed on big-time
to string theory in a way that was very
coercive and seductive so they even
though that the community understood why
he was signing on it was in part
Witten's endorsement that really started
to move the needle in my opinion yeah
and it's it's it's stunning just to what
degree that failed okay so say more well
the the strength reunification program
the idea that this description of all
fundamental particles and gravity and in
our entire universe would come from
a model based on strings vibrating in
other higher dimensions I mean that this
unification program has failed the the
vast majority of the high energy physics
community has been working on it for
over 30 years and they've uh turley
failed to deliver on that promise
despite the high hopes and promises well
and this has to do and again we can sort
of do a small synopsis of the field the
idea was the original hopes had been
built around an idealized point particle
concept where hard little balls were
kind of the naive model of particles
then he had to smear them out and do
waves on waves from that point particle
concept called second quantization or
quantum field theory and string theory
said no the fundamental unit should
never have been a hard little ball to
begin with it should have been modelled
by something that was and as if string
obviously and it wasn't string made out
of atoms it was some sort of
mathematical version of right it's an
abstract mathematical description of a
surface inside another surface
essentially right and so that this this
thing had a peculiar appeal to the
children of Bohr that was not that
appealing to the children of Einstein
would that be a fair description of it
that it for pretty subtle reasons
specifically anomaly cancellation and
also the ability to produce what
appeared to be particle excitations
within from the string model right now
that thing that sudden shift in the
community from regular quantum field
theory from a plurality of different
approaches whether some of them had
names like Technicolor or grand
unification or supersymmetry all of this
seemed to get subsumed in this I don't
know a fad what it's hard to click it
giant rolling what kind of married to
Marcie ball where it's just collecting
everything that it touches and making it
a part of itself that's right and in
fact the claim was if we find something
that isn't strain theory we'll just find
some way of including it and call it
string theory right so this was a
bizarre you know there was it was a
sociological phenomena it was a
we would say the political economy of
science was involved where who could get
a job for their students whether or not
the newspapers we're gonna challenge
this or go along with it so you had
reporters who had no idea what was going
on publishing these glowing pieces about
the string theorists and how they were
gonna wrap it all up yeah and in essence
you know we have this concept in
evolutionary theory called interference
competition where one animal will
attempt to out-compete the other by
keeping it away from like a watering
hole so that nobody else could afford to
get nourished because the string
theorists were saying all the smart
people are in string theory it's the
only game in town wasn't the famous
phrase I certainly encountered a lack of
nourishment when I graduated in the 90s
and I wasn't interested in strings but I
was interested in high energy physics
well I think almost everybody was in
that position that that is really the
Founding crime for me in the string
revolution it was the desire to say that
everyone who is not part of us is an
idiot yeah yeah that's above and beyond
normal physicist arrogance above and
beyond normal physicist arrogance and I
want to say also why I think I'm so
focused on theoretical physics as the
most important endeavor that humans are
engaged with I think there are three
components to it and just see whether
whether it resonates with you one is
that this is the closest we get
responsibly to asking why are we here
what is it that we're made of it is the
thing that would best substitute for a
religion if you were able to understand
what it was the second thing is that it
appears to be the secret powering our
economy that very few people have really
fully understood it gave us the
worldwide web the semiconductor the
electron shells the generated chemistry
nuclear power nuclear power nuclear
weapons communications technology the
electromagnetic you know Wi-Fi what have
you if you want it invented the
theoretical physics more or less created
molecular biology
that's probably a bit of a stretch but
the other certainly aren't so yeah if
you look at the RNA tie club you know
the people and that word teller Fineman
Creek people trained in physics so in in
this telling of the tale its second
major feature of importance is that it
sort of created our modern economy and I
don't think people have understood the
extent to which all of these things for
you know the Webb semiconductors and
even molecular biology really came out
of theoretical physics because of the
third issue which is I think even though
I'm a mathematician or trained in
mathematics I could make a pretty decent
argument that this was the world's most
impressive intellectual community ever
it certainly it seems to attract some of
the greatest minds well I would say I
would go even farther I would say that
because of the interplay between the
most beautiful mathematics even
according to mathematical standards and
experimental discipline so you have this
this thing that's forcing you to go back
and forth between the purest of pure
theory and the the dirt and intuition
and messiness of experiment I don't
think anything else had that property so
that it wasn't necessarily even that it
just attracted the best people but it it
actually rewarded human intellectual
achievement at like no other subject
ever all right it's also on touching on
something that's a little bit different
socially which is the type of people who
are attracted to really you know hard
problems in fundamental physics and and
modeling and really trying to get as you
say the source code of the universe
these often aren't very skilled people
people they're not very socially
oriented people for the most part some
are some aren't yeah but for for the
real intellectual heavy hitters you're
talking about people who sort of I mean
walk among us as aliens you're talking
about they know that they're not
extremely social they're not very
focused on issues with other human
beings and physics this understanding of
our universe through mathematics is
really otherworldly pursuit right it's
not like law where laws are made up by
humans and discussed in front of humans
compat in front of humans it's I mean
that has its own intricacies and
difficulties and puzzles but theoretical
physics you're getting you're working at
something that's not related to humans
directly I mean any intelligent beings
in this universe that advance to a
certain state are gonna be involved in
studying physics and it's gonna be the
same physics right with some of the same
mathematics and the same mathematical
tools it's it's something that exists
independent of humanity so if you're if
you're not a huge fan of human beings
and but you you really like puzzles and
you're good at math physics is very
attractive because it's a it's a it's
the greatest puzzle there is in our
universe and it exists completely
independent of humanity and yet humans
would be able to work on it and make
progress which is freaking amazing it's
amazing the degree to which humans have
understood our reality and and I think
we're getting close to having a commit
three classes of greatest puzzles I mean
if I could I could tell a story that
biology is the greatest puzzle because
now it without something to care about
the universe in which it lives this is
all completely sterile to begin with and
I can also make a different case for
mathematics which is that physics is but
one example of a universe we don't know
if there are other universes that can
could be concerned so so biology I mean
it's it's I I agree it's intricate and
and it can be a pure pursuit but it's
not pure in the sense that so much of
the foundations of biology are somewhat
arbitrary like whether it you know DNA
helix is going to spiral to the left or
the right and and and what its chemical
components are precisely that might very
other planets you know other
civilizations biology be different you
can make a decent argument that systems
of selective pressures as described by
Darwin and Wallace there there might be
conserved even if you had the
if carbon-based life there will be
convergent evolution of course sure but
but the details will be slightly
different so if you're studying biology
by the time you get up to something like
cells or animals it's gonna be wildly
different in different different places
in the in the galaxy
all right whereas whereas physics is the
same everywhere okay it's it's
independent of biology and it's
independent of humanity and it's III
think and then when you go to
mathematics mathematics the pursuit of
mathematics like how things get proved
and how structures get built up through
axioms that are then proved it's a it's
a larger playing field than physics so
within that huge arena of possible
mathematical structures okay we see
appear to live in one mathematical
structure so I mean a physicist only has
to focus on the the mathematics that we
that is reality and I by the way assure
your intuition and in a certain sense
this is the best and most interesting
place to play in part because there's
this very weird feature that we've
seemingly unearthed about the physical
universe which is that it unexpectedly
has this bizarrely good taste yeah about
what to care about within it's as if you
let it loose in the mathematical jewelry
store and it selects only the finest
pieces yeah yeah and we have to wonder
if that's you know is that just our
human take on it because our human
aesthetics have evolved within this
beautiful world in the universe so is it
that I mean Douglas Adams described the
anthropic principle as a puddle of water
right and thinking it's like wow this
this this hole I'm in is just perfectly
formed to my shape all right isn't it
wonderful how it just fits me so
perfectly in it and it's so comfortable
here just like it was made for me well
it's like no the puddle got there and
filled the shape of the the
I mean the water got there and filled
that shape and as humans we ended up
here and we filled this niche and our
aesthetic taste was shaped by what's
around us including the the mathematics
that underlies the physics of this
universe and so when we look at the
universe you might say oh no maybe it's
just our tastes evolved within this
universe so this is why we find physics
aesthetically pleasing do you actually
believe what you're saying right now no
I think it's wrong I mean this is so
powered Lee I know I agree and I have to
wonder about it I have to I mean I
understand every little service you know
that's not just lip service I think
about this I mean I think I mean is it
really my proclivities have been shaped
by my environment in order to think this
because I have to question everything
all the time sure mostly cuz I don't
talk to enough other people but but also
it's because you know you yeah when
you're questioning things and you're
delving with fundamental building blocks
you want to make sure as you build
things up that you have things right and
in looking at the fundamental physics
pieces of physics you know the
fundamental mathematical physics I
really think that the mathematical
pieces are as you say are the ones that
are extraordinarily beautiful and it's
not just my aesthetic taste has been
shaped by evolution that causes me to
think that I really think objectively
these are very pretty mathematical
objects being underlying our physical
reality yeah I think we just lack the
courage to say what this appears to be
which is there is something that we do
not understand about the universe in
which it is selected for the most
mysterious most beautiful stuff with
which to write what we I mean with the
closest thing we have to source code we
don't we're not at the source code yet
we're not quite at that layer right baby
I smell it can't you well I mean yes and
no feels closed I think it's almost
provably closed but but the there's a
caveat to that which is I think we're
almost at the end of this chapter and it
does feel like it could easily be the
final chapter
and by the way we should be we should
clarify that when we sit when we talk
about a theory of everything we don't
mean a theory that once understood could
explain everything you see in your daily
universe right we may be still gonna be
a mystery of course now God you really
did that of course I did but ya know
ladies file form a single-file line
there's evidence I mean there in our in
our understanding of physics as we've
learned more particles yeah the
fundamental particles we've learned
about appear to be filling out a
complete set I mean we've you know when
you when you predict that a towel quark
should exist right know that a lepton
should exist or you figure out that you
know it completes this set that's third
generation it's complete right so we
seem to be completing our set of
fundamental partner so we have three
sets of Lego yeah right the first
generation second generation and third
generation of matter and all the pieces
in each generation are mirrored in the
other two generations just a different
mass scales so far that's what it looks
like well it's not just so far it's like
we we have we have reasons to know that
there aren't there aren't more from-from
how the Big Bang sent matter loose in
the universe we know that there aren't
more than three generations up there
certain very high energy well we've
known a lot of things Garrett that have
turned out to be wrong ah well but this
is really filling out a pretty complete
pattern I don't dispute but I just
accept except for this minor point of
dark matter still being completely
unknown for the most part yeah I mean I
guess my discomfort with this comes from
the fact that knowing the history I know
how we've been wrong and I also know how
we haven't had the courage of our
convictions and one of the things that
really you know occupies my mind is why
we're not more definite about things
that I think we have very good good
reason to believe and we're so definite
about things that sort of scare me where
we say I know that it can't be other
than this
and yet it has we've been we've been
shown up multiple times that we've got
two different directives telling us to
be both more confident and more humble
right the thing that has affected both
both you and myself most profoundly is
the existence of something called
spinners at the core of our
understanding of manner do you want to
say a little bit about what that is
Wyatt you think it's affected you and me
as well and why perhaps it hasn't had
the same emotional and intellectual
impact on the community right I mean
when you're basically when physicists
more or less completed that what's
called the standard model of particle
physics right you have you have the the
known forces in physics like the
electromagnetic force the weak force and
the strong force as well as the force of
gravity and then you have the the matter
particles which are electrons and quarks
and neutrinos and and other generations
of these that that form you know what
would have called the fermions okay and
these are called the matter particles
and then they have mass because of the
interaction with the Higgs boson right
which is sort of himbut it's not going
to make sense to people it's not alright
but anyway the the force particles
behave differently as elementary
particles under rotations than the
matter particles all right so these
matter particles they you have to
basically rotate them 720 degrees to
return them to their original state all
right where's most objects you rotate it
and you rotate it 360 degrees and get
back to where you started all right but
spinners are different right and they
they behave in a very specific way and
there's a there's a very specific way of
describing them mathematically but it's
described in an unusual way it's
described as a as a column of complex
numbers or a column matrix if you like
that's acted on by a rotation matrix
that tells you specifically how these
particles transform under rotation
honestly that wouldn't make any sense
to me and I don't think I can help all
of my audience to guess that this is the
thing so so this is the way physicists
are introduced to a description of
electrons well look I'm just try to play
with something while we're talking about
this is this way why you can't can I
hand it off to you in about 10 seconds
no you finish it out all right so I
found this description to be incredibly
unsatisfying all right because the rest
of physics is not described this way
right you don't introduce a fundamental
field that transforms a certain way
under rotations that's not how you know
why would the universe do that it's not
elegant it's not it's not geometric
right it seems sort of arbitrary why
would the universe have spinners in it
well it turns out that because if you if
you describe Kjell relativity as curving
four-dimensional space-time describe
gravity and you just tribe forces as
gauge fields right with both of those
they're very geometric descriptions
they're very elegant mathematically when
you scribe physically the fermions as
spinners it looks like a kludge
it just it doesn't fit with the other
theories but that's why I left physics
to solve this problem I wanted to know
why spinners geometrically and no one
else was interested in the problem no
one else thought it was a problem
they're like yeah they transform this
way and and maybe it comes from strings
and that's all you get
and it's like no that's totally
unsatisfying if gravity is described
geometrically and are all our other
forces described geometrically the
universe is just one thing it's right
there in the name I mean Yoona is one
verse is turning we have we have this
one turning thing we call the universe
and it's just one mathematical object
and if this if we have different
particles they have to be aspects of
this one mathematical object why would
this mathematical object have spinners
as an aspect of them
it was a huge mystery to me I wanted to
go solve it no one else even
acknowledged it was a problem and you
also tackled this this also bothered you
well there was a so this is the very
difficult part of what the portal is
supposed to be and I have the feeling
that we've probably left a lot of our
listeners behind but I've I've said that
we're going to have to take some risks
and this is going to be one of them so
the way I see it some some of our
listeners are also viewers right and we
have in studio these beautiful Klein
bottles from Acme Klein bottle and cliff
stole out of Oakland I guess these
objects that I'm holding up or you can
look up Klein bottles on the on the web
have this very odd property that they
are covered if you will by the surface
of a doughnut if the surface of the
doughnut wraps around this object twice
and we call this a double cover now the
idea that you have some very strange
object with no inside and outside called
a Klein bottle but that it's wrapped
twice by some object which has different
properties namely the surface of a
doughnut called a torus the rotations of
our three-dimensional space bizarrely
have some object that covers them twice
just as a doughnut it covers a Klein
model toys so when we talk this crazy
language about you have to rotate an
object more than 360 degrees for it to
come back to itself this is somewhat of
garbage language that we've taught
people to understand where we're not
really showing them what's behind the
curtain
we're not showing them that there are
the rotations of a rigid
three-dimensional space and then there's
this thing that covers those rotations
twice called the spin group and that
spin group is the thing that has the
property that it acts on these things
called spinners so this is a hidden
level of structure that you would not
know was there just from
three-dimensional space there's some
secret trapped in three-dimensional
space that is very well hidden and if we
weren't at a very high level of
mathematics or physics you would never
know that spinners even exist to play
with right I mean it comes out of
representation theory but that once
again that's a fairly high level of
mathematics you have to get to to even
see that these things exist and for all
of the other basic kinds of symmetries
we don't have these hidden
representations we don't have these
hidden spaces
that have these bizarre properties it's
only for these things called orthogonal
groups so it's a very special property
of real Euclidean rigid space that
spinners are there to be found and not
only does Nature find them she bases all
of matter around the hidden object that
can't easily be seen or deduced which is
a total mind job right and the math
community has in fact sort of split
between people who think hey we can
describe these things mathematically so
our work is done versus other people who
believe there's something about spinners
that just it continues to surprise us we
don't understand where they came from
they're a hidden feature of the universe
and they keep giving in this very
mysterious fashion yeah and the most of
the general relativists who came at this
problem um just would not want to touch
it because it's too far into them and
the people came into it from the
particle physics side thought it wasn't
a problem it's they Trent that's this
field transforms a certain way it seems
perfectly well described that doesn't
this doesn't make sense to me at all so
it didn't make sense to me either
argument as to why this is a real really
serious problem if I take two kinds of
thing that might one might hope to find
in the universe an electron and a photon
okay so the idea is that I've got stuff
that orbits around atomic nuclei and
I've got light and it's relatives that
carry the electromagnetic force in the
photon if I don't know how to measure
length and angle I can still talk about
the objects that are photons we call
them spin one particles but if I don't
have length and angle I don't have any
way of talking about spinners in other
words if there isn't a ruler and a
protractor which is effectively what
Einstein used to define space-time I
don't have
ability to talk about spinners and
that's a big problem because if your
problem it's a huge clue
it says the antennas have to be
intimately related to gravity and
general relativity and gravity so
spinners are over on the quantum side of
the equation right in the quantity and
the children of Bohr it's really more
their object than the children of
Einsteins the children of Bohr claim we
have to quantize gravity and make
everything quantum so it's sort of an
imperial belief that the people who
study the standard model should extend
their techniques to cover gravity so
that all can be one yet if it turns out
that they're we don't know how to
measure length and angle between
measurements because in quantum theory
you get something very different when
when things wouldn't when a field is
propagating versus when it's measured
all of the probabilistic stuff we talk
about is happening when there's a
quantum measurement if you don't know
where length and angle are while
something is propagating then you don't
even know where where the electrons can
be a disturbance if electrons are waves
they have to be waves in some kind of a
sea you know with photons that you can't
tell exactly where the wave is but you
know where the sea is in the case of
electrons if you don't know where the
the metric is you can't even say where
the sea is that the electron would be a
wave in it's a very convoluted thing but
it's a big difference yeah and it's I
mean I can almost describe it in
extremely simple terms which is most
people most physicists who think about
it think of gravitational charge as
being mass but gravitational charge is
really spin well you we're getting
pretty up we're getting pretty far
afield all right so to speak so to speak
so let's imagine that maybe our
listeners haven't understood exactly
what we're saying but that there is some
special problem about spinners and have
how they're tied to the structure of
space-time that is different where you
can describe things like photons in some
sense without knowing how length and
angle are measured whereas length and
angle are essential if you're ever going
to talk about spinners now you and I
have two very different points of view
and the reason that I consider you an
arch nemesis is that I think your theory
based on i-84 those who are viewing on
YouTube thanks for bringing your
kryptonite to the show your approach to
this is to say let's start out with some
object that is mathematically
distinguished and very peculiar
effectively like a platypus of the
mathematical world and let's try to
distill from this thing that has to
exist for reasons of logical necessity
and is accomplished
arguably that you could pick and let's
find the richness of our natural world
as distilled from this bizarre freakish
occurrence in the laws of mathematical
necessity is that a fair telling um from
a top-down perspective it is but the way
I got there is by describing spinners
and saying that spinners is part of this
one beautiful mathematical object
naturally and it's it's unique to the
exceptional League groups to these this
class the small class of objects when
you say exceptionally groups what you
mean is lot of high continuous
symmetries that only occur once that
they don't fall into some regular
pattern right okay and and spinners are
naturally a part of their geometry and
there and there and there they're
intricate beautiful objects they have
spinners naturally as part of their
geometry and that if you dissect them
you can see all the other parts
necessary to particle physics and
gravity and this was just stunning to me
and at this point I'm like alright I've
built up from the ground up from from
article physics and from gravity and
from spinners have built the structure
up in seeing how it's all interconnected
and I found that they're all part of
this small class of mathematical objects
that are that are unique in their
intricacy and beauty for finite
dimensional objects and that's why now I
appear to have adopted more of a
top-down view where it seems like oh I
started with this pretty object I said
oh look it explains everything but it's
it's nowhere near like that how I
actually got to there all right the
truth is I'm building up and the truth
is the next object is going to be higher
dimensional objects that include ae8
like this one as a subgroup so the way
I'm hearing you garrett and again you
know this is like one of the most
obscure let's get at least I'm eager
listeners but I was gonna be I'm happy
to talk about well but I'm trying to
we're trying to describe this I would
like to describe this a little bit as as
if we were taking somebody to an opera
in a foreign language so that they can
follow the plot even though they can't
follow line by line okay the way I see
what you're saying is is that there is a
usual kind of symmetry which we would
associate with bosons that is the force
particles of the universe and what makes
these very strange objects that you've
you've referred to as in referring to
exceptional ly groups is that you appear
to take something from the fermionic
universe that is this spin oriole
universe where the spinners come from
and you adjoin it in some sense to the
boson ik to get more symmetries yes yeah
that's very clear okay
there's a huge problem with the strategy
we'll wait but this but you're
forgetting the part where this structure
exists as part of these exceptional lobs
well Dora I'm not you've correctly
described how these objects occur in
nature that there is some regular kind
of typical symmetry a boson X Emma tree
then you you take some of these spinners
that are related to that symmetry and
you fuse them together to get
an even more beautiful weird symmetric
object but the problem with that
strategy is is that we know that nature
has these two very different recipes for
how she wants to treat these things
quantum mechanically right one of them
goes into the name of bosanna Kuan
quantization and the other sort of goes
under the name sometimes of you know
berezin theory or right and anti
commuting numbers number members were a
times B times a Harrell l totally
different treatment and the way you've
done it you've really taken the fermions
that is the matter part that the
spinners that we've been discussing
you've lumped them together with the
bosons and now they're fused in a way
that it's going to be almost impossible
to treat these spinners in a manner
befitting fermionic quantization ya know
it's it's it's very straightforward
though the the fermions just end up
being along directions orthogonal to
space-time I don't see that that
actually works I mean this is this is my
great about my criticisms of your theory
which we've known each other now for 11
years and this is the basis of our
antagonism is that on the one hand you
ingeniously saw and give you your credit
that he ate the largest of these objects
a 248 dimensional behemoth carried some
numerology surrounding three copies of
the spinners that are present which
looked in some sense could be confused
for maybe related to three copies of
methods about that hand-wavy yeah okay
so all the honour to you that's not an
obvious feature most people who barely
know what the exceptionally groups are
most of them don't know that it has to
do with this property called tri
allottee okay that was that was true but
there really wasn't in my opinion enough
room to pack the particles that we
current
see into this group structure with three
generations that was one issue second of
all because the of the unit of the
particular way in which bosons and
fermions matter enforce were fused
together it really pushed everything
towards the bosonic side that is the
force side of the equation so you're
gonna now have to be in some kind of
technical debt where you would have to
figure out how to get the fermions back
into a matter framework because you
would actually push them too far through
unification into a union with force that
was another basic concern and my last
concern was that because of the
properties of this object you didn't
have any room for what we call chirality
in which the universe that we've seen so
far appears to have a left-right
asymmetry to it it's as if it has a
beauty mark and these the any object
that you derive from eh is gonna be very
hard to get it to have a beauty mark
because II eight doesn't have a beauty
mark itself so these were three things
that you're going to have to pay back
right if you were going to connect this
to the world that we see and I that
might yeah irritation with you was is
that I brought this up with you in 2000
and you remind me 2008 not 2009 when we
met at the Perimeter Institute and I
tried to warn you about these things I
felt like you never took me seriously no
I did take these here so you have taken
all these problems seriously and they're
discussed in subsequent work and the way
I've been resolving them is by tackling
a larger unspoken problem which is how
to have a quantum description of this
sort of geometry all right because our
universe is a quantum universe and EA
tis a finite dimensional object and you
have to have multiple states multiple
numbers of particles be able to occupy
every state so if you have a full
quantum description of a theory you need
an infinite dimensional geometry to do
it well I always thought your
your goal was to take a finite object
and then take waves on that finite
object to create something that was
going to be infinite dimensional I
didn't see that it's a problem but
that's not good enough say more because
just-just-just
when you talk about waves on geometric
object those act as different
representations mathematically this is a
peter wild theorem but when you when you
do that that's not enough to give you
all the structure you need for quantum
field theory you really need a
fundamentally infinite dimensional
geometric object to describe quantum
field theory and and this and and by
looking at what sort of objects you need
that include exceptional lis groups but
are infinite dimensional geometries that
can correspond to quantum field theory
that's how you tackle the three problems
you discussed you you yet you have you
can have more space to handle the three
generations of particles you can have
the anti commuting fermions in them so
that they behave like from yan should
like matter particles should and it's
also you know large enough to give you
the sort of dynamics you need for
quantum field theory so that's why I've
I've I've in the intervening ten years
since we've had a deep discussion about
this I've now started looking at
generalized infinite dimensional
geometries which are general infinite
dimensional generalizations of Li curves
which at which solve these problems and
that's that's why I've been really
believe that you've solved these
problems I think I have a really good
description that goes a long way towards
easing here's the thing if I just think
about where we are with the standard
model right you've got four dimensions
of space and time right then you've got
an extra eight dimensions coming from
something called su-33 dimensions from
something called su two and one extra
dimension coming from something called
u1 that's the basic data right that
occurs and gravity people give up used
to put in six dimensions for something
called spin three one okay but the point
is I can add those all up and I'm gonna
get some number probably you know in 20
s of dimension 20 some-odd dimensions
ever that finite thing generates the
infinite dimensional world of quantum
field but quantum field theory there we
have a way of mapping between those the
base geometry and then going to quantum
field theory right then you have fox
base right and you have occupation
numbers for all the different possible
states your it my point is you're
working on a problem that has certain
foreseeable problems as part of the
challenge and unlike your detractors
from the more standard community I'm not
I'm not telling you that you're dead on
arrival just because certain problems
can be seen that would be unfair and
then by the way that's what you know
there are lots of problems that can be
seen from the string theory community
where let's say you know the the number
of dimensions it wants to play and it
doesn't seem to be the right number or
that they thought there were only a
finite number of theories it turns out
that there's a continuum of theories
that or the vast majority come out with
right and it and I get very irritated
that somehow the string theory community
is entitled to make all these mistakes
and anybody outside if they say one
wrong thing or one seemingly wrong thing
they're excommunicated it's a ridiculous
standard okay that's not what I'm trying
to do to you I'm trying to say something
very different which is you're going to
be up against the fact that if your
initial data comes from this most
beautiful and most bizarre of all
objects he ate and that doesn't contain
as I said I'm now working on its
generalizations to infinite dimensions
but there's an issue of intellectual
check-kiting like I don't mind the idea
that you recognize the debts that you're
in and then you say I think I have a way
of getting this thing to close off right
but there is a question of well now that
you've recognized am i right I mean am i
right yeah yeah right i right that the
issues that I raised with you initially
turned out to be really serious problem
of course I mean and you did that back
then yeah I did they were there in the
paper there in the original paper saying
that the the description of three
generations was very hand wavy and
unsatisfactory that's in the
on paper okay my recollection was that
when I tried to explain to you why
people were going to have the objection
about the two different quantization
schemes that that was not handled
correctly right I handled that in a
paper in 2010 or so okay so that
cosmology all right that was one of the
the issue yeah then there's gonna be an
issue that you weren't able to bring the
left-right asymmetry out of the initial
data there wasn't enough and that was a
fair description absolutely okay and
then you're saying that the I ceded to
you that you were making a connection
between the mysterious appearance of
three copies of matter and something
called try ality which was not manifest
obviously inside of EA to the few people
who actually care about this structure
it it definitely is there in a very
profound way it relates to rotations in
eight dimensional spaces yes but you
also haven't taken an interest in what
is eight if not the the wellspring for
the source code of the universe like if
it isn't the unit I think it's a piece
of it but I'm not religious Eric I mean
I'm I'm gonna explore whatever seems
most promising to explore okay and well
have you changed your your sense of the
status of ei tis a candidate for the
unified theory in the fashion that you
were originally seeing absolutely you
have changed your view yes can you talk
about that right so it was in tackling
quantum field theory and how to describe
it geometrically which as far as I know
nobody has done I mean whenever whenever
you have you start with as you say you
want an su 2 su 3 and you go through
this quantization procedure for its
field so you know field theory or if
you're dealing with strings right you
have this model of vibrating strings in
higher dimensions then you go through
this quantization procedure to get a
quantum quantum theory of strings okay
all right we have we physicists have
this toolkit for quantizing things but
that's utterly the wrong way to look at
reality if if the universe is just one
thing which it is then it's one
magical object I mean you're making a
point that is very well understood I
believe in the right standards
theoretical physics community which is
that if the world starts off as quantum
right you should talk about classical
izing pieces of it rather than
quantities in the classical pieces that
appear to exist yeah that's exactly
right so so what's a quantum geometric
object look like it's in you know with
with all these infinite dimensional Fox
space and the creation and annihilation
of of elementary particles people people
at home won't know what a fox spaces
Rock space is effectively where the
states of the system can live when you
have multiple particles in a situation
and you can change the number of
particles that you have just the way a
photon can break into an electron and a
positron pair that would be possible in
a fox space not possible in a simpler
quantum so that's right so effectively a
fox base is just a large place to play
where the number of particles in the
system can change up to infinity going
so in order to describe this as one
geometric object you're stuck with the
generalized lis group infinite
dimensional generalize Li group yes and
in order to describe spinners it's going
to be an exceptional generalize Li group
yeah I don't think I don't think you're
adding anything I think that the problem
here is is that he ate is an
exceptionally beautiful exceptionally
interesting object it did have the
properties that you were talking about
in the it unifies standard symmetries
with these spinners to form new
symmetries that's right but in that way
what it's not only inadequate it would
push them into a universe of pure force
rather than a universe divided between
force and matter you're actually the
problem is the kind of unification it
would create would be completely force
unification with with an absence of
metod you'd be dragging matter if you
will
spinners your phone
on a problem that that that was you know
they solved in a paper in 2010 but it's
very simply that fermions are orthogonal
to space-time whereas you know the force
fields at boson fields are a long
space-time in the same way the the same
way if you have to force fields that are
along space-time but in different
directions they would anti commute right
so you're doing is you're using
space-time if you will which is again
kind of a classical Einstein Ian concept
to break apart a unified system which
was the intention in unification to
begin with and then you're going to try
to treat these two things naturally
according to two totally different
prescriptions that's like you're
violating I mean in some sense any kind
of naturality that you just picked up in
the unification to begin with in a sense
yeah but the symmetry has to break some
how does it do it and in natural I mean
this doesn't feel this feels it allows
it it doesn't seem completely natural
but it does allow it well but the whole
point of the thing I thought was to take
the natural T and what we had understood
about the nature of these exceptional
objects and to say hey these things
actually unify beautifully inside of
these very unusual elegant mathematical
structures they do but it was it was too
small as you said it was too small
because it didn't correctly contain
three generations of matter and because
it can't correctly portray quantum field
theory but once you go to the larger
general Eisley groups it can well you
know if this was a start up what you're
saying is that the business is going
great but it's just run out of money and
I needed a fresh intellectual check
right no no it's it's it's round be
funding Series B I see R is a cash flow
pause not yet I mean put the paper house
yeah okay so the there's I mean I look
it's not a question that I I need to see
the paper or that you're not allowed to
take out more loans but are you getting
what I mean I know you to be
look I've I hate to say this but I have
defended you to the regular community
with some frequency because I have
viewed you as an honest broker for your
own stuff I don't think you're trying to
get away with something I think thank
you what you try it what you're trying
to do is you're trying to say I need to
take some advances which I think and I
hope I can pay back which i think is an
admirable and honourable way to do
physics are you worried about your own
theory are you worried that you're going
to infinite dimensions in the way that
you've been forced to modify on several
previous occasions and that in fact this
is not going to close I am unusually
confident that I'm on the right track
with this one really yeah only there are
too many things matching up in the right
way this doesn't sound good
Garrett I got to be honest but it's yeah
I will put a paper out yeah yeah okay
and you know people may not find it
interesting or they might find it really
interesting well I wish you the best of
luck but I have to tell you that I do
think that the problems in this program
I mean again I should just be honest
about it I thought that the choice of e8
was so natural but they're really one of
two choices that I can see is being the
way to go if you're going to avoid the
the usual paths in in research into into
fundamental physics one is that you
start with the most beautiful intricate
object you can find and then you find
the intricacies of the natural world
somehow living inside of the intricacies
which occurred naturally that would be
that way top down view and press and
it's quite nice to look at that the
bottom-up view is that somehow you start
with something that's practically
lifeless which I've analogized to a
fertilized egg and somehow it bootstraps
itself into this weird intricate and
baroque world that we
find ourselves in and it sort of AutoCAD
the universe Auto catalyzes from almost
nothing and these are the two basic
approaches that I can imagine that would
not strain the concept of a theory of
everything right well then we both
engage in both of these but once you've
used this bottom-up approach right
starting with your fertilized egg and
getting up into more and more complexity
then you start to see a complete object
after you've expanded it out sorry you
view yourself as exploring the concept
of going from the bottom up what is it
that you've done that that has that
character starting from gravity and
particle physics and how they can be
matched up together in a in a way that
brings about natural okay that's that's
not very simple at all well I know
rabbity gravity is already you know
you're talking about the curvature of a
space-time manifold that's beautiful
stuff that I love it no it's absolutely
gorgeous I don't think we're divided by
that but when it comes to you know
breaking up this object called the
curvature tensor into three different
pieces throwing one of the one of them
away called the viol curvature and then
fine-tuning the other two to be equal to
the matter and energy in the universe
there's a lot of stuff that's going into
that story that isn't and that's an
intricate story and then the other story
is even worse and right here der yeah so
you know you're smuggling in a ton of
complexity when I say fertilized egg I'm
thinking at the level of cytology but
you know at the level of the actual DNA
that's incredibly rich so you when I you
know maybe it's a bad analogy because
it's not bootstrapping itself out of
nothing right you're smuggling in a ton
of intricacy but you have to look in
both directions you have to look from
the bottom up and then once you can see
the larger picture then you have to look
again from the top down
and if going that way from the top down
doesn't match up very well with with
what you did to get there then you have
to go further and so you can get a
different bigger picture it's the only
way forward Garrett but I'm going to be
honest I feel like you know this is
something is run into a wall and there's
the sense that like how could this
beautiful structure not be not be right
it doesn't feel to me like it's
insufficient yeah yeah and there but
there there's there larger structures
that are not finite dimensional but
there's still Li groups and exceptional
Li groups they're just generalized
infinite dimensionally groups that
contain ei tis a substructure and
they're beautiful they're just as
beautiful if not more so I really don't
I think that the problem is is that you
know we have this mutual friend sabine
hassan Felder when sabine has this very
strange feature of her personality that
she needs to tell the truth it's scale
well sabina is a scientist and
scientists you know engage in the truth
at all costs
yes but serve our modus operandi well I
find it very interesting that almost no
one has followed sabaeans lead I think
it's a penis Abuna
yeah okay from her perspective Beauty
has led theoretical physics astray right
now I've I've tangled with her my claim
is is that the the string theory
community which has generally hoovered
up the most brilliant minds but turned
them into kind of almost cult-like
members which are exploring some
structure but I just don't it's it's
similar to e8 in the sense that I'm not
positive that it's the structure of our
world it has some beauty and some
consistency but I'm not positive that
that's its reason for being
and because that argument has been so
abusive and it it's it's just been it's
been abused against other people that
our work is beautiful and then when
those Outsiders look at it doesn't look
like what you're doing is that beautiful
at all she's gone against beauty as a
means of trying to figure out what's
true and what what isn't I'm concerned
that you're falling prey to the siren of
beauty where you're not coupling you're
not things that are beautiful that there
are many things that are beautiful that
don't exist to do what you think they're
there to do right well that's definitely
true I'm definitely inspired by
beautiful mathematical objects when I
start exploring an area of mathematics
and I start to see its intricacies and
it's connection to fundamental physics I
am led to think that there might be
something there based on aesthetics well
and I and I've also discussed this with
Sabrina who I think is great her points
are wonderful but I would be lost if I
didn't have this aesthetic sense as a
guide well let's take an example like
the hydrogen atom so you've got one
proton at the center of a hydrogen atom
and you have all of the electron shells
in quantum theory that are generated by
the Coulomb potential that comes off of
that nucleus right okay that story of
chemistry is just being these perfectly
spherical electron shells works pretty
well by even the other orbitals young
people's s over looking over a lot of
these things yeah yeah in terms of the
representation theory of something we'd
call spin three that gives the
symmetries of the system that story is
not it is absolutely beautiful and it
works pretty darn well but it starts to
fall apart the larger the atoms are and
the more neutrons and protons are stuck
together in the in the nucleus it gets
much more subtle yeah well
it's a perfectly beautiful story that
isn't the right story it's not the true
story it's very close to a true story
it's suggestive it's indicative but it
isn't actually the true story itself so
you have to be very careful in my mind
that you'd you don't fall into the trap
of thinking that the hydrogen atom sort
of generalizes it's perfection is simply
the story of chemistry right of course
they're much more complex elements and
then grouped into molecules and there's
all sorts of things that go into you
into that sort of chemistry well but you
don't you have the same situation in
theoretical physics where you have
certain kinds of beauty that are
incredibly pure that actually kind of
fall apart under scrutiny and you have
other kinds of beauty that seem to fall
apart but actually go the distance I'm
thinking about de Rock's discovery of
antimatter is the corresponding
solutions to the matter solution I
didn't originally think that was that
the anti electrons were that were
actually protons and they only knew of
those two particles and then Heisenberg
tried to pop his bubble and said you
know you actually have a new particle
here well no he said that the proton was
way too heavy to be the anti particle
mirror of the electron and I think Dirac
sort of recanted but Dirac should have
had the courage of his convictions and
said I predict that there will be two
new particles an antiproton and an anti
electron which was called the positron
and both of those things turned out to
be true
yeah and that's considered a victory for
the aesthetic of beauty in mathematical
physics yes but there was an
intermediate there what situation in
which the beauty led Dirac astray
because he wanted to shoehorn
his theory into the pre-existing world
that was understood that's right so it's
important to be cautious but and careful
yeah but not too cautious so if you're
if the mathematics is actually telling
you something you want to listen to it
what's the mathematics telling you it's
telling me that I think of
got the first handle on a geometric
description of quantum field theory here
I said I saw this out of love and I hope
not envy I'm super concerned that you
can see the problems from here and that
rather than just going to infinite
dimensions and saying that quantum field
theory requires a jump from finite to
infinite dimensions you can say look I I
am fighting the fact that the the
beautiful unification that I found
actually is going to be challenged at
the quantum level where that beauty
becomes my enemy I would never put it
that way
I know because what you did is you took
a theory I mean to be honest there's a
different set of objects called the
exceptional isomorphisms which aren't
the exceptional League groups that have
the exact same property that you found
where you take something from the force
universe let's say there's some object
called spin six which by an exceptional
isomorphism is equivalent to some other
object surprisingly called su 4 and you
can take the spinners of spin six and
find out that they are just the four
dimensional object from su four right
and smush them together and you get an
analog of eight yeah there's also
probably not used by the physical
universe in any way that we think of as
being important I don't think that that
feature is what you think it is right
but they're a vast world of mathematical
possibilities out here and I think we
need more people might agree with you
that we need more people fanning out and
trying things that look like they won't
work so we need a more exploratory cut
we need a more exploratory culture and
we need to be forgiving what we don't
need to do is to fool ourselves when we
start getting the sense that maybe this
stuff doesn't actually work I mean it
just like it feels to me like I can sort
of see what the next set of problems are
gonna be and it would be I would be
remiss if I didn't say them at the
beginning sure
but you know you can't really dig into
this stuff until you see the
mathematical details of it and this gets
back to an issue of the question of how
science should be organized so we've
talked about how difficult it is to do
science inside of the institutions
because there is such a pressure
economically to do whatever's
fashionable to get lots of results to
publish continuously can we talk a
little bit about what happens when we
try to do science outside of the
institutions both of us have and I think
people will be very surprised to hear it
been rather critical of how hard it is
to do science when you're not part of
the standard community right I mean I
think in some sense it is essential to
say to stay connected with the
scientific community even when you're
exploring out almost entirely on your
own you one thing that has to happen is
you have to have an extreme set of
internal checks on your own progress and
because it science is extremely
frustrating to work on most of the
pathways you follow out or end up being
dead ends and it can be really
frustrating so in doing that if you're
gonna work outside academia you also
need a extremely strong support system
and a healthy life independent of the
science you're working on so you need to
have good support from friends and
family good relationships you need to
have confidence and your ability to
support yourself and and that frees up
your time if you're really gonna work on
stuff outside of academia on your own
I've been fortunate enough to build into
and to have those things I feel really
lucky to be able to do that and I think
I've had a really good life that way
and but if you're gonna do that you need
to be really careful about it because if
you if you if you just abandon
everything else because you have this
idea in science that you want to pursue
and you abandon everything else you'll
be totally
out of balance in your life and if you
hit some frustrating item and what
you're researching
it'll be crushing because the main thing
you're working on focused on stopped
working when really what you want be
able to do is like oh I've got other
stuff going on that's keeping me happy
this thing didn't work out I just have
to wipe the board clean and start fresh
and that's not devastating to do because
the rest of your life is good you have
to do that otherwise you just won't be
healthy as a human being okay and you
have created something that you think
might be an intermediate between being
in total isolation and being hooked up
to the community that lives within it's
the standard institutional stress right
that's right I mean I've I came to this
idea when I was wandering from friend's
house to friend's house after getting my
PhD I would basically go hang out with a
friend I haven't seen in a while and if
it had extra space I spend time in their
house while I worked on theoretical
physics and enjoyed the local
environment and I thought was great to
be able to do this cuz you're not
worried about you know having a roof
over your head you have company to
interact with and you have a good
environment to play in and I wanted to
have a network of such places but I had
a hard time getting friends to give me
their houses to use for this so I ended
up getting the resources together to buy
a house in Maui and and to start
bringing friends and visiting scientists
in and I've called this the Pacific
Science Institute and currently it's
basically my house with delusions of
grandeur because what I also have is a
is a beautiful piece of property that's
15 acres that I've bought 10 years ago
because I like doing things slowly
mm-hmm so I've been growing the
community of the Pacific Science
Institute by having friends come in and
stay at my house including you and my
arts night assist I had a great time
despite the obvious antagonism and and
for you specifically I tried to kill you
in several different ways with the
millipedes instead of yeah and
shark-infested water yeah sure it's
great rough corals but but yeah
basically I've scientists visit
and take people out to have fun around
the island and really enjoy a good
environment where they're free to
explore ideas that might be a little bit
on the dangerous side to work on while
they're in the confines of academia and
among their normal colleagues it's a
it's a place where you can explore a
little bit Wilder ideas and I'm really
excited to grow this community by by
starting to design things to build on
the 15 acres I've got that's really in a
nice location so I've been growing
things slowly up here and I'm really
looking forward to some more progress
with it and grind this community it's in
its it's also been a nice balance
against working on physics directly
because it's it's guaranteed success I
mean when you have a place in Maui for
scientists to come hang out and have a
good time that's that's going to happen
and also keeps me entertained to have
good people coming through that's
fantastic so yeah yourself can you just
I'm curious from your perspective how do
you see the two of us as being divided
in our approaches to the community I
would definitely say that I I seem to be
more connected to the sensibilities of
the elite science community I know that
I can get their noses out of joint but
I'm attacked them very carefully yeah
you had a lot fights with those guys
okay yeah
whereas I I didn't so my our academic
lineages are quite different I mean I
went I went to a smaller school I went
to UC San Diego I didn't go to Harvard
but you know my advisor there in
particle physics was Roger Dashon but he
he passed away was a graduate student
and I finished up my dissertation under
under Henry Barban who also had a
background in particle physics but it
changed in nonlinear dynamics but in
some sense you were a self advised PhD
yeah so I was very much self-directed
Henry gave me the freedom to go explore
whatever the heck I wanted I had an
extraordinary extraordinary amount of
freedom as a graduate student and I hit
this problem with spinners and that's
what I wanted to tackle I want figure
out what they were geometrically and no
one else was interested in that problem
but through academia I was a straight-a
student you know I did really well I
never had any big conflicts was an easy
round yeah it was I spent a lot of time
surfing I was living on the beach in La
Jolla is beautiful is the greatest time
in my life okay you know people talk
about you know a small you know being in
a small pot big fish in a small pond and
going to a bigger pond you feel humbled
I never really had that experience I was
I was pretty pretty close to the top of
my class and really happy about it how
everything was going everything was
great I got my PhD but there was no way
I was going to get a job trying to
understand the geometry of spinors when
everybody else was doing string theory
so you had already accepted that you
were unemployable yeah I was totally
unemployable but I invested in Apple
stock in the 90s so I had a few money so
I said see you guys let me go surf in
Maui and work on the stuff on my own
whereas you had a very different
experience so you were you were in
Harvard in the math department but
studying mathematical physics and as far
as I know you were making some really
unusual breakthroughs that were very
ahead of their time but you weren't
welcomed by the the head of the PETA
they had people there and so you said
yet you had a conflict from the get-go
well I had a very I had a very serious
dispute about something in mathematics
which were called the self-dual
equations self-dual yang-mills equations
which were related to the regular
yang-mills equations which are the
equations of force in the standard model
but the self-dual yang-mills equations
were sort of a square root of those
equations and they were very difficult
to work with and to solve and I was very
confused as to why people were investing
in this particular form of these
equations when it felt to me that we
hadn't asked what constellation of
equations these new equations belong to
and I had proposed again spinners as a
means of changing the equations and was
told that if I mean the exact quote was
something like if spinners had anything
to do with the story Nigel who is Nigel
Hitchin would have told
like it was just completely yeah it was
bananas and then I got into this issue
that well you know spinners have to be
quantized as fermions that is they have
to be treated as if they were matter
inside of quantum field theory but this
was not like we weren't doing quantum
field theory we were just doing
classical geometry of a kind and so none
of the arguments I put forward the set
of equations which later got recognized
and completely changed the field which
came through ed Witten and this guy
called Nattie sy Berg both of them now
professors at the Institute and there
was just no room to question why
everybody was struggling with these
almost intractable equations and just
you know getting great results but with
so much effort and work so that was like
a very weird story whereby you know I
think that by 1994 the Harvard
Department had woken up to the fact that
it was not using the right equations and
I'd been actually proposing several sets
of different equations but that you know
when this all you know came about late
late 80s early 90s there was just no way
to to have a productive conversation
about it right so you found yourself at
odds with the the people you were
talking with and you decided to go into
finance instead or how'd that happen
no I mean I I wanted I was trying to get
back to physics and the you know I was
proposing I'd propose three sets of
equations one of which it turned out to
have been done by somebody else and
someplace that I had didn't know
anything about one of which later gets
done by cybergun Witten and then another
set of equations that I wanted to
connect to the actual standard model and
the the department was just very
concerned that this didn't really have
anything to do with actual physics
it was sort of a coincidence in their
mind that something that was vaguely
physics II was having great topological
results and so there was this you know
this fear and I was sent to a guy named
Sidney Coleman who was a great quantum
theorists and he was much more
encouraging than the Harvard math
departments any Coleman's a great guy I
mean an unbelievable human being I had
two memories of him one of which was
that he had all the time in the world
for people who had no idea what they
were doing and the other was that he
didn't suffer fools gladly and then I
realized that those are two
contradictory images I unearthed old
footage of him he gave this brilliant
lecture called quantum mechanics in your
face to try to make the quantum have you
ever seen this thing I've know it's a
work of art you'd love it
and it turns out both of these things
were really true about him that he he
had if you were full of yourself and you
were wrong he would just cut you up into
little pieces but if you said I don't
quite understand this he had all the
time in the world to be the greatest of
teachers no I mean one of the marks of a
good scientist is humility you know know
one of the marks of a good science is a
dialectic between arrogance and humility
if you don't have that's a more subtle
and accurate way of putting it yeah well
no I just I worry about us extolling the
virtues of the humble the mean right
the self effacing it's just like that's
not where the magic happens yeah yeah
but you have to have had the arrogance
to tackle hard problems right and made
some progress but then been kicked back
by something didn't work right I mean
after enough of that you develop some
humility but you still have to maintain
the arrogance to get anywhere so how do
you feel currently about about the
community like the professional
community you have to know that they
regard you with very I mean well I know
what's going on I mean there's I got a
lot of contempt from string theorists
forgetting forgetting attention for
putting forward a mathematical model of
reality that wasn't strings and it
wasn't complete
was it had is a model that was proposed
that had problems with it and I was
forthcoming with the problems in it but
I was still saying yeah this is this
seems like it's making progress towards
the description reality and has nothing
to do with strings and that said alarm
bells off all over the place it set off
alarm bells for either it's a threat or
this guy's a complete crackpot which is
more likely and and I got criticisms
from but for both don't think if I were
to steal me in their perspective and
again you know that I don't share it and
I'm willing to fight them and I as I did
when you first encountered when I called
their immune system in a gentleman known
as Jacques dis lair
right I'm willing to stand up for what
it is you're trying to do but I do think
that we have to give them their due
before we say what's wrong with their
perspective their perspective is there
are lots of constraints that one learns
are very difficult to evade when you
immerse yourself in standard quantum
field theory like they know what it is
that is demotivating them it's all the
no-go theorems and the the intricacies
and the reason they got crazy about
string theory first of all I'm convinced
that it was a way of evading the real
problems in physics it gave them
something to do it's like like wargames
it's an amazing period piece well yeah
it gives you something to do to keep
your chops up that is different from the
thing you're supposed to be doing and
what they were objecting to is to say
this guy doesn't understand all the
things that have to go right in order to
do it in a have an improvement on the
theory from our perspective how dare he
blithely saunter forth if we ignored all
the constraints on us we could have fun
proposing all sorts of things that also
won't work that was really the
responsible version of their critique
now the irresponsible version of their
critique is hey we have something that
isn't working very well
how dare he takes on
thing that isn't working very well and
get attention all right and maybe
funding or maybe destroy the sense that
there's only one game in town right and
you know I was separately lobbying you
and them for different things I wanted
you to just say the words like I
understand these are the constraints
that will have to be satisfied and I
don't have answers and I don't know how
difficult they'll be to find but I don't
want to be demotivated from the get-go
so please don't immediately tell me all
the no-go theorems because any
successful theory will probably have to
have a period where it's flying in the
face of no go with you so that's what I
wanted to hear from you right I believe
I said those things scattered over
several interviews at the time somewhat
but I think that I I think that what
they don't Intuit is that you understand
how how significant the negative results
are the no-go theorems as they're called
are pretty profound right now I mean
there's a theorem called the Coleman
medulla theorem that prohibits the
unification of gravity with the other
forces I just blew right through that
because it didn't seem to apply in what
I was doing well it I mean really it
prohibits naive unification of matter
and force and there's a way of evading
it using this thing called supersymmetry
and supersymmetry is this very weird
thing that doesn't have that much
mathematical beauty behind it so the
mathematicians know about it they study
it a little bit but they're not bananas
over yeah I'm not either the natural
world doesn't seem to use it in the
expected way but it does so much for
theoretical physics that despite the
fact that math is just kind of ho-hum on
it and that the natural world doesn't
seem to be using it it doesn't stop the
theoretical physics community from
embracing that because it evades this
dreaded no go it's not me from from
embracing it
I never embraced supersymmetry I never I
never liked it but you didn't evade the
problem with it either
I mean it got around it you think you
really got around it the common men do
oh yeah
it requires as one of its axioms that
you have to have you know certain you
talked about properties of the
scattering of particles and you have to
have a spacetime of the scattering
occurs and in the theory I put forward
the space-time comes out after the
symmetry breaking between gravity and
forces so it's only after the symmetry
breaking happens when the unification is
no longer there yeah I'm sure you have
space-time I don't then in that context
that theorem applies my guess making it
doesn't but my guess is and then I could
be wrong about this because I haven't
studied exactly what you're talking
about that what's gonna happen is that
even with how you you claim this arises
in your theory they're gonna say in
whatever approximation is going to be
applied to relatively flat space times
close to Minkowski space yeah that if
you've really evaded it in some super
meaningful way you should be able to
tell us some theorems about good old
quantum field theory and relatively flat
space-time right well I mean it evades
it by not satisfying the axioms of the
theorem you do you know what I'm trying
to get it it's not evading it in some
you should be able to tell us something
really new if you've if your underlying
theory mmm truly unifies force and
matter right it would be the case that
the approximation of it that is found in
ordinary regions that look close to flat
right where quantum the usual rules of
quantum field theory apply it should be
telling us something wildly new about
that can you tell us a new theorem about
how it would appeared to unify force and
matter in a region that looks close to
classical quantum field theory to the
standard quantum fit well I mean once
the theories advanced to the stage where
you can get to that description yeah
then that would happened but in the
initial stages all you can see for
certain is that it's not violating the
theorem I don't know enough about all
right how we talk about it after this ok
night sure but but anyway so so those
my I had these wishes for you and then I
had the wishes for the community which
is that they would stop being pricks
about the whole thing
and that they would say look we can't
keep telling everybody who's not a
string theory string theorist that their
theory is dead on arrival and keep
saying while we know that our theory
doesn't appear to be living in four
dimensions and appears to have a bunch
of stuff that we don't want and not
necessarily all the stuff that we do
want and maybe there's a huge landscape
of different theories that would yeah at
this point I don't think string theory
is living at all I think it's an X
theory I think it's pining for the
fjords
I've seen nothing but decline since I
left this train wreck well this is
prodding is it refuses to take stock of
itself and it took a lot more minds than
one I think that's happening yeah it
certainly the graduate students who are
coming up are seeing what's going on
with string theory and they're taking
stock of the field and they're going
another dress so where where do we go
next
like well is there any way I mean I
actually view it as highly demotivating
then in essence every new theory is dead
on arrival because of the number of
things I mean can we agree that physics
has gotten incredibly difficult it has
we have it's it's difficult by virtue of
being so successful I mean that this
that you can smell that we're almost at
the end of most of this chapter we've
exhausted everything that we know that
has worked previously which is like to
vary the assumptions a little bit on
every and that's been spectacularly
successful and now it doesn't work
anymore and it hasn't worked for almost
50 years right it's it's incredibly
frustrating I think that's why most
people are wise to stay the hell away
from it and I think a lot of the smarter
Minds are going into machine learning or
even biophysics or just into other field
or okay or even condensed matter how do
you feel about that I feel like I'm out
in an island in the middle of the
Pacific watching it from unfold from
afar well I work on the puzzle myself my
own different way you're having fun yeah
that's that's my prime directive is have
fun is to have fun and do you think that
inducing
other people to do this as kind of like
maybe the big programs fall apart and we
start just becoming individuals trying
crazy strategies that probably won't
work yeah I mean there there are
undergraduate textbooks and
undergraduate courses on string theory
yeah okay and people from undergraduates
they're that and and there's this
culture of arrogance saying string
theory is the pinnacle of physics right
and people are coming up to you that and
they're becoming and if you're really
working on fundamental physics and and
the the whole area of string theory has
gotten so large in the amount of
research done sure that it just takes an
enormous amount of intellectual effort
to consume it and to get it up to speed
on to what the current status is of the
field and by the time you're there
you're so invested then of course what
you want to do is go and continue a
postdoc in string theory when you
graduate and they're there hundreds of
students who are coming up this way and
when they get there they go to help like
I did this morning you look at it John
the high-energy physics theory section
where of this thing called the archive
where all the new papers are found every
day yeah and and and the this
high-energy physics archive also has a
postdoc and job posting board and just
just for giggles
I went say okay well how many
opportunities does a rising string
theorist have now and I went looked and
there are all these subfields of physics
the condensed matter is a big party
because it's so incredibly vibrant and
right and productive right now and you
go into high energy theory and okay
there are 30 positions open in North
America okay all right and some of them
are open to string theorists but I have
those thirty positions you go how many
of them actually actively want a string
theorist and are looking for a strength
there's there's one one Eric so you know
these hundreds of people groomed up
saying string theory is the pinnacle of
what you can be studying and there's
nowhere for them to go well but the
field is dying well because it was a
baby-boomer phenomenon we treated it as
if it was an intellectual phenomena but
it was actually this weird generational
phenomena that this took hold you know
this is very weird feature of 1951 where
Frank will check
ed Witten two great physicists born in
the same year will check is effectively
like the last guy to make the train for
real physics he's an amazing guy
yeah and then Witten born later that
year probably more powerful than anyone
else alive in terms of his mental
abilities hasn't had a trip to Stockholm
because he hasn't been able to make
contact with the physical world and
almost certainly in any era that wasn't
this one this guy would have been to
Stockholm
once or more yeah and it's in my mind
it's a cultural problem we're stuck in
this culture of particle physics where
we have everybody in the same community
studying the same popular direction in
full force as if there was lots of data
coming in supporting that and there's
not so what it is is they're going
full-bore full self-supporting force a
long direction that in my mind just
doesn't describe our universe and what
we need is an exploratory phase with
physicist students coming up and picking
up stuff that they think is interesting
and following that direction on their
own branching away from the main herd
and by having more explorers going
different directions you're more likely
to find something good and I guess my
hope is that you know some graduate
student will listen through this
incredibly long and detailed podcast and
go look at stuff and say well that's
kind of interesting maybe I want to
learn more about that do you have any
ideas or the Pacific Science Institute
is there any way that our listeners can
support it yeah are you a are you a
non-profit 501c3 nonprofit I'm be very
happy to take donations and put those
donations to use supporting scientists
to diverse lives okay and these aren't
just it's not just supporting physicists
the idea is that as you said science has
supported our economy to incredible
degree and I don't think scientists have
been sufficiently personally rewarded
for that so basically what I want to do
is you know give them a nice place to
hang out and Maui and enjoy the
environment and work and think on
whatever they want undirected while they
do it
it was a place to fight groupthink
effectively with a little field while
still having community support well
solving community support the problem is
I've very limited resource right now I'm
basically running this out of my house
right I have a big piece of land I have
dreams for what I want build on you
in there and it's it's incredibly
generous that people can hang out and
just actually fulfill the promise of
dreaming about our world and trying
things that they wouldn't feel
comfortable trying under the watchful
eyes of a departmental chairman is
telling them what they need it's ready
to get chair tenure or to win grants do
you have any sense of what we should be
directing people to do if they're in a
position to change the culture of the
field I always want to think like we
still have a few old great people that
everybody looks up to and they refuse to
say something really provocative like
here's the thing that I dream about we
get all of the negative results they're
incredibly demotivating allow your young
people to violate several of them
without being string theorists and then
insist that they try to pay that back
once they've been exploring a theory
that in a previous era would have been
dead on arrival because somewhere we
have to go backwards to go forwards we
have to question something that is
rock-solid in all of our minds but isn't
actually right don't I mean yeah this is
totally right and this sort of cultural
inertia that's holding things back is
it's in biology it's in computer science
it's in it's in all fields of science so
I would say just I mean it's almost the
best thing to do just to find people who
are really frickin smart and want to
work on stuff on their own and give them
money and support and limb to it unless
well this is the and I I'm on record as
saying that we have too much oversight
too much transparency and too much
accountability it's strangling us yeah
it's absolutely true that's absolute you
well Garret I really appreciate you
sitting down it's a hell of an
experiment to just even try to have
conversations about you know what might
be the path towards final theories of
everything and I'm actually really
worried that we hurt most of your
listeners well but I'll do that if we
use this at all I'll try to say
something at the beginning of the
program to try to say what it is that
people are listening to so they'll have
an idea they're not just gonna stumble
in on a podcast and hear people talking
about bosons fermions ea8 quantization
and have no idea what's going on the
fact is very few people are in
vested in this like this but this is the
fabric of reality ultimately in a
question but how we go about trying to
probe whatever's next yeah I think it's
amazing I think it's the most
significant and intricate and difficult
puzzle there is right now for anybody to
tackle and to immerse themselves in and
I also think it's potentially incredibly
rewarding but it's also where the
hardest things you can it's a yeah
probably the hardest thing has never
been harder yeah that's almost as hard
as learning to surf okay well through
the portal with Garrett Lisi here from
the island of Maui my arch-nemesis
you're welcome to come back anytime and
if you're interested in the Pacific
Science Institute
it's Garrett's attempt try to figure out
how to move science outside of the
direct institutional control you can
find him on Instagram I think is Garrett
Lisi and on Twitter as Garrett Lisi
chair at least not hard to find all
right thanks for joining us thank you
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]