howdy this is Jim rut and this is the
Jim rut show listeners have asked us to
provide pointers some of the resources
we talked about on the show we now have
links to books and articles referenced
in recent podcasts that are available on
our website
we also offer full transcripts go to Jim
ruts show com
that's Jim ruts show com today's guest
is Jessica flack resident professor at
the Santa Fe Institute hey Jim
thanks for having me on the podcast hey
great to have you on I'm sure we're
gonna have a really interesting
conversation Jessica received her PhD
from Emory University in 2004 studying
animal behavior cognitive science and
evolutionary theory spending thousands
of hours recording primate behavior at
the world-famous Yerkes National Primate
Research Center today she is the
director of at SFI of C for collective
computations group at SFI which
describes its audacious mission as we
work on how nature collectively computes
solutions to problems and how these
computations are refined and
evolutionary and learning time we
explore these ideas at all levels of
biological organization from societies
of cells to animal societies to markets
the Machine human hybrid societies see
for research projects it at the
intersection of evolutionary theory
cognitive science and collective
behavior statistical mechanics
information theory and theoretical
computer science is some serious
here I'm telling you we're gonna get
into it here Jessica's also long been
interested in some of my favorite things
the foundations of complexity science
and the nature of causality now let's
start out with our first question one of
your new research ideas which you worked
on with some other folks at SFI and
elsewhere is that the long-held view
that complex the emerges from
interactions among simple components is
wrong that's a big challenge the
convention indeed our mutual friend
Murray goemon used to remind the SFI
community regularly that the full name
of what SFI did wasn't complexity
science but rather complexity
from simplicity tell us about your new
view haha yes so I don't want to say
Murray was wrong because of course
Murray's never wrong but um but so
there's a sort of nuance that we need to
add to that understanding of how
complexity arises and I think one of the
things that's that we're coming to
understand with better and better
observation measurement tools is that
lower levels of organization are not
necessarily simpler than higher levels
of organization as an example if you
look at a eukaryotic cell you know it's
not just and this is really for people
are not cellular biologist obviously
it's not just um you know 10 or so
organelles floating around in some
cytoplasm it's actually an incredibly
complex thing with many many molecular
houses of molecular motors densely
packed organelles everything's optimally
packed it looks when you when when you
look at images of these things today
they look actually like cities do
especially if you look at a city from
the point of view of um I sped up like
in Godfrey Reggio films cornice quasi so
amazing complexity at the cellular level
and just recently was discovered for
example that cells can compute the XOR
function certain neurons can compute the
XOR function so also individual cells
individual neurons are capable of
incredibly complicated behavior behavior
that we thought required a larger system
to perform and so that's the first
observation that in fact lower levels of
organization are a lot more complex than
we've been giving them credit for now
one could say that well the higher
levels of organization contain the lower
levels and so even if they're more
complex the higher levels by definition
are more complex in a sort of Russian
doll model of complexity but that's not
really a least as far as I'm concerned a
very interesting notion of complexity
that Russian doll model and I think
what's really going on is that you've
got this incredible complexity lots of
parts doing complicated things at lower
levels and then you've got the component
trying to figure out how the world works
trying to estimate regularities and
through that process they're doing what
we call coarse graining getting a handle
on what those regularities are what the
things are in all that complexity that
they should pay attention to
and you get this kind of compression of
that microscopic complexity and the
compression or the coarse graining then
even though it's lossy and so you've by
definition when you coarse grain you
lose information the system also gains
information because it gains information
about what the right strategies are
given those regularities and as a
consequence of this you get what I call
a macroscopic expansion that is the
capacity for the system to perform new
functions because it has a better
understanding of what strategies work in
a given environment so you have
microscopic complexity you have a what
I'm calling an information bottleneck by
virtue of the coarse graining or the
compression of the regularities at the
microscopic scale and then because of
that information bottleneck you get this
macroscopic expansion of function such
where the emergence comes in so as far
as Murray's points about complexity from
simplicity they're still sort of correct
in the sense that the information
bottleneck is simplifying so you're
getting the complexity through this
coarse graining in a way but though
unfortunately I think what's happened is
the way people interpret that is they
think that it means the microscopic
scale is simple perhaps it is simple to
go lower right maybe atoms and quarks
are sort of simple but maybe not maybe
we dig into them further we'll find out
that they're just as complex hard to say
well that's an interesting point Jim and
I think before we get to atoms and
quarks we know that prokaryotes are a
lot more complex and we thought - so
it's been discovered that there they can
perform within a prokaryote complicated
metabolic functions and they have what
would be something like seed organelles
in a compartments so again we
underestimate the complexity there now
in terms of you know atoms and so forth
I think one of the one of the things we
always have to remember is that physical
systems by virtue of having had many
more many more hundreds of years to
study them good science look to us now a
lot simpler than perhaps they did when
these things were first being worked out
right so as you say it's not entirely
clear to me that physical systems are
you know as simple as we like to think I
think anne-marie's sort of Eightfold way
you know you know provide some backing
for that right yeah he added some
complexity downward basically right
from what used to be very simple object
okay here's our point proton or neutron
and there we go no not quite that simple
exactly as it turns out every time you
look further what are we fine what's the
most likely answer the further you look
not quite so simple so let's get back to
this idea of micro complexity and a
bottleneck it probably helpful for the
audience to have an actual example and
maybe something at the level of a cell
moving up I don't know what would be a
good example well let me start with the
example that I that I've that I've
worked on and where some of these ideas
originally started or I developed them
and that's in actually in primate
societies and you mentioned I did
thousands of hours of work observing
primary societies macaque and chimpanzee
societies and in the course of that work
I saw that the the monkeys were sort of
trying to figure out they were you know
this was well known and I don't leave
our monkeys have a power structure
what's typically called dominance
hierarchy and they have fighting
abilities that are kind of intrinsic
develop over time very slowly but I was
fighting in those fighting abilities are
invisible to the other monkeys the
monkeys have to sort of infer what the
fighting ability is through fights
that's how they learn about who's weaker
and stronger they can't just see it it's
not like a bird who has a badge on on
its chest and the badge tells the other
bird you know how capable that bird is
of winning a fight the monkeys have to
have to infer this through fights the
fighting underlying fighting ability and
then to use some attacks like a
pigtailed macaque which is one of the
species that I've worked with these
pigtailed macaques they they have this
history of fights with other individuals
and and over that history one individual
we learned that it's likely the loose to
the other and if the asymmetry between
them is large so that one individual
knows with a high probability it's going
to lose that individual omits what's
called a subordination signal and it
emits this signal outside of the
agonistic or fight context and it tells
the receiver of the signal that the
sender recognizes that it's likely to
lose and has agreed to yield if a
conflict in the future arises it's
agreeing that the sender is agreeing to
a state subordinate state in the
relationship
and so this subordination signal
summarizes there's a coarse-grained
representation of that fight history and
then the two individuals use it they
reference it to make decisions about how
to sort of behave in the future with
each other now fights do continue but
they continue at a much lower rate and
the idea is that it's like a background
processing computer science the fights
are continuing just so something changes
in the monkey's fighting ability or
circumstances that dominance
relationship that subordination contract
can be reversed now everyone in the
group is doing this they're all learning
about each other's fights they're
exchanging these signals and signal is
highly unidirectional meaning that only
one individual in the pair gives a
signal so it's a very reliable indicator
of this role and now there's a network
of these things or a circuit if you like
a circuit of these unidirectional
signals and in that circuit is encoded
information about the distribution of
power it's essentially a mechanism that
the monkeys have for voting on who they
collectively perceive to be the most
capable individual of winning fights
mm-hmm I like that so you start out with
a bunch of monkeys fighting which is a
complicated many-to-many relationship
complex I would say formally and that
gets cooked down through presumably some
genetically inclination to a at least
fuzzy signal from which individuals say
I am submissive to you a sort of a
dyadic connection and then all the
monkeys give out those signals lease all
the submissive monkeys anyone below the
Alpha presumably and then that set of
signals unifies across the field of all
monkeys in that particular troop to
establish the kind of complicated
network relationship of dominance
hierarchy is that did I get it pretty
close you did and I'm just gonna change
a few things and the better understand
and the first is that the fighting
ability and are in the ability to win
any particular fight is governed by both
sort of this intrinsic ability that
develops over an individual's lifetime
so it's a slowly changing thing based on
its experience and and someone genetics
some genetic things like how big it is
but that's of course also a little bit
environmental and it's based on things
like how a particular monkey feels on a
given day or whether it's alliance
partners are around and so forth so
things that are temporally variable
and so the reason why the monkeys need a
bunch of fights to figure out the
regularity is is because there are all
these fluctuations so that's why this
coarse graining the use of the signal is
an important mechanism it gives the
monkeys a reliable indicator of the sort
of overall state of the relationship and
and it's important distinction to that
it's subordination signal not just
submission because the monkeys do use
similar signals in the fight context to
indicate they're going to yield in this
particular fight but by moving the
signal outside the fight context to the
peaceful context the monkeys are
reducing the uncertainty in the receiver
that the signal stands for subordination
and not just submission in the immediate
context so it's a really important
innovation and it relates to the
evolution of language and how we can
come back to this later and how
individuals learn the meaning of signals
that are temporally and spatially
divorced from their reference very
complicated and interesting problem ok
so now the monkeys have exchanged e
signals and you've got this network of
these signals and you can ask where the
monkeys can by looking over the network
who gives signals to whom figure out how
much agreement there is based on the way
the signals are being exchanged about
who can use for successfully so this is
fundamentally a collective problem and
individuals can make errors in their
assessment that's very important right
so the power structure that's arising
out of this process can be imperfect it
may not a map directly on to the
underlying distribution of fighting
abilities it's the outcome of this sort
of collective assessment process that's
super interesting so the idea is not
just that we're recovering like a ground
truth that's hard to see the underlying
distribution of fighting abilities but
we're covering a kind of collectively
constructed ground truth or view of
who's powerful so when in this in the
groups that I've studied one of the and
this isn't true in every group or every
macaque Society some are very different
there's a the power distribution that's
encoded in this circuit of signals is
heavy tailed meaning that there are a
few individuals who sit out in the tail
are different from the rest of the group
who are perceived by everyone more or
less as disproportionately powerful so
they're like our billionaires and those
individuals are because they they're
perceived this way they pay almost no
cost
they get no aggression response to
interventions and fights and so they can
perform functions like conflict
management that could not be performed
if the distribution were more normal or
or uniform where there there are none of
these billionaires so to speak right so
these individuals out in the tail can do
things that by virtue of being perceived
so different from everybody else that
they wouldn't be able to do if the
distribution were different emergent
function that's interesting it shows
that diversity has its uses it basically
produces classes that can have different
roles than if everything were uniform
that's another question for you one of
my old favorites is there's some
arguments in cognitive science that our
reasoning is roughly Bayesian if that
were also true from macaque s-- was at
the cash whatever monkeys these were
presumably if the fight ability
differential was large the number of
conflicts necessary to emit a signal
ought to be relatively small and when
the fighting ability is closer to being
similar by Bayesian analysis it will
take more conflicts before you get a
reliable signal is that what the data
shows yeah that basically is what the
data show and and also the individuals
who are very similar in fighting ability
they often don't signal at all and they
sometimes avoid each other so you you
need to fight you would need to fight
more to sort of figure out what the
difference is as you point out but also
since with fluctuations and contextual e
variable stuff like how you're feeling
today or the weather or the presence of
your allies would make so many fights
required sometimes the strategy they
adopt is just not to interact that's
interesting that would basically point
toward my old favorite roughly Bayesian
right of course they don't sit there and
run base theorem but they say hmm this
guy is too close to me
it would take a long time to prove my
dominance right so not worth getting
beat up that many times even if I win
well Jim you raised a very interesting
point you say they wouldn't be sitting
there competing Bayes theorem but yes
consciously they're not probably
considered computing Bayes theorem but
their brain may be doing that that isn't
you know possibility that we I think it
confused about in social cases where we
think that we're consciously performing
the computations rather than just
layering
on top of competitions our brain is
performing the explanation yeah that was
my point is that you know I am a
believer more or less that we are
unconsciously running Bayes theorem in
the background for roughly for a lot of
things so that's why I ask the question
this happens to be a kind of a
horizontal interesting idea that I
follow up on whenever I happened to get
a sniff that it might be relevant yes
absolutely I agree and there's a lot 1
to discuss there absolutely but we got a
lot of things talked about so maybe
we'll come back to that so let's talk a
little bit about causality I know that's
something you're interested in it seems
like every time anybody digs deeply into
complexity if we're being honest we run
into causality or we decide to sweep it
under the rug what are your thoughts on
causality that's such a big question
yeah give us a big answer ok well I mean
I've thought about causality in a few
particular contexts which I can mention
so one of them is in the context of
what's called a downward causation which
is this idea that higher levels of
organization somehow mysteriously impact
lower levels of organization and this
has been a debate because often the
higher levels are thought to be sort of
statistical and it's not clear
materially how this works how
information can influence you know mass
materials so to speak and so you know
there's been a lot of nonsense around
this down causation discussion and one
of the things that we've sort of hit
upon in our work is that what's
happening is it comes back to the coarse
graining I mentioned that as the
components of an adaptive system or
estimating regularities that's doing
this coarse graining they're starting to
use these coarse-grained representations
rather than the environment these
coarse-grained representations of the
environment to make decisions and even
if those estimates are wrong they're
still using them to tune their behavior
and as the computational capacity of the
components of the system is when it's
similar and when the sort of
environments that the components are
observing is somewhat similar then these
estimates can start converging and you
get what I call collective coarse
graining and so through this kind of
collective coarse graining these
statistical regularities start to
converge everyone's using the kind of
same estimates to make decisions and in
that sense you're
starting to get this downward causation
so then the components are still doing
the work they're reading these global
variables that they're constructing do
their estimates of the world
and they're tuning their behavior based
on them and so there's no mystical they
we've simplified the problem we're being
very operational there's no mystical
issue here the components that you know
it's still materially instantiate the
components are doing the work they're
reading the variables but you're getting
these this higher level starting to form
as those as those estimates converge as
those quartz crannies converts you get
one picture even if it's wrong more or
less one picture in the system of how
the world works which we both know
downward causality is something people
love to talk about and are often very
slippery about it let's dig into your
view about this a little bit now the
example I use for downward causality you
know as a thought case experiment and
correct me if I'm wrong on this is let's
imagine I me whoever that might be
decides to move my hand now the atoms in
my hand would normally in the course of
the life follow Newton's law and just
sit where they are they jiggle around a
little bit through the Brownian motion
but they certainly wouldn't move 18
inches from right - laughs all of a
sudden the reason they did that is
downward causation where's somebody
maybe it was me decided maybe using
something called free will which we'll
get to later to move my hand and so that
downward causation caused those atoms to
move one is that a reasonable
description of downward causation and if
so how would you apply your thinking to
that so I distinguish between simple
feedback a parent downward causation and
effective downward causation you know in
your your atom case is closest to what I
would call fee-simple feedback so there
is you know some consequence because the
world has changed to those atoms but the
atoms are not reading anything about the
world and making decisions based on that
reading and the apparent downward
causation you're getting tuning so the
components are reading they're making
read they're coarse graining and they're
using those coarse grains to make
decisions so they're reading essentially
global variables but the tuning can be
partial and imprecise and then this sort
of like weaker form the components I
need to be tuning their base
to these estimates of these of these
environmental or aggregate properties
and there's some kind of downward
causation as soon as that happens but it
doesn't demand that the estimates of the
aggregate properties are correct or even
good predictors of the system's future
states there so that sort of theories
for other world where could be wrong
okay and then what happens is downward
causation in this apparent downward
causation in my view becomes effective
downward causation in a much stronger
form when that when the coarse grained
representation or these aggregate
properties are predictive of the future
state of the system and another name for
these variables we call them slow
variables they're the aggregate
properties the slow variables are robust
to small perturbations the estimates of
the variables are used by all components
to tune decision making or most of them
and the components are the individuals
are mostly in agreement about these
variables right so your atoms are doing
none of these things and the estimates
are converging so that there's an
increase in what we say we call a mutual
information between the microscopic
behavior and the macroscopic properties
so in the atom case in the atoms case
you just have simple feedback the
environments change and that is you know
has some consequences for the atoms but
they really haven't had a role in that
in order for it to be downward causation
the components have to have a role in it
they have to be perceiving or measuring
some regularities and using those
regularities to tune their behavior
that's the critical aspect of it in my
view okay let's take my example one step
further maybe we can get into that realm
would you describe the way the muscles
behave relative to the concept in the
head that says move your arm presumably
influence by signaling over nerve
systems etc is that coming closer to
your idea so I don't know enough about
the like neurophysiology of muscle
movement to answer that question but
neurons like back propagation I think
when you have like feedback from a
higher level to a lower level where the
neurons have to actually make estimates
of those regularities to do the back
propagation mechanism would be an
example so it all comes down to this if
the components are estimating
regularities and then using those
estimates to tune their behavior and
when there's a majority or a large
number of them in the system doing this
that's what I call it effective downward
causation so that would certainly fit
the case of the muscles because they're
in a constant recurrent loop with the
higher levels of the brain
and they're constantly adjusting as they
go yeah so this doesn't require any you
know it and I have to be careful
obviously sophisticated cognition
because actually I think there's a lot
of sophisticated cognition going on in
lower levels but this isn't you know
just at the individual level it
certainly can describe as you you know
muscle cells and principal and neurons
it certainly seems to describe some you
know of neural systems where there are
these feedbacks with the neurons
estimating regularities gotten the
regularities in this case are what the
the brain state what is the regularity
that they're estimating well so for
example it could be something like a
brain state encoded in some timescales
or you know some circuit property and a
simple example would be in an experiment
over the random dot basically you have
dots on the screen moving left or right
and there's a lot of dots and that you
can control the number that are moving
left to right and a subject a monkey is
watching the screen it has to estimate
which direction the dots are moving and
so the neurons receive some input some
signal that sort of based on the monkeys
you know intake of this visual scene and
then the man the neurons have to decide
how to respond in to that signal how to
fire okay and so then the state is the
dots on the screen in that case the
state would be yes something in the
environment the dots on the screen and
the downward causality would be the
behavior of the monkey based on those
dots well know so that in the case of
the neurons here so the neurons then
have to sort of estimate which way the
Drott dots are moving and then they have
an opinion about this and that in pinyin
is code it encoded at the population
level and an interesting question is you
know if the neurons have different
opinions how do they come to consensus
about it and then presumably sis a
little bit more complicated example that
consensus view of what's going on is
then passed on to another system another
population of neurons in the brain that
maybe control the motor output of the
neuron and which direction of the monkey
and which direction the monkey looks to
indicate to the experiment or whether
the dots are moving left to right so the
downward causation always has to be from
you know a higher organizational level
to a lower organizational level and so
I'm not sure in that case whether you
know it's occurring in the population
neurons that's encoding which direction
the monkey should look or or further
downstream okay it's getting there it's
still a difficult topic right they're
still not clear in my head maybe it is
in yours but I think we have to all do a
little bit more thinking about this the
monkey temple affords the you know a
really easy version of this in the sense
that the monkeys in the downward
position occurs in multiple contexts so
the downward causation occurs in the
signaling context when they reference a
signal the subordination signal for
decision-making right so they've made an
irregularity from the fights they encode
that regularity with the signal exchange
they reference the signal to make
decisions about how to interact in the
future and then as the signals
consolidate in the network the signal
exchange consolidates in the network and
they start computing the power
distribution they reference the power
distribution for decision-making what's
the costs are going to pay in fights
based on how they're perceived
collectively in the group in terms of
capacity to win a fight and so you get
downward causation from the power
distribution to their decisions during
conflicts and and other aspects of
social interaction so you have downward
position there are two at two levels one
at the signaling level and one in the
power distribution okay I will call out
to our audience that just written a
quite accessible paper called coarse
graining as a downward causation
mechanism is that still a paper that
you'd recommend people read to get a
sense of your thinking oh yeah
absolutely yeah I found that to be quite
good actually final question on
causality are you familiar with Judaea
Pearl's work and his work of trying to
unify probability and causality yes yes
I'm not an expert on you day of pearls
work but yes I know his book and his
papers and it related to some work that
we do on robustness what's the essence
of his idea about unifying probability
and causality well I'm not sure that I
want to summarize that but I can say a
little bit about causality in the
context of robustness and some of the
challenges that we face in measuring
robustness
so of course robustness is the ability
of a system to maintain a function or
state or structure in response to
perturbations and one of the challenges
in measuring robustness is that
it's um often not visible until there is
a perturbation and you have to be very
careful about certain kinds of things
like for example you could do an
experiment where you perturb an element
of a system or component of a system and
you see no change to the system and you
ask yourself well why might this be is
it that the systems robust this
perturbation possibly or an alternative
explanation is that the component that
you perturbed makes a very small causal
contribution to the function of interest
so let's say like again I can give you
an example from our monkey society or
gene regulatory network and the monkey
case one of the things we did is we
knocked out the policing mechanism
that's at this this mechanism that these
individuals in the tail of the Power
Distribution perform this conflict
management mechanism where they break up
fights and partially among other
individuals in the group so they don't
take a side and they can do this by
because they're perceived to be so
successful are so powerful by the
individuals in the group and so we
knocked out this policing function by
removing these individuals from the
group and confining them so the removal
was partial they had vocal and visual
access to the group they couldn't
actually perform any interventions and
we had to sort of show in advance that
they made a causal contribution to
fights that they actually were impartial
e breaking up these fights and so one of
the issues in robustness as I said is is
knowing whether the if you observe no
change to a system as a result of the
perturbation it's because the component
you disabled or perturbed is making a
causal contribution and then what you
want to defend what you want to measure
is an ideally if you can you want the
magnitude of that causal contribution
and then you want to measure what we
call the exclusion dependence and this
is work with David Krakauer and me had I
the exclusion dependence is the change
to the system function or the target
function in the absence when you do the
perturbation so now you have the causal
contribution prior to prior to the
perturbation and the exclusion
dependence what happens to the system
when there is a perturbation and it's
the difference in these two quantities
that tells you whether the system is
robust so in other words you have to
knock out a node that makes a causal
contribution and you have to observe
that when it's when it's removed
the system changes and so in the cake
you're talking about here you took out
these highly dominant animals that were
playing the policing function and when
you took them out something changed and
we knew in advance that they were making
a causal contribution by virtue of their
intervention behavior right and then yes
we disabled the system of measure the
exclusion dependence this is so you you
take these two quantities into account
so you're not measuring trivial
robustness essentially gotcha I like it
that's good so one thing that can happen
when you do the perturbation is the
system if you don't set the time scale
of measurement correctly the system
could rewire itself to recover the
function all in an alternative way and
that would also make it seem like the
system had not changed but if you knew
that the components that you were
removing or making a causal contribution
then you would question your results so
again this distinction between the
causal contribution prior to
perturbation and then the exclusion
dependence as a result of perturbation
these are two different you know
concepts and they're very important to
keep in mind okay that's good since
we've been talking about slippery topics
let's go into one of the slipperiest
what are your thoughts about this thing
some people call freewill and maybe how
does it relate to consciousness okay so
I have a some somewhat and I think
slightly different take on this and it
is definitely related to two dominant my
take is definitely related to dominant
ideas and neuroscience which I'll come
to in a second but I basically think
about freewill as the feeling and it's
very important the feeling that we can
make choices and then choice is just the
ability to select among alternatives due
to these sort of inherent stochasticity
in the world and errors and information
processing which I think are common
because of all that complexity that we
discussed earlier so I just think it's
between choice and free will with
choices is the ability to select among
alternatives
given the stochasticity in the world do
you know a variety of different things
and freewill is the feeling that we can
make choices so by saying feeling it
doesn't mean that it's an illusion the
important point is that it's a kind of
emotion a feeling about how about
whether we can make choices and it
relates to consciousness in the sense
that for me and again this is again
slightly different take I think although
it's been talked about for so
probably since humans could talk I'm
sure someone has articulated it this way
but for me consciousness is essentially
the degree of access to computations in
our brains at this at the system level
so whether it's the whole brain of the
whole organism or some subsystem
whatever your system however you define
it is however you define your system
it's it's a degree of access to
computations the brain at the system
level captured by an effective Sirius
essentially a theory for how the
competition works that whether right or
wrong lets the Assessor understand how
the computation is being made so it's
not about an perception I'll introduce
that to perception is a state of the
world how we how we perceive the state
of the world and elements in those
states and you know you often hear about
consciousness has this integrated thing
and I would say that it's perception
that can be integrated and consciousness
really is about the degree of access to
competitions in our brain so we have a
less access to our motor control
explaining them articulating them than
we do to in principle our understanding
of social interactions and one more
point on ADD is that this sort of
effective theory or access to these
computations can be given in a variety
of different ways that needn't be in
natural language it could be in
mathematics or it could be even
expressed musically or in terms of
visual imagery or texture so it's just
about an alternative representation so
again consciousness is a degree of
access to competitions in the brain what
does it mean access to be able to see
them to understand them or to use them
Tabitha sort of a theory for how the
computation is performed whether it's
right or wrong so when you do walk down
a set of steps you often have no access
to the computations your brain or making
is making to ensure you put your step
your foot down in the right place your
brain is doing that computation but you
can't describe it now if you were pushed
by a friend who you know you tripped or
something you asked what happened you
might be able to sort of make up an
explanation based on logic or you sort
of understanding geometry or something
for how your brain perform that
computation so I say our conscious
understanding of many of our motor
control movements is very low but
perhaps we have uh we have better things
for social interaction so our conscious
understanding of social interaction
seems to even higher although that could
be that could be full you know that
could be
a little bit of an illusion well this
seems like a pretty high level sort of
evolutionary definition of consciousness
I mean I'm thinking here the way you're
describing it only applies to humans no
I don't think so because that's why I
said that the representation needn't be
in natural language okay it could be a
mathematic it could mathematical it
could be visual imagery could be
geometric there are many alternative
representations that other organisms
could be using to sort of have a theory
for how their brains performing these
computations why do they need a theory I
like to use Gerald Edelman's distinction
between primary consciousness as he
would describe it the kind that we are
pretty confident that a dog has versus
extended consciousness which is the kind
that for sure humans have and maybe some
of the great apes and maybe some whales
and dolphins have and his definition of
primary consciousness of the dog is
essentially it's in its own movie of the
world right it's in a scene and it acts
and it feels that it's in this scene and
it doesn't necessarily theorize about
that while extended consciousness and
needleman's terminology does start to
bring in concepts like self-awareness
and the ability to theorize is your
definition either of those two or
something something else yeah I mean the
definition of consciousness I'm you know
the ability to access those computations
and have a kind of effective theory for
how they're being performed is related
to a omens second point but I would not
restrict that to humans I think we don't
know the answer to this question yet and
like I said by allowing many different
types of representations then we're not
ruling this kind of consciousness out
another analyst because we're focusing
on the ability to do this in natural
language or mathematics all right so
that's that's an important point now and
neuroscience there are two big theories
as I understand it for for our own
consciousness and one is comes from some
French I think mostly French
neuroscientists and it's basically
called the global neuronal work space
idea of consciousness and it's similar
to what I'm articulating in the sense
that it suggests that there are many
different processes going on in your
brain and when you're conscious of
something you you sort of have access to
those computations in many different
parts of your brain
so and the way it sort of comes from
this idea I think it that was originally
came out of early days of AI where you
have a kind of blackboard and different
processes basically post information to
this blackboard and when it's posted to
the blackboard it's globally a bit
so-called globally available information
the blackboard of course is small or
finite so you can't post everything
there all at once and the more you can
post there the more conscious you are so
to speak that's that's one take on a
global neuronal workspace which comes
from these French neuroscientists I
think it's very interesting and it's
related to what I'm saying although not
identical and then and then the other
idea comes from like to know and
Christophe coke and people like that
integrated information theory which is
more or less they're different takes on
this but more or less the idea that
consciousness is about a sophisticated
mechanisms that through integration and
modularity allow you to represent a web
of causal net of causal effects and the
sort of higher you this measure called
Phi is the more conscious you are so and
the idea is that a higher Phi means that
you can represent you have a network
structure that can represent more of
these puzzle interactions and so I would
say that what I'm saying is more it's
closer in some respects to the sort of
global neuronal workspace except I'm
also including this idea of this
effective theory so that you have this
theory for how your brains performing
these computations which brings in a
little bit of that to Nonie perspective
mm-hmm right because so you've got on
the one hand this sort of global
neuronal workspace that says you get
access to these computations when
they're posted to this blackboard this
kind of global posting and then the
tannot knee which is sort of emphasizing
this web of causal interactions that's
meaning possible by this particular type
of network structure where this Phi is
maximized
yep yeah I would add a little bit to
that which is the global workspace
theory was actually I think originally
fully articulated by Bernard Bars who's
an American though it is being pushed
today by frenchman like the Haney etc
exactly that's right Barzini and change
you I think's the same yeah I don't know
that one in my own work in consciousness
I basically follow bars with some
extensions and corrections and certainly
we have two noni and coke with the
integrated information there's a third
real important one which is the more
bodily emotional theories of people like
Antonio Damasio one of the books that I
wrongly recommend to people if they're
interested in understanding his
perspective is the feeling of what
happens yeah he argues that the seat of
consciousness is not the cortex there
the thalamocortical connections or in
perception or anywhere else but it's
deep in the brain stem in the feeling of
having a body and that that is where
consciousness comes from so he would
argue consciousness goes way way way
back evolutionary I would say those are
the three differing arguments from the
neural science community and then of
course we have other arguments from
people like David Chalmers about the
hard problem which we don't really need
to get into today because that's above
our pay grade I think what we've covered
actually tackles almost hard-hard from
exactly that I mean so I don't I would
add to this is so I don't I don't really
see that there's a hard and an easy
problem as Chalmers articulated I think
that that's false and that the the the
free will thing that I the point I made
earlier that free will is a feeling that
we can make choices is related to the
embodiment points you're making and this
mind brain distinction comes back to the
coarse graining and the global neuronal
works based points which is that by
coarse graining you come out coming out
with these sort of summary statistics
global variables essentially that you're
posting to this blackboard and that's
where you get the notion of mind is
essentially that the summary statistics
are coarse-grained representations of
neural dynamics the weak problem of
Chalmers that we have some access to
secondarily and when we have that access
that's what I call consciousness and so
like I said it I'm not gonna restrict it
to humans because I'm not going to limit
it to those representations being stated
in terms of natural language they can be
any type of representation so you know
dogs amoeba anything that can have a
representation of the computations that
is performing
that's secondary would be a candidate
for for having some level of
consciousness I I just don't think that
Chalmers saying you know I I don't
believe in that again it's like the
downward causation it's mystical that's
my take as well even though I can't
prove it
my intuition having been working in this
space now for eight years is that there
is no hard problem you know guys like
Daniel Dennett would agree with that as
well
but we haven't quite been able to figure
out exactly how to articulate it though
I like your approach which is we think
about things like free will let me try
to put your words into some different
words and tell me if I get it or not is
that if we think of free will as the
ability to make choice within a certain
level of abstraction or what you would
call coarse graining then we can say
that we do have free will
even though I'm currently reading Brian
Greene's new book you know explanation
of everything about science from the Big
Bang to Beethoven essentially and he
argues there's no such thing as free
well it's all fundamentally reductionist
physics all the way down but your
analysis would say that it at the right
level of coarse graining than to degree
we have choices within that coarse
graining then we have freewill
yes I think that's basically what I'm
saying I would I would highlight two
things that one our choice space could
be larger than we imagined or understand
and so are we might in that case our
feeling of freewill is less than it
could be if we fully understood our
choice space that's one sort of nuance
and the other is that yes how you
coarse-grain will impact how large
perceive that choice space to be now I'm
going to branch off here something not
in my notes so could something like
meditation affect our ability to access
our free will or change how we feel it
or experience it yeah I think I think
there are definitely ways that we could
so let's say our you know we're highly
stressed and so we don't perceive the
full choice space we think there are
certain options that are close to us but
they're not actually and by taking
making certain interventions meditation
might be one exercise could be another
where we calm our brains or change our
attentional neck
or you know quiet our responses we might
be able to perceive a larger choice
space and then increase that feeling of
being able to make choices and then that
way so to speak increase our freewill
possibly I mean that's really special
rating and it's fun it's a fun thing to
think about people who listen to the
show regularly know that I'm fairly
skeptical about spirituality and I call
it the S word and I've had some very
interesting conversations with people
who are practitioners of what they call
spirituality I will say I have learned
from them and I hope they have learned
from me next time I run into one of
these discussions I'm going to ask them
all right I'll present your concept of
free will and I'd say explain to me how
contemplative practice or other forms of
spirituality may or may not you know
expand or refine or improve this concept
of free will so interesting so I'm going
to move along here a little bit you're a
co-author with a bunch of other my
favorite complexity science folks on a
paper titled the challenges and scope of
theoretical biology and it's a paper I'd
also recommend to our listeners despite
its incredibly deep ideas
it is quite accessible and as I recall
has no math at all I know it's a huge
topic could you tell us what you can
about it yeah so I mean this is
obviously a huge point of interest at
the Sante fans it's you law like
behavior and adaptive systems and and
there seem to be you know lots of
regularities and low like phenomenon
physical systems and we question one
question is why there there aren't as
many or why we haven't identified as
many or as often laws in biology in
adaptive systems and and so this papers
sort of an attempt to I'm addressed that
and this is a big theme in my work in
fact so I guess I would step back and
start with this observation that energy
energy was sort of at the core of 20th
century science and and maybe the
proceedings say 300 years and the focus
on energy in sort of in physics of
course culminated with the splitting of
the atom during Manhattan Project and in
biology for the most part the focus has
been on this is a really big picture to
sort of get into this difference of you
know why I seem to be fewer laws analogy
in biology also for the most for the
20th century and before the emphasis has
been on energy how organisms get across
and convert it into offspring
information is always recognized as
important right so you've got wheeler
for example in arguing that it's in fact
perceived matter and that lovely paper
he wrote and then jeans you know
connecting entropy the number of options
available to a system to statistical
mechanics information theory so and then
you've got people like Seth Lloyd
writing books about universe itself
being a computer but I say despite this
this the overwhelming focus has been on
energy and I've argued and we sort of
dealing with this in that paper to make
products and biology information has to
be more central and to sort of see why
that's the case it's sort of useful to
step back and think about some
distinctions between physical and
biology biological systems so physics
for the most part you know dominated by
concepts like pressure temperature and
entropy that emerge to fairly simple
collective interactions and kind of they
give these collective interactions to
give sort of deep insight into the
behavior of the physical universe right
and so physical particles have
properties like position velocity mass
and their collective property is the
macroscopic world of temperature and
pressure and so forth and you get
thermodynamics it's kind of theory for a
relationship among the microscopic or
aggregate variables at equilibrium and
you get these regularities then like the
ideal gas law which is an equation of
state that tells you the amount of gas
is to turn by its pressure volume and
temperature and so you get this these
regularities or laws like the ideal gas
law now biology also makes use of
comparable collective concepts like as
physics does but in biology these are
concepts like metabolism conflict
management and robust as some of the
things we've already mentioned and in
contrasts of physical systems these are
very functional properties with
consequences to downward causation and
so forth to the system and its
components so physics is essentially
producing and we're gonna get to the to
the to the close point in just a second
physics is essentially producing orders
of the minimization of energy and
biologies doing this with the addition
of information processing and now what
are the states we look around biology we
see not a lot of laws but water states
are ubiquitous there's law like
relations it seems all over the place
but why adaptive systems have this extra
step of information processing and
whether it's the reason why we see fewer
laws and biology are these big open
questions that people ask it SFI so one
of the things we want to understand is
what do what does information processing
do in biology and a nice sort of entry
point into this is to think of the
scaling work of Jeffery West and his
colleagues Jim Brown and Brian quest and
others right so Kleiber of course
observed a long time ago 100 years or so
this robust statistical relationship
between mass and metabolic rate that
such a mass scale since 3/4 power right
so this is this is one of the laws we
have in biology and then Geoffrey and
his colleagues came along and derived
this from first principles for axioms
about how these axioms capture the
energetic constraints it's sort of like
how energy is distributed through the
circulatory system of mammals so we get
this law but it's a law for an example
where there's a strong energetic
constraint now we also like a set of
information processing all over biology
and so Geoffrey and and crew sort of
shifted to cities and they started
asking about scaling in cities and
they're asking they're about questions
like how does population size scale with
crime or eating patent generation and so
forth
and one of the interesting things they
find is that for a lot of these city
variables the scaling is super linear
that means you know it's an increasing
return to scale in contrast to the
sublinear 3/4 scale power 3/4 scaling
that was found for the metabolic systems
so so here's an interesting observation
in these systems where information
processing is important that team to be
collective you get super linear scaling
and in the strongly constrained
energetically constrained systems you
get this sort of sub linear scaling so
there does seem to be this difference or
this implication of having information
and collective effects in your system
and then sort of the last point I want
to make is that this brings us to the
collective computation so and back to
our point about complexity at the
beginning of this talk when you asked
about the information bottleneck and
macroscopic expansion so what does
information do so information processing
do the system well my suggestion is that
a lot of information processing is
erroneous the components are making
mistakes or have restricted
computational capacity so they cannot
perfectly estimate or optimally estimate
regularities in their environment so
what do they do instead of doing it just
on their own they collectively compute
the regularities they collectively
coarse-grain and in this way they sort
of solve this problem that information
processing introduces and the problem is
subjectivity and so the reason why we
haven't seen
or identified a lot of laws and biology
yet it's because we need in order to see
those laws we need to understand how the
system is processing information through
collective computation and once we have
that we'll have a better idea of what
the relevant macroscopic variables are
all right so the basic idea is that
because the system is performing these
computations without taking the system's
point of view we will never see the laws
and in physical systems that is
absolutely not required could you expand
that just a little bit the difference
between physical systems and the
biological I didn't quite get that last
sentence okay right so the microscopic
world is complex we've sort of
established at the beginning this
conversation so how do components get
regularities so they doing information
processing they're estimating
regularities despite all of that
complexity yet they're error-prone so
they don't make these estimates
perfectly so information processing in
adaptive systems is introducing
subjectivity it's introducing
idiosyncratic views for how the world
works because of the errors that
components are making and so one of the
arguments that we make in our work is
that one way to overcome this
subjectivity and produce ordered States
is by collectively computing pooling our
opinions of how the world works
and getting the consensus view now there
are two consequences of that one is that
we might get a better picture for how
the world works but another is that
sometimes we're not recovering the
ground truth if there is one out in the
environment that is like something like
the height of the Eiffel Tower that over
which we have no control but we're
computing a social regularity like power
so my point when I was going through the
monkey example earlier about the power
being kind of a the outcome of a
collective perception is that the view
of power is in some sense being created
as the system moves through its the
dynamics so it's it's collective and so
in that sense the power distribution is
not a ground it's not you're not
recovering a ground truth you were
covering a collectively constructed
variable that is a result of information
processing so my point is that in
physical systems where there is much
less of this information processing and
it's not as error prone or are prone at
all the law like regularities are easy
to observe from the observers point of
view
but that in adaptive systems law-like
regularities are a little bit hidden
because in order to see them you have to
understand how the system perceives the
world how its processing information
what the errors are its making and and
how those errors are impacting the world
that the system through the components
through its their interactions are
creating like in the power case or in
our decision to elect Trump or whatever
right so these things are not based on
on ground truths out there in the world
they're based on the collective dynamics
or an outcome or information processing
the collective dynamics and one could
say perhaps you have to even take a
subjective point of view from the
perspective of a component is that
somehow make sense exactly you have to
try and figure out how the components
perceive the world what their theories
are for the how the world works and how
those theories combine to briefs their
social structure and then and you know
their their their collective enterprise
you have to take their point of view and
I think once we start doing this more
seriously we will identify laws and
adaptive systems another way of putting
this is that there are not as many to
the macroscopic variables observed in
the khyber case climber's observations
were not mechanistic there was an
aggregate level observation microscopic
observation that NASA metabolic rates
scale in the city's case there's like
many many variables that you could
measure and how do you know which are
the macroscopic variables described like
qualities of cities how do you know what
the right ones are well the right ones
in some sense are the ones that have you
know a downward causation consequent to
the system the ones that the components
are constructing through their
interactions and can perceive or read so
they can tune again in response so
without taking the system's point of
view we can't know or titrating in some
sense between the microscopic
interactions and the microscopic world
they're creating we can't know what the
right variables are a priori this is
very good I really like that that made
it ring for me let's move on now to
another topic it's actually from the
same paper ever quote how much of
biological nature can be predicted from
basic physical law this question is
simple to answer effectively zero this
connects directly with the thorny
question of emergence so we're getting
to our another slippery topic here what
are your thoughts about the thorny
question of emergent
you know my you're gonna detect a theme
here but I believe all of these things
freewill consciousness and emergence are
overly mystified the mind brain problem
right I think comes down to just being a
little bit more materialist about this
so emergence for me is when you have a
reduction in uncertainty and generally a
slow variables is a coarse-grained
variable is what's giving you that so
again like if you take my macroscopic
expansion thing in the power example
which fairly easy to think through you
get this distribution of power that's
sort of encoded in this network
typically with emergency we think
there's some kind of non-linearity it
makes it hard to predict but that's not
the only thing so in the in the power
case the algorithms that are used to
quantify the power structure that sort
of tell you how it's encoded in the net
the network or circuit of signaling
interactions there are some
nonlinearities in those we think so the
power distribution cell has a little
property of emergence to it but the real
emergence comes in functional
consequences of having this heavy-tailed
distribution with these few individuals
sitting way out in the tail and being
able to do this policing so you get the
slow variable the this and the
uncertainty reduction to the power
distribution and then the surprise comes
from the performance of this new
function policing so again for me it's
not that mysterious emergence it comes
from slow variables and coarse graining
and uncertainty reduction and the
production of surprise to new function
and I don't think there's more to it
than that I think one one thing that's
hard to understand is sometimes why it
doesn't occur and there are perhaps
other ways than what I just described
for it to be generated for example there
was a study that came out the other day
in Nature Physics on schooling behavior
and fish that showed that you can get
the schooling through noise the
alignment decisions of the fish when
they're noisy can push the fish from
poorly aligned state to one where
they're highly aligned and in that sense
that's a very different mechanism that
what I have been suggesting in the power
case where it with the coarse grain
there's no coarse graining necessary
there and that's interesting but you
have emergence potentially in both cases
very interesting yeah for those
interested in really digging into
emergence one book I'd recommend is the
emergence of everything how the world
became calm
by harold Moretz he basically describes
our whole universe is something like 27
emergences from quarks up to social
systems and it's actually quite
interesting
have you read that one I looked for it I
know I you know I knew Harold of course
great guy yeah he was actually my first
mentor in the complexity area before I
even came out to Santa Fe when he was at
George Mason when I first retired from
business he was the first guy I ran into
didn't know that yeah he had a huge
influence on me to say the least this
one we can punt on if you don't have a
good thought on but her ego gene and his
far from equilibrium dissipative
structures do you find that in any way
useful in thinking about or
understanding emergence furger genes
idea is that and this of course not in
the SantaFe tradition it's just they
called the Russell's tradition I think
that essentially complexity emerges in
far from equilibrium systems and
essentially it's the way the universe
dissipates far from equilibrium energy
flows is that the complex systems get
spun up and they use up the energy and
they degrade it by the second law and
that's what they do and that's
essentially where complexity comes from
I'm from red producing in many many
years but but I will say one thing I do
agree that you know adaptive systems are
obviously we don't really have the
framework yet to deal with this
non-equilibrium but that they recover
some of those equilibrium properties by
having kind of overlapping timescales so
that they do create these slow variables
that I keep talking about these
coarse-grained variables that
essentially give an effective
equilibrium and an effective equilibrium
so the slow variable creates a
background that from the point of view
of the component is more or less stable
or constant and against which it can
adapt and so on the one hand we need
better formalisms and approaches for
working in to working in non equilibrium
ideas into adaptive systems for sure on
the other hand I think adaptive systems
have developed ways of sort of
recovering essentially equilibrium
states to these kind of effective
sleeves so variables and and needs that
these are haven't kind of an effective
equilibrium as a consequence of these
slow variables
okay that's good yeah I always throw in
a friggin question with s fi people
because I always noticed that most of
them either pushback or don't know too
much about it I do think it's an area of
complexity that I wish the SFI people
would learn more about right I do think
it has some merit that's my editorial
comment for the day I think that's a
fair point Jim I mean it's one of those
things that we sort of cover or learned
about it you know in early days in our
early work at complex systems and at the
summer school and so forth and and I
haven't really thought about too much
since and I should take a look at it
again
cool let's move on to the next topic
from your edge bio you say a central
philosophical issue behind this work
meaning your work is how nature
overcomes subjectivity there's that word
again inherent and information
processing systems to produce collective
ordered states yeah pretty much a
summary of all I think you talked about
but you do pose it as a philosophical
issue so what do you think are the
philosophical implications of your work
are there truly metaphysical issues that
arise or can complex the including
emergence be described strictly in the
language of science inside a realist
program with no recourse to metaphysics
I think that it's you know in the end
science is is sufficient I do believe
that but most of the work that I do and
some of us if I fall into this camp is
very much in the business of taking
concepts that from philosophy or that
are sort of outside of science and
turning them into questions that can be
approached using scientific methods so
all of my work sir sits on the on the
edge or between philosophy on that
border between philosophy and science
but we're very much in the business of
taking these questions that maybe from a
science perspective seem ill or poorly
defined from a science perspective and
turning them into something that to a
model that can be analyzed
mathematically or approach with data so
you know I'm at that border for sure and
there are other XY people who are who
are not anywhere near that border and
much more interested in you know they
develop profound methods for thinking
about networks but their questions are
very clearly defined from the get-go
so that's my partial answer to your
question give me an example of part of
your work that's actually informed by an
actual philosophical question certainly
this this distinction between
collectively constructed macroscopic
world and a ground truth that's right so
this is a and downward causation is
another one right most biologists or
most people work in adaptive systems are
you know generally thinking about the
system learning about states of the
world where the states of the world are
serving so genus - the system outside
its control and I think we need to you
know take seriously that by by virtue of
this erroneous information processing a
lot of the world is being collectively
constructed and so those ideas come from
you know originally to come out of
certain areas of philosophy and
definitely some of the structural and
early 20th century anthropologists we're
thinking about these kinds of things
claude lévi-strauss and others Bruce
Benedict and I studied that work early
on there's been a lot of influence from
those literature's in early days to my
syrup original thinking about this stuff
yeah that's good yeah it is interesting
because some of the most interesting
problems are right in there in that
liminal space where we don't even quite
know how to fully state the problem
correctly that's right at least
initially you know so we kind of iterate
between what is the problem exactly and
once you get the problem stated right
sometimes it's not that hard to figure
out yeah I know that's that is sort of
what we do exactly that yeah it's
actually one of my insights into
artificial general intelligence is a lot
of the work being invested in today by
companies like Google is in so-called
question-answering
capabilities I keep pushing back and say
I want to see question-asking capability
that would be far more impressive
actually right people look at me like
I'm nuts but I think you get it
ya know I highly value that that's true
I found that frankly and my working with
scientists that really best ones are the
ones that are the best in asking
questions and the variants and their
ability to answer questions is less than
their ability to ask questions that's
good cuz I feel that's my skill and
sometimes I have no ability to answer my
own questions ah well I chose that
you're brilliant so that's good by the
Rutte rule of how to measure science
we were really true love it
another thing you wrote recent I don't
know it was recently or not but chapter
nine and a work called social and
economic engineering mmm-hmm I read that
and it reminded me of the possibly false
Road many of us nerdy kids went down
when we read the foundation trilogy way
back yonder and Harry Selden in his
psycho history and social engineering
and of course it's worth noting that the
foundation trilogy it's just been
announced it's gonna be made into a TV
series from Apple that should be
interesting how the heck are they gonna
make a science fiction series from a
really deep intellectual story that has
no sex and no violence
hmmm that may take some work yeah but
anyway to the topic of social economic
engineering you seem to take the lime if
I read it correctly that hey maybe we
can now do some social engineering and
economic engineering what say you to
that yeah so I mean I think a lot of
them so I've written a couple little
essays on this and I and I think a lot
of the engineering that we've done has
been sort of reactive and qualitative
and so with big data with some methods
and concepts I'll talk about in a second
and with machine learning and so forth I
think we are at this point where there
could be a big change in how we engineer
things and you see a little bit of that
the sort of foreshadowing of that with
the sort of sort of Facebook stuff both
from the science side and the
intervention interference by you know
Russia or whomever into on Facebook
basically what's happening is that we
now have vast quantities of microscopic
data of data on individual behavior and
and we're in a position where for the
first time and it comes back to these
micro to macro maps so no and in the
just as an aside that's that sort of an
important aside and in the Jeffrey work
on scaling you know they had the
macroscopic observable math scales of
metabolic rate and they had some axioms
from which they derive the microscopic
so they have they build this micro to
macro map and what I've been saying for
the information processing systems is
you can't build that micro to macro mat
without having some idea of how the sort
of components are processing information
how they're getting building their
effective theories for how the world
works
to do that you need good microscopic
data you need data on what they're doing
how they see the world what their
strategies are and so with Simon today
on David Krakauer we developed this
approach called inductive game theory a
while ago which is basically it was a
kind of response to simple game theory
models a negative response then where
the strategies and the payoffs
everything's being posited in toy models
and what we said well no we want to go
into the data and actually pull the
strategies out so you get all this you
have this rich time series on individual
interactions and behavior going to that
time series and try and extract the
strategies that the individuals are
using to make decisions in their social
environment and once you have these
strategies and you build up you know how
they collectively interact and to do
this we built circuits of how these
strategies interact to produce a
macroscopic property of interest like in
an animal society to fight size or power
distribution it could be a city variable
anything really and so it's a very
different way of building a micro to
macro map then then in this sort of like
mass metabolic rate case and what we one
of the reasons we wanted to build these
maps in addition to you know the
foundational region which reason which
is getting out laws in information
processing systems and figuring out what
those laws are taking the citizens point
of view and having you know all those
strategies and data from the system
itself another reason is because we
thought by having these micro to macro
maps and then understanding how you
simplify them or how the system
simplifies them to make decisions would
tell us in a more informed way and
potentially highly quantitative way what
interventions we could perform to induce
changes at the macroscopic level like in
social structure for example so if you
had a theory for how power distribution
was arising in a given system and you
knew what the dominant causal coming
back to our causality discussion
dominant causal contributors are to a
particular power distribution then you
can intervene in a more informed way on
those variables or individuals to change
the type of power distribution that you
see and so the basic idea is that by by
developing methods for studying micro to
macro maps and information processing
systems we could make more informed
interventions and potentially
potentially engine
your outcomes in social systems and I
think we we are going to be able to do
that now
of course one complexity that arises is
that as everyone can do this everyone
when you know you adopt this approach
can build better models using
microscopic data of multiple different
groups nations corporations whatever
together intervening you're gonna create
a lot more complexity and you might
actually make it because they're you
know all these now these couple systems
competing you might make it very hard to
control the consequences of your
intervention coevolution will have a
coevolution of complex interventions
effectively exactly that means happen
now I think it's already happening yeah
exactly we just don't know it yet very
good very good I like that
that last insight is actually the
coolest thing I think that we've said on
this show is that as we get greater
insight in how to control complex social
systems inevitably there will be a
co-evolutionary war of such
interventions ah yeah it's just another
version of gephardt's law yes indeed get
back to the Harry Selden thing I'm just
for fun both Jessica and I are really
serious Lord of the Rings nerds I mean I
think I've read it 39 times that's right
Lord of the Rings nerd as I recall it's
of our conversations we said okay what
character are you I think you said you
were Eragon is that correct yeah I'm
Erin that's right now Tom Bombadil
without a doubt right that's a good
price I think that's a great choice I
know jealous but anyway so back to
foundation trilogy of the folks working
on this work that we know about I've
just decided that Simon is Harry Selden
that's funny you say that because so
Harry so I when I give the talk I
haven't given the talk in a couple years
but used to give the talk an inductive
game theory in the circuits in micro to
macro map rarely regularly and and I did
that work with Simon and and every time
particularly actually in audiences with
some physicists I would be called
accused of being Harry Selden yeah so
maybe you're Harry Selden well I move
east of what the inductive game theory
that's Harry Selden though Simon looks
like Harry Selden he looks like
at Simon did a oh by the way who was my
very first guest on the gym rut show so
go look at episode number one and you
can hear very very interesting
far-ranging conversation with simon de
deo aka Harry Selden let's go on to
another topic agent-based models have
long been part of the work at SFI
exploring complexity do you have a view
of the strengths and dangers from that
approach yeah so I had this sort of
canonical view of the strains and
dangers I think that you know in the the
the sort of standard thing you hear
everyone complain about is to put
anything in and that anything comes out
garbage in garbage out and so I think
there's a lot of bad agent-based
modeling out there you know there are
now there are like little agent-based
modeling worlds and even without sort of
thinking hard like same happened of
course for statistics with SPSS and so
forth and anyone can use these programs
to build a nature base model and so a
lot of bad science gets done of course
there's good agent-based modeling and
epstein and excellence some of these
other guys who know they're doing very
thoughtful work but though at this sort
of crudest level when an agent meets
model is it's just tracking individual
individual level behavior tracking
individuals I mean that's you can define
it that could be like the simplest
definition of an age of each model of
tracks individuals and so in that sense
there's a lot a lot of modeling of
modelling frameworks fall under
agent-based modeling they're just not
what we sort of canonically think of
each of a small again and so in that
sense to the inductive game theory that
I just mentioned falls in that in that
space and and the difference though
between I'd say the way that we do
inductive game theory and the way that
each of these modeling is often
approached is that the strategies that
we use in our models come directly from
the data and so I am fine and in fact
advocate this approach if you're if your
strategies are empirical you know if and
and if you're and if you are rigorous
and thoughtful about how many of them
you put in right so you know you don't
want to build you don't want to take
into account a huge number of strategies
you want to have some understanding of
what the most important ones are and and
begin with those and so yeah I mean
Asian B's modelling is powerful you know
it can give
a lot of insight it's just that it's
easy to abuse yeah that's a very good
way I recently attended a workshop
organized by Josh Epstein and Rob Axtell
and some others called inverse
generative social science gentlemen
great yep yep and one of the points was
hey let's start with the data when we
can what a concept right
and then let's generate things like
maybe genetic programming from the data
and then let's the agents be those right
as a way that does not make some stuff
up because I remember when I first
retired from business started playing
pseudoscientist one of the first things
I played with was agent-based modeling
and my models would have forty seven
variables which I just made up when I
got out to SF I quickly got schooled on
47 variables that's ridiculous
three three variables and two or one is
better right and they were right so you
got to be really careful when you do
this stuff but you can't get some
amazing insights yeah I mean you know
I'm a pluralist I think that we gain
insight by using lots of different tools
and approaches and so agent may smiling
or you know tracking individuals coupled
to extremely reduced you know we're
phenomenological model where you can do
you can analyze the model you know is
you want as many you know multiple
perspectives on a problem and they each
do different things and it's sort of the
you know it's a collective outcome that
helps you understand what's going on
very good you've written a lot about
social policing and its effects on
social systems I really like your paper
policing stabilises construction of
niches and primates back to our Apes and
monkeys tell us about that what we did
that study is we wanted to assess the
contribution of policing to social
system robustness so I already talked a
little bit about that and we developed a
set of experimental techniques to
identify the consequences of the
policing to robustness by taking to
account both the causal contribution and
exclusion dependence and I measured
earlier and so basically in that study
we had a like half a football sized
colony of of macaques there was a heavy
tail distribution of power and the
individuals in the tail performance
policing behavior and we we removed them
temporarily over the course of say 20
weeks
on randomly chosen days once every week
or so and and we studied how social
networks and various social variables
changed when they were removed and
inferred from that the contribution of
their policing behavior to things like
how connected the networks are how
negative a positive behavior spread over
those networks to how cliquish the
societies were in the presence and
absence of the policing mechanism to how
often individuals showed aggression
versus socially positive behaviors as a
consequence of the policing so yeah it
was one of the first what I would call
behavioral knockouts so most knockout
work is done on genes or in molecular
systems and there really hasn't been
rigorous Network knockouts in social
systems and that was sort of one of the
first there had been much earlier
studies in the 60s where the scientists
sort of like just removed the
individuals they thought were strong or
powerful without really a theory for
what would happen as a result of those
removals but but we we had a lot more of
the more of the ideas worked out when we
did this knock out study so as zoos it
was very you know was um it was fun and
what we found was that in fact in the
what the policing mechanism did is it
made the system more integrated
individuals had a larger number of
partners and their social networks they
had better relationships with those
partners there was less volatility right
so there was less aggression the police
things seemed to allow individuals to
build better local social environments
so the hippies were wrong you can't off
the pigs haha yeah so I don't know I
mean I think there you know there there
are lots of things to discuss here about
you know how about inequality and you
Galit aryan societies and our sort of
knee-jerk reactions to the 1% and so
forth I think we really need to approach
that in a more thoughtful way it's not
clear to me that having a system with
billionaires is necessarily problematic
and it may in fact be that with what you
need are certain kinds of regulations to
incentivize good behavior but when you
have individuals who are really out
there in the tale their ability to do
things faster more efficiently than say
government might be quite a bit higher
and so these are trade-offs we need to
really you know think hard about
like how do we if we're gonna have we
have a system where government can do
certain things and you know individuals
out there and the tale can do other
things but we want but because there's
it's sort of like potentially could go
rogue we want to create incentives so
they do the right things so that's that
you know that's the question for me is
is it's an empirical question what the
best system is and not an ideological
one and I wish there were no more
empirical studies of how these different
social structures what their
consequences are there are some in
economics but I think we're you know
really really only getting to get
beginning to get a sense of of the full
picture yeah folks we know Sam Bowles
and herb Ginn tests have done work along
with some other folks that strongly
imply that the kind of work that you saw
in primates also applies to humans in
some of the simple games that they have
set up all around the world
cross-culturally where the existence of
the ability to punish bad actors reduces
bad action mm-hmm do you have any
thoughts on you know how this kind of
work applies to humans well I mean one
thing just you mentioned punishment I
mean one of the things that was very
important in the in the primates
you know robustness and interventions
conflict work is that the police are
there to proceed to be
disproportionately powerful so no one's
gonna challenge them but it seems to be
critically important that they actually
don't use force when they intervene so
when they intervene it's impartial and
they they generally use if any very low
levels of gresham like not much more
than a threat now they do one hand they
don't need to but you know if you look
at old sociological theories of power
and one of the big influences I mean
this guy Bierstadt wrote some very nice
work on power and what it is some of the
cleanest perspective on that that I read
quite widely in that literature when you
use power you risk losing it that's one
sort of thing and another is that you
know it's a credibility thing so these
individuals are out in the talent and
they're the the they're out there
because of the collective dynamics and
what and and to some extent choice made
by the other individuals in the system
so if they were abusing their position
they probably would receive fewer
signals because it would be avoided and
so the opportunity give the signals
wouldn't be there and so they would
actually accumulate they would have less
power because they this
girls are key to them the key to the
stability of their power right so this
is a really sort of important point like
they they will they risk losing power
when they use force in these contexts
that's one and then another is to some
extent the signaling dynamics is really
like voting in the human case where
you're making a choice for one leader
over another and you could you know
influence that outcome by avoiding and
not giving the signals and you get you
see that quite clearly in chimpanzee
groups where unlike the macaques and
remember in one group at Yerkes there
was an alpha and a beta male so the beta
male gave a subordination signals called
a pant got in that case to the alpha
male but the alpha male was very
aggressive and so in the dyadic
relationship between alpha and beta the
beta had to give this signal but the
rest of the group did not like and so
alpha is defined by receiving a signal
from everybody else but the most
powerful individual in the group is the
beta male so the beta male even though
he gives a bank run to the alpha male
receives more pant grounds from a larger
or more diverse group of individuals
than the alpha male receipt and was so
we said that beta male was the one who
was perceived to be the most powerful
individual in the group even though
technically the alpha male is the one
that receives Pankratz for everyone and
what you would actually see the chimps
doing is they would pass by the alpha
male and in within his sight his field
of vision they would give in this sort
of very irreverent way Pankratz to the
beta male uh-huh we're moving pan
currents to the alpha male and so it
really I mean I didn't I never published
a papers incident I'm up data and so
this is this is a little bit speculative
but it did really seem like a choice in
the part of the chimps in terms of
voting they were like saying look I'm
not voting for you I'll give you a bank
run if I have to but I'm not really
voting for you I prefer this guy whose
interventions are you know more
diplomatic actually and who's who's a
better manager of the sort of groups
social interactions and you are who uses
force too much so really interesting
stuff and so I you know I mean this this
notion of of power and how you maintain
it and how you use it I think it needs
you needs a lot of careful thought yeah
it sounds like we take that model it's
an argument for kind of self-organizing
network based authority as opposed to
top-down role based Authority yeah I
mean it can become top-down if there
if you develop institutions and norms
and rules that allow it it comes back to
the slow variable point it make it hard
to change right it effectively trans
transitions into something that is
top-down even if it started bottom-up
yep let's move on to our next we're
getting close to our time line so it
will be one of our last maybe not the
last you've dug as deeply as anybody I
know into what might be called the
foundations of complexity assigned times
warn folks that complexity science is
still a baby science now I will say
since I've dug deep deeply into it
myself spent at least 10 years and I'm
sure lots happened is it still true that
the plexy science is a baby science and
if so what do you think the next area is
where foundations might become solid or
will they ever well I mean I think it's
definitely still compared to physics for
example definitely still early days and
and then there's a distinction too
between you know people working in
complexity science maybe some
theoretical biology and so forth and the
rest of biology and Social Sciences in
particular and so things might be moving
kind of fast within complexity science
but they it's not the results and
approaches and way of think ways of
thinking still haven't spread as far as
they need to so I can still go to a
biology department and give a talk and
find you know that they've never walked
over to a physics department or you know
the idea of using maximum entropy
framework or even you know an Ising
model to study you know a biological
system seems silly and it sometimes it
is silly because it's it's their use
inappropriately or without any attention
to mechanism but yeah so there are these
there they're definitely still sort of
like it's it's um the future is it
what's the expression the future is here
but it's not evenly distributed for
complexity sign so that's one issue but
then in terms of the topics and the
questions you know I always tell people
at the public lectures and in the summer
school talks that we sort of have two
types of talks at these at the summer
school and in public lectures to some
extent the one type of talk is the kind
of on the complexity science stuff
that's now been around for a while and
on which there are textbooks so for
example Network science and some
theoretical computer science and maybe
you know dynamical systems
Seagal is Bradley and Chris more
Rainey's book on computation coming from
theoretical computer science
computational biology now competition by
biological systems which is what we do
and you get you know Mark Newman doing
this absolutely outstanding work on
networks and that stuff is it's you know
it's being hammered and it's it's gotten
to the point where it's pedagogical so
there's nice there's cool stuff on the
horizon to do but you know there's like
a core of agreed-upon concepts and
methods developed by these guys and can
be conveyed in a fairly accessible
pedagogical way to - you know we're jr.
or or lay people and then there's this
other stuff and the other stuff tends to
be more like at the borders as we were
talking about earlier between philosophy
and biology or you know just where the
questions are where the where the all
the currency is in working out the
question and in taking that question and
making it amenable to modeling and
theory and and and and gathering data
and that's where another group of
researchers sit is in that space and
certainly like my work and Dave's work
sits there and then the collective
commentation stuff that we do you know
that as you numerated as I often do that
long list of disciplines that informs
collective computation maybe in one or
two of those disciplines do I know you
know as much as my peers maybe one of
them in most of them I am you know I
really don't know that much but I know a
lot about collective computation and I
know a lot and increasingly a lot about
how it relates to ideas about
computation in theoretical computer
science and so this thing that I study
you know it's it's at this in this
liminal space use a word you use earlier
that I quite like it sits in this
liminal space is this sort of
intersection between many different
fields and you have to be very
comfortable drawing from those fields
and working with collaborators is super
important you know more about those
fields than you do and you know being
comfortable not knowing everything and
that's general general featured being in
SFI in order to make progress on these
new in these new areas and so I think
there's a number of new areas like
another one is the thermodynamics of
computation that's that's adjacent to
collect a conversation that people like
David walpert work on and then they're
and they're building on old ideas a
testify but they're they feel new again
they feel new and
you know and I'm very young and and so
I'm always trying to convey to people
you know the difference in the talks and
the summer school talks like here you're
going to be exposed to this new set of
ideas it's not well worked out the
person giving the talk does not know all
the answers
maybe knows more of the questions and
you're gonna be exposed to some or
pedagogical stuff and you shouldn't
confuse the two very good wonderful
distinction you guys like friends is the
network science work of like Mark Newman
which has a really good book called
networks I think or something like that
that's a good example one that's well
worked out and then a lot of the rest of
this stuff is still working progress and
that's probably a good way to think
about it so here's our last question you
spent thousands of hours with primates
of various sorts and I've long been
fascinated by the idea that we have such
close relatives here on earth what do we
think between us and chimps it's 1% one
and a half percent difference in genes
something like that and frankly I'm
saddened in a pretty deep way about
their fate in the wild you spent
thousands of hours with them what are
chimps like and other primates what are
they like you know so I when I was in
graduate school is in the group of
friends Duvall and Franz had he's a
famous that he's a famous Dutch
pathologist and Franz would make this
point and I think it's just so important
and that is when he would hire like a
graduate student or someone to you know
attack to get to help collect data on
the monkeys whether are the chimps tax
rates one of the questions he'd asked
after they spent a couple days up there
on the tower is you know what do you
think of the animals what did you think
of you know monkeys in the group or the
chimps and if they said oh I love them
all they went out and they weren't hired
right so one of the first you know of
points Franz mean would I he's
incredible I insight about social
dynamics and individuals and individual
behavior and so forth this is that just
like in human groups they're you know
there's this incredible heterogeneity
and they have complex personalities and
very interesting social structures and
if you don't see that then you know you
shouldn't be anthologies you should be
collecting these data and so the chimps
to be honest like there's a lot of
variability in how likable chimps are
there are some extremely likeable chimps
and and very intelligent ones or others
that are quite Machiavellian and just
never seem happy and you know I mean
just like
I see the you know the full range there
as well I mean a little lesser in the
macaque but but there too and so chimps
I mean there's this stereotype chimps
you know are the aggressive hierarchical
ones and vinolas are the sort of you
know free love egalitarian ones and
these distinctions are of course they
are stereotypes and they're amplified a
little bit by the politics within the
animal behavior community of who study
you know the randoms of the world from
ring ups at Harvard and the Franz's of
the world or the thomas ellis and their
particular viewpoints on things but
there is something to these distinctions
and it's and it's not necessarily that
these distinctions are have a genetic
basis they might have some genetic basis
but there are distinctions that get
amplified by social structure and to
give you an example of references story
by Robert Sapolsky Sapolsky is a sort of
a neuroscientist who works on cortisol
and and stress and health and and he's
done primate work and studied sort of
the role of cortisol and serotonin and
other things in behavior and dominance
and related phenomena and he studied for
a while yet a field site in Kenya and I
I thought about going there and working
with him I was in grad school but I
remember he had this great story so
these these groups of baboons at this
fields the two groups of baboons I think
and there's a garbage dump and in these
groups of everyone's there are these
very aggressive dominant males and they
they weren't the type of males who
according to the story who you know
modulated their power they abused it
regularly and so there probably was a
fair bit of change but these aggressive
males of course you know by rights got
access to the food at this garbage dump
and they got tuberculosis they died
nobody else ate the garbage and so what
this left it's left is this culture in
this group it were left the only animals
at left were these sort of docile as he
you know supposed to really as a story
he's docile less aggressive males and
the social culture of the baboons
changed and the interesting question was
well was it just gonna last as long as
these young males then became bigger and
older
lived or would it be culturally
inherited were and maybe there's some
gene expression issues and so forth and
in according to Sapolsky was so the next
generation after these younger males
also maintained these social norms so to
speak
the style of interaction they had with
other animals and so you know the chimps
are more aggressive they do seem to be
more aggressive maybe I'm a little bit
more hierarchical then say the bonobos
but I think this is a little bit
overstated and also also it's not
necessarily you know just a kind of like
specie specific thing there's a lot of
plasticity and social structure and
coming back to that downward causation
behaviors get reinforced by this sort of
norms and institutions that are in place
and when those change when the mechanism
or context arises for those things to
change
you can get big changes in the system
and that brings us full circle to the
emergent our social engineering
questions you asked earlier like how do
we intervene who do we remove what
behavioral changes we want to induce you
know what's what's the right way to get
a different social structure to move
from a more despotic society to a
hierarchical one and I think by having
these more informed micro to macro maps
or information processing systems we'll
will be in a better position to do that
and so there's a long answer to your
what is butter chimps like they're you
know they're like their social structure
demands to some extent and to some
extent what their genetics give them but
you shouldn't discount a one shouldn't
discount the importance of social
structure and and social institutions in
animal societies the behavior that we
see and I would add humans as well oh of
course yeah indeed well that was I think
a good wrap-up question it managed to
bring together a lot of the themes that
we've talked about I'd like to thank you
for a truly interesting wild ride into
all the things that you work on and the
stuff that's done at st. the Institute
and elsewhere in these areas I think our
listeners will really like this thank
you a lot yeah thank you Jim I mean
that's wonderful talking to you you have
such an informed and wide-ranging mind
that you know no topic is pretty much
off-limits I like that a lot that's what
we try to do here so
production services and audio editing by
jerod Jane's consulting music by Tom
Muller at modern space music com