I have unlike every other day where I'm
streaming from my house during this time
I am at a friend's cafe below star at
Heather and 16th in Vancouver because we
are all going into the climate March
together in a little bit but I still
wanted to come on and do my regular live
scheduled conversation and my kid City
next week
hey they can't hear you because it's the
mic yeah yeah no please don't
hi there we go okay so keep sitting draw
please know who's gonna who's gonna save
the planet when I can't even get you to
draw a picture although we were talking
on the way as to what what your plans
were no they're not backwards for them
they could actually Oh actually maybe it
is because it's like reverses reverses
all right
it means theoretically I'm doing
something that's not you doing that okay
please don't
I love sit draw let me save the planet
for you so this idea that I had last
week on how to use zoom to host a global
citizens assembly yeah follow her on her
youtube channel as well
she tells stories with helping us
although we're not like peanut because
this one shows your face important to be
on camera unlike your mother
can you please draw I'm gonna go switch
the other way so that you're not on here
that means the random people okay
actually I have an idea could you switch
the other side of the table that way
random people aren't going live and
so I'll buy you a taffy I will stop not
buy you a taffy yeah there we go okay
peanut you're gonna hurt my arm okay
okay I need it pen so give me that pen
no we know I keep my promises no okay
well then you won't be getting a toffee
if you don't so I need one of the Pens
I'm sure I don't need one this is going
so well we're three minutes in I haven't
said anything so citizen assemblies on
zoom' I'm doing something similar
because one there wasn't that much
energy behind people wanting to do this
I think if they could jump on and
participate and see what it is they
would be down with it they're getting
people to understand what my vision is
is always the difficulty so luckily I'm
doing something very similar with the
game V people where we're using zoom to
break off into into think groups into
smaller groups I think around a question
like on the idea cafe channel and then
creating a brain that works no we're not
doing that the universe not that's not
an alignment let's just restart let's
dress without restarting this is this
live just week I can always cancel
although the beginning part so
extinction rebellion has three demands
that they have on their website that you
I was pointed out the us one has a
fourth one which i think is very vital
but I think even what I am saying helps
us get there because if you watch any of
the other videos on creating a global
tech cooperative basically gives us the
tools to do everything in anything so
the three demands that distinction
rebellion says oh I guess no toffee I
don't know oh no okay just draw peanut
it's only for half an hour okay thanks
this is why we need tablets double
tablet my laptop I can be on and a
tablet for her
it's like stellar parenting okay so
there three demands are to tell the
truth so they want them to actually look
at the science acknowledge the science
and then number to do something about it
act now get to net zero by 2025 the
third thing they want them to do is
create citizen assemblies which they've
labeled us beyond politics created an
assembly of citizens that are a
representation of the population based
on diversity that can understand the
science and give what's the word give
recommendations to the government that
the government actually has to follow so
beyond a recommendation so that even if
one government goes in and one
government goes out you have this body
that continues forward I don't know how
long people serve on the citizen
assembly the lifetime appointment um is
it paid how much they don't really get
me tell you about or they could tell you
I'm like we can create citizen
assemblies now and if it was like oh no
we don't want to be on them they're like
jury duty if we want them to exist but
we don't want to be on them so that was
why I think that maybe this is not the
greatest idea is I was under the
impression that people wanted to be on
them wanted to collaborate on
understanding the science and creating a
better world I may have been wrong on
that one but I think that's with
everything that I do it's like this
dichotomy of people who feel qualified
but they're doing other things and want
to get paid for their expertise totally
valid and people who don't feel
qualified and so feel like they don't
have a voice like that they shouldn't
even have a voice and I think both of
those things are a little bit broken
because we need people to come bring
themselves bring their expertise that's
what the idea Cafe is going to be as a
platform for people to be able to come
and have a conversation on video on
voice around a meaningful question and
be given people to talk to you don't
need to bring it
pre-made community which to me is also
where a lot of social media is failing
us it's not designed to actually be
connecting it's designed for there to be
like you show us how connected you are
you have to bring those people together
so creating the tell the truth piece is
where a lot of my ideas in the global
clickable cafe well the cool tech
cooperative our about is looking at
every sector in society in this case
especially climate change and asking
what is it we want to know what is if
perfect science was done what does
everything we want to know I mean even
if you're just looking at co2
I think we should look at way beyond co2
where does it come from what does it do
in the atmosphere what is the actual
like how do we follow the weather
patterns how do we follow the climate in
a way that we can trust it and we can
understand the data and I think a lot of
people are doing that visualization work
but because it's I want to say
sequestered because it's like tiny
groups working independently and then
marketing it none of them have the eyes
on them so they put in all of the work
and all of the money but they don't then
even if you find it it's really cool how
do you know you can trust it so even if
we allow those to be part of our network
taking a step back and asking ok someone
created us who created it how was it
funded is it trustworthy is the data in
it trustworthy that it was based on what
is their incentive what are they trying
to accomplish the people creating it I
think a lot of us are incentive is to
create a better world to get to the
truth but there's also sometimes the
flipside where we then want to fudge the
data in our in our power not if you
don't sit down turns out if they can
pick up that sound on on here not the
act now is like all three of their
demands which I said on my other live
video I went for like 15 minutes
no-one's here so I'm probably gonna keep
this short of 15 minutes because both my
brain is not on points out in
out in the world and but I'm here every
I'm not here here at this time on
YouTube at 11 a.m. every Friday to
answer questions on how the global
cooperative can create a world that
works for everyone because leaving it up
to our governments is never going to
work they're not incentivized to end
poverty or deal with climate change or
do long term long term solutions they're
incentivized to get elected again and to
make sure that as individuals they make
money in the long term with their who's
gonna hire them and what are they
invested in and we can use technology to
take back our politics as well but if we
first require taking back our politics
that's a long arduous process a lot of
money and a lot of time involved and I'm
happy there are people in that sphere
doing that work I'm going to the climate
March today for a reason but I don't
believe we can leave it up to them our
governments are not designed to take the
rapid action that we need and to have
the feedback into the system as the
action they take has implications they
are somewhat designed to overthink the
implications not take action not on the
implications they don't want to own find
out were them like yeah no we need very
basically the opposite of a government
structure and it has to be overarching
they have to support a hundred percent
of their population and they're never
gonna make 100 percent of their
population happy we can come together
just people who care about climate
change just people who care about
believe that that's true can come
together and create the tools to
understand it hopefully we also have
people that are skeptical there so that
we can resonate with them as well
because we're sapiens step back and
asking what should we know and then what
do we know and who funded all of the
studies and then taking action is about
well recreating the industries that are
doing the most damage creating the most
co2 in our name like we're the ones fine
well we could you know if we could
create massive transit together that's
not happening until there's millions
hundreds of millions of us
but for agriculture if we're shipping
our food from one place to another
what does it cost what does it take to
make it closer to you what is a diet
that you like that I mean we can create
a lot of tools and it's nothing to
create tools but not out in a cafe
that's so it so I am going to actually
stop this 50 minutes because there's
nobody here asking questions today I
don't know whether it's the Wi-Fi
connection or what but that's fine I
will see you all next Friday all all of
you next Friday where hopefully there's
a little more of a structure
all right - all right
[Music]
[Music]
you
you