new theory about human nature was put
forward by Sigmund Freud here discovered
he said primitive sexual and aggressive
forces hidden deep inside the minds of
all human beings forces which have not
controlled led individuals and societies
to chaos and destruction this series is
about how those in power have used
Freud's theories to try and control the
dangerous crowd in an age of mass
democracy at the heart of the story is
not just Sigmund Freud but other members
of the Freud camera this episode is
about Freud's American nephew Edward
Bernays her name is almost completely
unknown today but his influence on the
20th century was nearly as great as his
uncle's eye because Bernays was the
first person to take Freud's ideas about
human beings and use them to manipulate
the masses
he showed American corporations for the
first time how they could make people
want things they didn't need by linking
mass-produced goods to their unconscious
desires out of this would come a new
political idea of how to control the
masses by satisfying people's inner
selfish desires one made them happy and
the Stowe Sun it was the start of the
all-consuming self which has come to
dominate our world today
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
Boyd's ideas about how the human mind
works have now become an accepted part
of society that have cyclamens every
year the psychotherapy school is held in
a grand palace Indian this is the
psychotherapy boy psychotherapist come
some advanced patient comes our former
patients come and many other people's
friends but also people from the
Viennese society who like to go to a
nice elegant comfortable going
but it was not always Sun a hundred
years ago Freud's ideas were hated by
Viennese Society at that time Vienna was
the center of a vast empire ruling
Central Europe under the powerful
nobility of Habsburg court Freud's ideas
are not only embarrassing but the very
idea of examining and analysing on their
feelings as a threat to their absolute
control you see at that time these
people had the power and of course if
you just we're not allowed to show your
bloody feelings I mean you just couldn't
you know I mean you couldn't if you were
unhappy can you imagine you for instance
you sit somewhere in the country in a
castle you're deeply unhappy you a woman
you couldn't go to your maid and cry on
on her shoulder so you couldn't go into
the village and and complain you know
about your feelings I mean you couldn't
it was like selling yourself to somebody
to just couldn't you know because they
had to respect you now of course right
as he put that thought very much into
question because you you see to examine
yourselves you would have to put a lot
of other things into question your
society everything but surrounds you and
that wasn't a good thing at that time
one because your sales created Empire to
a certain extent would have fallen to
bits much alia already
but what frightened the rulers of the
Empire even law was Freud's idea that
hidden inside all human beings with
dangerous instinctual drives Freud had
devised a method he called
psychoanalysis by analyzing dreams and
free association
he had unearthed he said powerful sexual
and aggressive forces which were the
remnants of our animal past feelings we
repressed because they were too
dangerous Freud devised a method for
exploring a being part of the name which
we nowadays call the unconscious which
support that is totally unknown to our
consciousness that there exists a
barrier in all our minds which prevents
these hidden and unwelcome impulses for
the unconscious when emerging
good night in 1914 the austro-hungarian
Empire led Europe into war as the horror
mounted Freud saw it as terrible
evidence of the truth of his findings
the saddest thing here is that this is
exactly the way we should have expected
people to behave from our knowledge of
psychoanalysis
[Music]
government's had unleashed the primitive
forces in human beings and no one seemed
to know how to stop at that time
Freud's young nephew Edward Bernays was
working as a press agent in America your
main client was the world-famous opera
singer Caruso who was touring the United
States
[Music]
Bernays his parents had emigrated to
America 20 years before but he kept in
touch with his uncle joined him for
husbands in the arts the b√©arnaise was
now about to return to Europe for a very
different reason on the night that
Caruso opened in Toledo Ohio America
announced it was entering the war
against Germany and Austria as a part of
the war effort
the US government set up a committee on
public information Bernays was employed
to promote America's wines in the press
the President Woodrow Wilson had
announced that the United States would
fight not to restore the old empires but
to bring democracy to all of Europe
there is proved extremely skillful in
promoting this idea as at home and
abroad
and at the end of the world it was asked
to accompany the president to the Paris
Peace Conference
then my surprise they asked me to go
with Woodrow Wilson to the priest column
and at the age of 1926 I was in parish
for the entire time of the peace
conference it was held in the suburb of
ours and we were to make the world safe
for democracy
that was very slow in Wilson's reception
and times astounded our names and the
other American propagandists their
propaganda had portrayed Wilson as a
liberator of the people
a man who would create a new world in
which the individual be free they have
made him a hero of the masses and as he
watched the crowd surged around Wilson
Bernays began to wonder whether it would
be possible to do the same type of mass
persuasion but in peacetime married to
the man says I decided that if you
produce propaganda for war you can
certainly use it for peace and
propaganda got to be a bad word because
of the Germany Union so what I did you
wish to try to find some other words so
we found a way to counsel armed by legal
aid
Verna is returned to New York and set up
as a public relations council and a
small office of Broadway
which was the first time the terms ever
been used since the end of the 19th
century America had become a mass
industrial societies of millions
clustered together in the cities
Bernays was determined to find a way to
manage and alter the way these new
crowds for free thought through this he
turned the writings of his uncle Sigmund
while in Paris Bernays had sent his
uncle a gift of some Havana cigars in
return Freud had sent him a copy of his
general introduction to psychoanalysis
Monet's read it and the picture of
hidden irrational forces inside human
beings fascinated he wondered whether he
might make money by manipulation the
unconscious what Eddie got from Freud
was indeed this idea that there is a lot
more going on in human decision-making
not only among individuals but even more
important among groups than this idea
that information drives behavior and so
Eddie began to formulate this idea that
you had to look at things that were play
to people's irrational emotions and you
see that move Eddie immediately into a
different category from other people in
his field and most government officials
and managers of the day who thought if
you just hit people with all this
factual information they would look at
that and say oh of course
in any group that was not the way the
world worked
Bernays set out to experiment with the
minds of the popular classes his most
dramatic experiment was to persuade
women to smoke at that time those are
two against women smoking and one of his
early clients George Hill the president
of the American tobacco corporation
asked our names to find a way of
breaking it he said we're losing half of
our market because men have invoked the
taboo against women smoking in public
could you know anything about that I
said let me think about it
and then I say by your permission to see
a psychoanalyst to find out what
cigarettes mean to women he said what
Lacoste so I called up dr. Brill a girl
who's a meeting psychoanalyst in New
York at that time I can't even call you
uncle why didn't you call your uncle
he's in yen hey Brill was one of the
first psychoanalyst in America and for
large fee he told Bernays that
cigarettes were a symbol of the penis
and of male sexual power
he told Bernays if he could find a way
to connect cigarettes with the idea of
challenging male power then women would
smoke because then they would have their
own penises every year New York held an
Easter Day parade to which thousands
came and Bearnaise decided to stage an
event he persuaded a group of rich
debutantes to hide cigarettes under
their clothes then they should join the
parade and as a given signal from him
they were to light up the cigarettes
dramatically Bernays then informed the
press that he had heard that a group of
suffragettes were preparing to protest
by lighting up they called torches of
freedom
he knew this would be an Oprah and he
knew that all of the photographer's
would be there to capture this moment
and so he was ready with a phrase which
was torches of freedom and so here you
have a symbol women young women
debutantes smoking a cigarette in public
with a phrase that means anybody who
believes in this kind of equality pretty
much has to support them in the ensuing
debate about this because torches of
freedom
I mean what's on All American coins it's
Liberty she's holding up the torch you
see and so all of this is there together
there's emotion there's memory there's a
rational phrase even though it's using a
lot of emotional elements it's it's a
phrase that works in a rational sense
all of this is together and so the next
day this was not just in all of the New
York papers it was across the United
States and around the world and from
that point forward the sale of
cigarettes to women began to write she
had made them socially acceptable with a
single symbolic act what donors have
created was the idea that if a woman
smoked it made her more powerful and
independent an idea that still persists
today
[Music]
right we embrace made him realize but it
was possible to persuade people to
behave irrationally if you link products
to their emotional desires and feelings
the idea that smoking actually made
women freer was completely irrational
but it made them feel more independent
it meant that irrelevant objects could
become powerful emotional symbols of how
you wanted to be seen by others any
Brunei's saw the way to sell product was
not to sell it to your intellect that
you ought to buy an automobile but that
you will feel better about it if you
have this automobile I think he
originated that idea that they weren't
just purchasing something but they were
engaging themselves emotionally or
personally in the product or service
there's not you you think you need a new
piece of clothing but you'll feel better
with the piece of clothing that was his
contribution in a very real sense we see
it all over the place today but I think
he originated the idea of the emotional
connect to a product or service
[Music]
what Bernays was doing fascinated
America's corporations they had come out
of the war rich and powerful but they
had a growing worried system of mass
production had flourished during the war
and now millions of goods were pouring
off production lines what they were
frightened was the danger of
overproduction it would come a point
when people had enough goods and would
simply stop dying
up until that point the majority of
province the still sold the masses on
the basis of mean other rich had long
been used to luxury goods for the
millions of working-class Americans most
products were still advertised as
necessities goods like shoes stockings
even cars were promoted in functional
terms for their durability the aim of
the advertisements was simply show
people the products practical virtues
nothing more what the corporation's
realized they had to do was transform
the way the majority of Americans
thought about products one leading Wall
Street banker Paul Mazur of Lehman
Brothers was clear about what was
necessary we must shift America he wrote
from a needs to a desires culture people
must be trained to desire to want new
things even before the old had been
entirely consumed
we must shape a new mentality in America
man's desires must overshadow his needs
prior to that time there was no American
consumer there was the American worker
and there was a merkin owner and the
manufacturer and they saved and they ate
what they had do when the people shopped
for what they needed and while the very
rich may have bought things they didn't
need most people did not a maser vision
but break with that way you would have
things that you didn't actually need but
you wanted as opposed and needed and the
man who would be at the center of
changing that mentality for the
corporation's with Edward Bernays
Bernays really is the guy within the
United States more than anybody else we
sort of bring this to the table
psychological theory as something that
is an essential part
wellhow from the corporate side of how
we are going to appeal to the masses
effectively and the whole sort of
merchandising establishments tails and
sales establishment is ready for Sigmund
Freud I mean they are ready for
understanding what motivates the human
mind and so that there's this real
openness to Bernays his techniques being
used to sell products to the masses
beginning in the early 20s the New York
banks undid the creation of chains of
department stores across America they
were to be the outlets for the mass
produced goods and Bearnaise is John was
to produce the new type of customer
we're mais began to create many of the
techniques of mass consumer persuasion
that we now live with he was employed by
William Randolph Hearst promote his new
women's magazines and Bearnaise
glamorized them by placing articles and
advertisements that linked products made
by others of his clans to famous film
stars like Clara Bow who was also his
close Bernays also began the practice of
product placement in the movies and he
dressed the stars of the film's
premieres with clothes and jewelry from
other phones he represents he was he
claimed the first person to tell car
companies they could sell cars as
symbols of male sexuality he employed
psychologists to issue reports that said
products were good for you and then
pretended they were independent studies
the organized fashion showings in
department stores and paid celebrities
to repeat the new and essential message
you bought things not just for need but
to express your inner sense of yourself
to others
[Music]
there are psychology of dress have you
ever thought about it I can express your
character you all have interesting
characters but some of them are all
hidden I wonder why you wear a lot of
dress always the same wear the same hats
the same coats I'm sure all of you are
interesting and have wonderful things
about you but looking at you in the
street you all look so much the same and
that's why I'm talking to you about the
psychology of dress try and express
yourselves better in your dress
[Music]
bring out certain things that you think
a hidden I run a few part of this handle
of your personality like that is the
question Oh what do you like short game
oh look at this more to please
what good does that do you and make you
more attractive done in 1927 an American
journalist wrote a change has come over
our democracy it is called consumptions
the American citizens first importance
to his country is now no longer that a
citizen that that our consumer the
growing wave of consumerism helped in
turn to create a stock market
and yet again Edward Bernays became
involved promoting the novel idea that
ordinary people should buy shares
borrowing money from banks he also
represented and yet again millions
followed his advice he was uniquely
knowledgeable about how people in large
numbers are going to react to products
and ideas so but in turn in political
terms if he were to go out so I can't
imagine that he'd get three people
standing listen wasn't particularly
articulate was a kind of funny looking
and didn't have any sense of reaching
out for people one on one none at all
he didn't talk about didn't think about
people in groups of one thought about
people in groups of thousand Bernays
scene became famous as the man who
understood the mind of the crowd and in
1924 the president contacted him
President Coolidge was a quiet taciturn
man and had become a national joke the
press portrayed him as a doll humorless
figure
Bernays his solution was to do exactly
the same as he had done with products he
persuaded 34 famous film stars to visit
the White House and for the first time
politics became involved with public
relations and now Landel the 34 people
and I'd say what's your name
he's Al Jolson I'd say mr. president
Al Jolson next say every newspaper in
United States had a front page story
reading courage and attains actors at
White House and The Times and a headline
which said president merely left and
everybody was happy
but while b√©arnaise became rich and
powerful in America in Vienna his uncle
was facing disaster like much of Europe
the ni was suffering an economic crisis
and massive inflation which wiped out
all of Freud's savings facing bankruptcy
he wrote to his nephew for help
Bernays responded by arranging for
Freud's works to be published for the
first time in America began to send his
uncle precious dollars which Freud kept
secretly in a foreign bank account
he was Freud's agent if you will to get
his books published well of course
once the books were being published and
he couldn't help himself but promote
these books see that everybody around
them make them controversial emphasize
the fact that do you know what Freud
says about sex and what he says
cigarettes are a symbol of and so on and
so forth hi suppose all those stories
got out certainly the academics weren't
spreading these around the country Eddie
Bernays was then when Freud became
accepted well then of course to go to to
a client say well uncle singie see then
that had some cachet but notice their
first Eddie created uncle siggy in the
US made him acceptable secondly and
thirdly then capitalized a little thingy
typical Bernays performance Bruner is
also suggested that Freud promote
himself in the United States he proposed
his uncle write an article for
cosmopolitan a magazine that Bernays
represented entitled a woman's mental
place in the home
Freud was furious such an idea he said
was unthinkable
it was vulgar and anyway he hated
America Freud was now becoming
increasingly pessimistic about human
beings
in the mid-twenties he retreated in the
summers to the Alps sometimes staying in
an old hotel the posse Armour it's in
Berchtesgaden
it is now ruined lloyd began to write
about group behavior about how easily
the unconscious aggressive forces in
human beings could be triggered when
they were in crowds
Freud believed he had underestimated the
aggressive instincts in human beings
they were far more dangerous but he'd
originally thought after World War 1 for
it was a basically pessimist
he felt that man is any impossible
creature a very very sadistic and and
bad species and they did not believe
that man can be involved men said the
horses Amur the most office annual of a
exist the enjoy torturing and killing
and he didn't like name publication of
Freud's works in America have an
extraordinary effect on journalists and
intellectuals in the 1920s what
fascinated and frightened them was the
picture Freud painted of submerged
dangerous forces lurking just under the
surface of modern society
forces that could erupt easily to
produce the frenzied mob which had the
power to destroy even governments it was
this they believed had happened in
Russia to many this member one of the
guiding principles of mass democracy is
wrong to believe that human beings could
be trusted to make decisions on a
rational basis the leading political
writer walter Lippmann argued that if
human beings were in reality driven by
unconscious irrational forces then it
was necessary to rethink democracy what
was needed was a new elite who could
manage what he called the bewildered
herd this would be done through
psychological techniques that would
control the unconscious feelings of the
masses so here you have water little
probably the most influential political
thinker in the United States who is
essentially saying that the basic
mechanism of the mass mind is unreason
is a rationality is animality he
believes that the mob in the street
which is how he sees ordinary people or
people who are driven not by their minds
but by their spinal cords the notion of
kind of animal drives unconscious
instinctual drives lurking beneath the
surface of civilization and so they
started looking towards psychological
science as a way of understanding the
mechanisms by which the popular mind
works specifically with the goal of
figuring out how to understand how to
apply those mechanism to strategies for
social control Edward Bernays was
fascinated by Littman's arguments and
also saw a way to promote himself by
using
in 1920s he began to write a series of
books which argued that he had developed
the very techniques Lippmann was calling
for by stimulating people's inner
desires and then sating them with
consumer products he was creating a new
way to manage the irrational force of
the masses the Gaudet the engineering of
consent democracy - my father was a
wonderful concept but I don't think he
felt that all those public's out there
would have reliable judgment and that
they could that they very easily might
vote for the wrong man or want the wrong
thing so that they had to be guided from
above
it's enlightened despotism in a sense
you appeal to their desires and their
unrecognized longings that sort of thing
that you can tap into their deepest
desires or their deepest fears and use
it to your own purposes then in 1928 the
president came to power who agreed with
Bernays
President Hoover was the first
politician to articulate the idea that
consumers have become the central motor
of American life after his election he
told a group of advertisers and public
relations men you have taken over the
job of creating desire and have
transformed people into constantly
moving happiness machines machines which
have become the key to economic progress
what was beginning to emerge in 1920s
there's a new idea of how to run mass
democracy at its heart was the consuming
self it's not only made the economy work
it was happy and personal so created a
stable society both relays and liberals
concept of managing the masses takes the
idea of democracy and it turns it into a
palliative it turns it into giving
people some kind of feel-good medication
that will respond to an immediate pain
or immediate yearning but will not alter
the objective circumstances one iota
I mean democracy really the idea of
democracy at its heart was about
changing the relations of power that had
governed the world for so long
and Bearnaise concept of democracy was
one of maintaining the relations of
power even if it meant that one needed
to sort of stimulate the psychological
lives of the public and in fact in his
mind that was what was necessary but if
you can keep stimulating the irrational
self then leadership can basically go on
doing what it wants to do Bernays now
became one of the central figures and a
business elite that dominated American
society and politics in the 1920s he
also became extremely rich and lived in
a suite of rooms in one of New York's
most expensive hotels where he gave
frequent parties oh my good he had a
home in the corner suite of the
sherry-netherland hotel and here's this
wonderful suite Lolly's windows looking
out on Central Park and across at the
Plaza and on the square and he would use
this place to hold a soiree
the mayor would come all the media
leaders would come the political leaders
the business leaders the people in the
arts I mean it was a who's who people
wanted to know Eddie Bernays because you
know he himself became a sort of a
famous man a sort of a magician who
could make these things happen
he knows that
everybody knows the mayor and he knows
the senator and he called politicians on
the telephone as if he did get I've been
literally a hire bang out of doing what
he did and that's fine but it can be a
little hard on the people around you
especially when you make other people
feel stupid people who work for him were
stupid children was stupid and if people
did things in a way that he didn't that
he wouldn't have done them they were
stupid that was there was a word that he
used over and over and over dope and
stupid glasses they was stupid but
Bernays his power was about to be
destroyed dramatically and by a type of
human rationality he could do nothing to
control at the end of October 1929
Bernays organized a huge national event
to celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of
the invention of the light bulb
President Hoover the leaders of major
corporations and bankers like john d
rockefeller we're all summoned by
grenades to celebrate the power of
American business but even as they
gathered news came through that shares
on the New York Stock Exchange were
beginning to fall catastrophic
[Music]
throughout the 19th century speculators
had borrowed billions of dollars the
banks had promoted the idea that this
was a new era where market crashes were
a thing of the past but they were wrong
what was about to happen was the biggest
stock market crash in history investors
had panicked and began to sell in a
blind relentless fury but no reassurance
but bankers or politicians could halt
and on the 29th of October 1929 the
market collapsed
[Music]
the effect of the crash on the American
economy was disastrous faced with
recession and unemployment millions of
American workers stopped buying goods
they didn't need to consume abou that
Bernays had done so much to engineer
disappeared and he in the profession of
public relations fell from failure
Bernays his brief moment of clouds
seemed to be over the effects of the
Wall Street Crash on Europe was also
catastrophic it intensified the growing
economic and political crisis in the new
democracies in both Germany and Austria
there were violent street battles
between the armed wings a different
political party against this backdrop
Freud who is suffering from cancer of
the jaw retreated yet again to the Alps
he wrote a book called civilization and
its discontents it was a powerful attack
on the idea that civilization was an
expression of human progress instead
Freud argued civilization had actually
been constructed to control the
dangerous animal forces inside human
beings what was implicit in Freud's
argument was that the ideal of
individual freedom which was at the
heart of democracy was impossible human
beings could never be allowed to truly
express themselves because it was too
dangerous they must always be controlled
would thus always be discontented
man does not to be civilized and he is a
Lord civilization brings discontent but
is necessary to survival otherwise he
couldn't survive so he must be
discontent because this will be the only
way to keep him within limits
what did Freud think about the idea of
the ecology of man he didn't believe in
it we had 32 parties and it was it
before those parties don't vanish there
is no Germany that's true you can't have
32 parties and so they felt this wrong
person will put an end to this comedy
Freud was not alone in his pessimism
politicians like Adolf Hitler emerge
from a growing despair in 1920s about
democracy the Nazis were convinced the
democracy was dangerous because it
unleashed a selfish individualism but
didn't have a means to control it it was
party the National Socialists stood in
elections promising in their propaganda
they would abandon democracy because of
the chaos and unemployment it led to it
[Music]
in March 1933 the National Socialists
were elected to power in Germany and
they set out to create a society that
would control human beings in a
different way one of their first acts
was to take control of business the
planning production would in future
should be done by the state the free
market was too unstable as the crash in
America a true worth of leisure time was
also planned by the state to your new
organization could strength through joy
one of its models with service not such
[Music]
but the Nazis did not see this as a
return to an old form of autocratic
control it was a new alternative to
democracy in which the feelings and the
desires of the masses would still be
central but they would be channeled in
such a way as to bind the nation
together
chief exposes as Joseph Goebbels and
minister of propaganda s mass food
stained mats of as Ibsen the Alpha viren
root est√° el volc√°n de s the sheriff and
his focus supervinlin will just occupy
Goebbels organized huge rallies whose
function he said was to forge the mind
of the nation to a unity of thinking
feeling and desire one of his
inspirations he told the American
journalist was the writings of Freud's
nephew Edward Bernays
in his work on crowd psychology Freud
described how the frightening
irrationality inside human beings could
emerge in such groups the deep what he
called libidinal forces of desire given
up to the leader while the aggressive
instincts unleashed on those outside the
group Freud wrote this is a warning but
the Nazis were deliberately encouraging
these forces because they believed they
could master and control muscles are
bound by the business object or they
love each other and delegate ideas and
agree to the chat window the big
movement
favored wasn't dependent on oil positive
love this is delicate
[Music]
I could see from afar looking up with
empathy towards wooded Linden
how are those hello thousands of people
when they posted it could completely the
nearness they began to shout his wife I
will never get out of my ear Kylie Kylie
medicine and here I got confirmation how
those irrational forces good
controllable folks enjoy in the drone
everyone put out we are running wild
when you pump much marching on
[Music]
and in America to democracy was under
threat from the force of the angry mob
the effect of the stock market crash had
been disastrous there was growing
violence was an angry population took
out their frustration on the
corporations who were seem to have
covered this disaster
then in 1932 a new president was elected
who is also going to use the power of
the state to control the free market but
his aim was not to destroy democracy but
to strengthen it and to do this he was
going to develop a new way dealing with
the masses I am prepared under my
constitutional duty to recommend
measures that are stricken Mason in the
midst of a stricken world may require
but in the event that the national
emergency is still critical
I shall not evade the clear course of
duty that will then confront me I shall
ask the Congress for the one remaining
instrument to meet the crisis broad
executive power
[Music]
this was the start of what would become
known as the New Deal Roosevelt
assembled a group of young technocrats
and planners in Washington he told them
that their job was to plan and run jar
new industrial projects for the good of
the nation
Roosevelt was convinced the stock market
crash had shown that Lacey faire
capitalism could no longer run modern
industrial economies it had become the
job of government big business was
horrible but the New Deal attracted the
aberration of the Nazis especially
Joseph Goebbels propaganda clunk in
America with Emma Lagos in positivity in
treta windows in dr. festive observing
the President Roosevelt will celebrate
of the mystique in Vegas in a candle
dish in the top undisclosed webshop
visions of Keala problem Alice 1815 and
min Jordan are about flows and we
reflect on the machine and hidden
controllin for love and harmony read an
era an era battling sorts of urine does
commish align the prevention initiative
evil oscillating I'll start even if that
person began it wasn't hidden math snob
and anger but although Roosevelt liked
fun options was trying to organize
society in a different way unlike
villages he believed that human beings
were rational and could be trusted to
take an active part in government
Roosevelt believed it was possible to
explain his policies to ordinary
Americans and take into account their
opinions to do this he was helped by the
new ideas of an American social
scientist called George Gallup
favorite reading of New Deal Washington
at the survey of US public opinion from
officers at Princeton New Jersey of pain
statistician dr. George Gallup tells
Washington from week to week what the
nation is thinking and in New York
Fortune magazine's analyst Elmo Roper
compiles for publication a continuous
record of the nation's approval or
disapproval of how the country is being
run Gallup and Roper rejected Bernays
his view that human beings were at the
mercy of unconscious forces and so
needed to be controlled their system of
opinion polling was based on the idea
that people could be trusted to know
what they wanted they argued that one
could measure and predict the opinions
and behavior of the public if one are
strictly factual questions and avoided
manipulating their emotions well how
about this one do you think thank sandy
Roosevelt's New Deal has been bad to the
nation in general now that questions
loaded it automatically suggests Mantid
well how about this is your presence
feeling toward Christ and rose above one
of general approval or general
disapproval that's better
prior to scientific polling the view of
many people was that you couldn't trust
public opinion it was irrational that it
was ill-informed chaotic unruly and so
forth and so that opinion should be
dismissed but with scientific polling I
think it established very clearly that
people do are rational that they do make
good decisions and this offers democracy
a chance to be truly informed by the
public giving everybody a voice in the
way the country is run I know my father
wouldn't necessarily say the voice of
the public is the voice of God but he he
did feel very much that the voice of the
people is a rational voice and should be
heard what Roosevelt was doing was
forging a new connection between the
masses and politicians no longer were
they irrational consumers who were
managed by stating that his eyes he said
they were sensible citizens who could
take part in the governing of the
country in 1936 Roosevelt stood for
re-election he promised further control
of a big business to the corporation's
it was the beginning of a dictatorship
Roosevelt interferes with private
enterprise and is running the country
into debt for generations to come
the way to get recovery is to let
business alone the Roosevelt was
triumphantly reelected my friends like a
real landslide this time thank you again
and tell you and I hope to see you all
very soon and vigil and affectionate
goodnight faced with this business now
decided to fight back to regain power in
America at the heart of the battle would
be Edward Bernays and the profession
here invented public relations following
that election business people start to
get together and start to carry on
discussions primarily in private and
they start talking to each other about
the need to sort of carry on ideological
warfare against the New Deal and to sort
of reassert the sort of connectedness
between the idea of democracy on the one
hand and the idea of privately owned
business on the other and so under the
umbrella of an organization which still
exists which is called the National
Association of Manufacturers and whose
membership included all of the major
corporations of the United States a
campaign is launched explicitly designed
to create emotional attachments between
the public and big business it's Bernays
his techniques being used on a grand
scale I mean totally
General Motors parade of progress
traveling the high roads and fire roads
of America bringing to millions of
Americans in their own hometown the
fascinating story behind modern industry
drawing act the campaign set out to show
dramatically that it was business not
politicians who had created modern
America better mode of living were
Oliver
Bernays was an advisor to General Motors
but he was no longer alone the industry
he had founded now flourished as
hundreds of public relations advisors
organized a vast campaign they not only
used virtus pants and billboards but
managed to insinuate their message into
the editorial pages of the newspapers it
became a bitter fight in response to the
campaign the government made films that
warned of the unscrupulous manipulation
of the press by big business and the
central villain was the new figure of
the public relations man they tried to
achieve their aims by working entirely
behind the scenes corrupting and
deceiving the public the aims of such
groups may be either good or bad so far
as the public interest is concerned but
their methods are a grave danger to
democratic institutions the films also
showed how the responsible citizen could
monitor the press themselves they could
create a chart that analyzed the
reporting for signs of hidden bias but
such earnest instruction was to be no
match for the powerful imagination of
Edward Bernays
[Music]
he was about to help create a vision of
the Utopia that free-market capitalism
would build in America if it was
unleashed in 1939 New York hosted the
World's Fair Edward Bernays was a
central advisor he insisted that the
theme be the link between democracy and
American business
[Music]
at the heart of the fair was a giant
white dome the Bernays named democracy
and the central exhibit was a vast
working model of America's future
constructed by the General Motors
Corporation - my father the World's Fair
was an opportunity to keep the status
quo that is capitalism in a democracy
democracy and capitalism that marriage
right linking like just like that he did
that by manipulating people and getting
them to think that she couldn't have
real democracy in anything but a
capitalist society which was capable of
doing anything of creating these
wonderful highways of of making Vidal
moving pictures inside everybody's house
of telephones that didn't need cords of
sleek roadsters I mean it was if they
were it was it was it was consumerist
but at the same time you inferred that
in a funny way democracy and capitalism
weren't together the world's power was
an extraordinary success and captured
America's imagination the vision it
portrayed was of a new form of democracy
in which business responded to people's
innermost desires in a way politicians
could never do
but it was a form of democracy that
depended on treating people not as
active citizens and Roosevelt did but as
passive consumers because this Bernays
believed is the key to control and a
mass democracy it's not that the people
are in charge but that the people's
desires are in charge the people are not
in charge the people exercise no
decision-making power within this
environment so democracy is reduced from
something which assumes an active
citizenry to the idea of the public as
passive consumers Oh driven primarily
provide instinctual or unconscious
desires and that if you can in fact
trigger those needs and desires you can
get what you want from them but this
struggle between the two views of human
beings as to whether they were rational
or irrational was about to be
dramatically affected by events in
Europe events that would also change the
fortunes of the Freud family
in March 1938 the Nazis annexed Austria
it was called the anxious Hitler arrived
in Vienna to an extraordinary outpouring
of mass adulation but even as he drove
through the city behind the scenes the
Nazis were systematically whipping up
and unleashing the hatred of the crowd
against the enemies of the new Greater
Germany the anthems was a kind of
exploring of terrible hatred against the
enemies so-called enemies of whatever
they considered enemies against the Jews
in totally and also against a lot of
latest audiences who had opposed the
Nazis in Austria they said it's
legitimate now you can do what you want
so they did it stealing robbing and
killing and can save anyone and human
depravity of course is always near very
near to to normally it can change very
quickly
as the violence and assassinations raged
in Vienna
Freud decided he had to leave his aim
was to go to Britain but he knew that
Britain like many countries was refusing
entry to most Jewish refugees but health
came from the leading psychoanalyst in
Britain Ernest Jones he was in the same
ice skating Club as the Home Secretary
Sir Samuel 4 and Jones persuaded her to
issue Freud a British work permit
and in May 1938 Freud his daughter Anna
and other members of his family set off
for London Freud arrived in London as
Britain was preparing for war he settled
with his daughter Anna in a house in
Hampstead
but Freud's cancer was now far advanced
and in September 1939 just three weeks
after the outbreak of war he died the
second world war would utterly transform
the way government's saw democracy and
the people they govern next week's
program will show how the American
government as a result of the war became
convinced the worst savage dangerous
forces hidden inside all human beings
forces that needed to be controlled the
terrible evidence from the death camps
seemed to show what happened when these
forces were Unleashed and politicians
and planners in post-war America would
come to believe that hidden under the
surface of their own population for the
same dangerous forces
and they would turn to the Freud family
to help control his enemy within and
[Music]
ever adaptable Edward Bernays would work
not just for the American government but
the CIA and Sigmund Freud's daughter
Anna would also become powerful in the
United States because she believed that
people could be taught to control the
irrational forces within it out of this
would come vast government programs to
manage the inner psychological life of
the masses the century of the self
continues next Sunday night on BBC two
same time 8:00 o'clock tonight the final
part of SAS make
[Music]
[Music]
about dreams we all have thoughts which
we never know we had they are too
uncomfortable to incompatible with our
entire self to be remembered yet they
are often disturbing rambling under the
surface like lava in volcano the dream
is the Royal Road to be sought the Royal
Road to the unscented this is the story
of how Sigmund Freud's ideas about the
unconscious mind who used by those in
power in post-war American to try and
control the masses politicians and
planners came to believe that Freud was
right to suggest that hidden deep within
all human beings were dangerous and
irrational desires and fears they were
convinced that it was the unleashing of
these instincts that had led to the
barbarism of Nazi Germany to stop it
ever happening again they set out to
find ways to control this hidden enemy
within the human mind at the heart of
the story
our Sigmund Freud's daughter Anna and
his nephew Edward Bernays who had
invented the profession of public
relations their ideas were used by the
US government big business and the CIA
to develop techniques to manage and
control the minds of the American people
those in power believed that the only
way to make democracy work and create a
stable society was to repress the savage
barbarism that lurked just under the
surface of normal American life
[Music]
Oh
[Music]
[Applause]
the story begins in the middle of the
fierce fighting second world war as the
fighting intensified the American army
was faced by an extraordinary number of
mental breakdowns among its troops
forty-nine percent of all soldiers
evacuated from combat were sent back
because they suffered from mental
problems in desperation the army turned
to the new ideas of psychoanalysis they
made a film record of the experiment
using hidden cameras it says here on
your record that you hate the giant
crying film yes I believe in your
profession is called nostalgia now there
is something yes it was induced when
shortly before the war I received mentor
one sweetheart
I can't I'd alright
it was the first time that anyone had
paid such attention to the feelings and
anxieties of ordinary people at the
heart of the experiment were a number of
refugees psychoanalysts from Central
Europe they worked with American
psychiatrist to guide and shape the
project when I first came to America I
worked in the psychiatric service with
soldiers trying to rehabilitate them and
I traveled in the Train
from the east coast to the west coast I
was enormous ly curious what goes on in
all of those little towns that a train
is passing after my years in the army I
knew exactly what everybody was doing in
the little towns because I I saw so many
people who came from there and I
understood their aspirations their
disappointment and so forth so it was as
if somebody invited me to a privilege to
in the into the inner soul of America
I'm not doing this deliberately so
crazily hard I doubt you believe you
know a display of emotion is sometimes
very helpful now I hope so sorry I guess
it'll be said well sir perfectly honest
with you I'm very low General that must
be hard
he has been the one person that gave me
a sense of importance is that through
her cooperation with me we were able to
surmount so many obstacles take anything
I just opted psychoanalysts use
techniques developed by Freud to take
the men back into their past they became
convinced that the breakdowns were not
the direct result of fighting the stress
of combat had merely triggered old
childhood memories these were memories
of the men's own violent feelings and
desires which they had repressed
because they were too frightening they
let's go back to the psychoanalyst it
was overwhelming proof of Freud's theory
that underneath human beings were driven
by primitive irrational forces you want
a world war ii was a major shattering
experience because I discovered the
enormous all of the irrational in the
life of most people that I can say that
I learned that the the ratio between the
irrational and the rational in America
is very much in favor of the irrational
that there is much greater unhappiness
much more suffering much more affair the
country then one would imagine it from
from the adversity from their thirties
words that you get a much more
problematic country victory in the
Second World War was celebrated as a
triumph of democracy but in private many
policymakers were worried about the
implications of the analysis of the
soldiers it seemed to show that
underneath every American were
irrational violent crimes
what happened in Germany seemed to bear
this out the complicity of so many
ordinary Germans in mass killings during
the war so just how easily these forces
could break through overwhelm democracy
[Music]
planners and policy makers had been
convinced by their experiences during
World War two that human beings could
act very irrationally because of this
sort of teeming and raw and
unpredictable emotionality the kind of
chaos that lived at the at the base of
human personality could in fact infect
the society social institutions to such
a point that the society itself would
become sick that's what they believe
happened in Germany in which the
irrational the anti-democratic
went wild
what was the vision of human nature is
incredibly destructive and they were
terrified that Americans would in fact
fact behave that way or were capable of
behaving that way and they wanted to
avoid a rerun of that so what is needed
is a human being that can internalize
democratic values so that they are not
shaken with historic analysis carried
ett promise that it can be done it
opened up new vistas as to how the inner
structure of the human being can be
changed so that he becomes a more vital
free supporter and maintainer of
democracy psychoanalysts were convinced
they not only understood these dangerous
forces but they knew how to control them
too they would use their techniques to
create democratic individuals because
democracy left to itself failed to do
this
the source of this idea was not only
Sigmund Freud but his youngest daughter
Anna she had fled with her father to
London before the outbreak of war and
after he died Anna Freud became the
acknowledged leader of the world
psychoanalytic movement she saw her job
was to fulfill her father's dream of
making his ideas accepted throughout the
world let the center of the Freid
movement stood auntie Anna because she
managed to work herself into that
position she was recognized as that and
not just because she was a daughter she
worked she worked on that she was rather
forbidding he was what to me a warm
person not an arm thinking you could
kiss or put your arms around not at all
and her whole life rotated around the
spreading of psychoanalysis Freud
himself had seen the role of
psychoanalysis as allowing people to
understand their unconscious drives Anna
Freud believed it was possible to teach
individuals how to control these inner
forces he'll come to believe this -
analysing children above all the
children of her close friend Dorothy
Burlington Dorothy Burlingham was an
American millionaire as' who in the
1920s fled a failed marriage and brought
her children to Anna Freud in Vienna
they were suffering terrible anxieties
and aggression but Anna Freud was
convinced she could free them from our
changing the world around them she
thought that she could come in and into
their environment essentially because
they were children you see they didn't
have independent lives of their own she
could go talk to the parents or the
mother she could go to the school she
could influence their real world the
actual external world to change their
lives and to to help them has changed
people I think that was part of what her
idea was is that she felt that she could
change them from her analysis of the
burning of children Anna Freud developed
a theory of how to control the inner
drives it was simple you taught the
children to conform to the rules of
society but this was more than just
moral guidance Anna Freud believed that
if children like the Burling hams
strictly followed the rules of accepted
social conduct
then as they grew up the conscious part
of their mind what was called the ego
would be greatly strengthened in its
struggle to control the unconscious but
if children did not conform their ego
would be weak and they would be prey to
the dangerous forces of the unconscious
in my father's case they were concerned
that he would be a homosexual and so a
lot of their efforts went into
preventing or trying to stop my father
from becoming a homosexual whether or
not he would have or did or you know is
you know unknown to me why did they were
stopped because they felt it was
abnormal it wasn't a it wasn't a normal
way to develop they wanted to have him
develop a long lines that society
recognized to be normal because if they
didn't then you're going to be under the
control of forces that you don't
understand that you're not even aware of
the analysis seemed to be a great
success and in the 30s the Burling and
children had returned to America they
settled down to happy married lives in
the suburbs what they didn't realize was
that their experience was about to
become a template for job social
experiment to control the inner mental
life of the American population in 1946
President Truman signed the National
Mental Health Act it had been born
directly out of the wartime discoveries
by psychoanalysts that millions of
Americans who have been drafted suffered
hidden anxieties and fields the aim of
the Act was to deal with this invisible
threat to society
shocked by the appalling percentage of
the emotionally unstable revealed by the
world war two draft figures Congress in
1946 passed the National Mental Health
Act which recognized for the first time
that mental illness was a national
problem keenly aware of the tremendous
problems ahead is dr. Robert H Felix
director of the vast new project a
primary objective of the National mental
health program is to increase our fund
of scientific knowledge about mental
health and about mental illness we're
not doing this why because there are all
too few skilled mental health workers
two of the principal architects of the
act with a Menninger brothers Carl and
will will had run the wartime
psychotherapy experiments and now he and
his brother began to train hundreds of
new psychiatrists the men England's were
convinced that it would be possible to
apply Anna Freud ideas on a wide scale
and to adults as well as children the
psychiatrists job would be to teach
ordinary Americans how to control their
unconscious drives psychoanalysis could
be used to make a better society
they said psychoanalytic thinking could
make for the betterment of society
because you could change the way the
mind functioned and you could take the
ways in which people did hurtful things
to themselves and others and alter them
by enlarging their understanding and
this was the vision psychoanalysis
brought if you can really change me that
you can really change people
and you could change them almost in
limitless plains in the late forties a
vast project began in America to apply
the ideas of psychoanalysis to the
masses psychological guidance centers
were set up in hundreds of towns there
was staffed by psychiatrists who
believed it was their job to control the
hidden forces inside the minds of
millions of ordinary Americans
yes I need something done I need some
help
would you have any particular teachers
if you'd like so all I call my teachers
a Czech long and what was the trouble of
this one and she just scared me most of
the time caller I mean I ran outside and
vomit I rolled the surprised at the same
time thousands of counselors were
trained to apply psychoanalysis to
marriage guidance and social workers
were sent out to visit people's homes
and advise on the psychological
structure family life behind all this
was the fundamental idea of Anna Freud
but if people were encouraged to conform
to the accepted patterns of family and
social life then their ego would be
strengthened they would be able to
control the dangerous forces within them
your emotions control your actions it
affects not only yourself but the people
around and if this sort of flare-up is
repeated often that might lead to a
permanently walk personality you can
control the fire of your emotion so that
your personality becomes more pleasant
so we expected someone who's been
through that experience is much more
insightful much more understanding and a
much better regulated person and what
happens in regulation includes being
able to let go as it were to enjoy a
football game or a soccer game
a more understanding
yes rational but also a puppet almost no
person the regulatory aspects of human
mind would really be in charge instead
of instead of being overwhelmed by our
passions and by our darker impulses that
one would be master or mistress of one's
own passions they just felt that the
road to happiness was in adapting to the
external world in which they that people
could be under a de conflicts and
impulses that they would not engage in
self-destructive behavior that they
would in fact adapt to the reality about
them they never questioned the reality
they never questioned that it might
itself be a source of evil or something
to which you could not adapt without
without compromise or without suffering
or without exploiting yourself in some
way so there was this fit with the
politics of the day and a balls of
emotions is important to a well-rounded
personality but it was only the
beginning of the rise to power
psychoanalysis in America
psychoanalysts we're about to move into
big business and use their techniques
not just to create model citizens that
model consumers last week's episode
showed how Freud's American nephew
Edward Bernays had been the first to
convince American corporations that they
could sell products by connecting them
with people's unconscious feelings but
now a group of psychoanalyst were going
to take what Bernays had begun and
invent a whole range of techniques to
get inside and manage the unconscious
mind the consumer they were led by
earnest dicta Victor had practiced next
door to Freud in Vienna but he had come
to America and set up the Institute for
motivational research in an old mansion
north of New York this is the Institute
for motivational research a place
devoted to the intriguing business of
finding out why people behave as they do
why they buy as they do why they respond
to advertising as they do and this is
dr. Ernest Victor we don't go out and
ask directly
why do you buy why don't you what we try
to do instead is to understand the total
personality the self-image of the
customer we use all the resources of
modern social sciences it opens up some
stimulating psychological techniques for
selling any new product
like the other psychoanalysts dictor
believed that American citizens were
fundamentally irrational beings they
could not be trusted their real reasons
for buying products were rooted in
unconscious desires and feelings and
dictor wanted to find ways to uncover
what he called the secret self of the
American consumer he was trying to get
our peoples mind the unconscious
motivations that they had for purchasing
these could be sexual they could be
psychological they could be sociological
there could be a demand for status a
demand for recognition there were things
that people couldn't verbalize or
wouldn't verbalize because they were too
secret to them there were too much a
part of their nature and there were they
would be embarrassed they would be
embarrassed if they came out and said
things like this he would interview
people but not ask them direct questions
but let them talk freely like you do in
psychoanalysis and that was his
background and so he said why can't we
have a group therapy session about
products all right and so Viktor built
this room up above his garage and that
he said we can have psychoanalysis of
products they can actually act out and
verbalize their wants and needs what
we're going to do is try a couple of
these salad dressings now let's see what
happens there is our typical house why
not empower the obstruction and they
could be observed and watched and other
people could comment and they could talk
about it and everybody could join in he
was the first to do this this was
absolutely the first thing that was ever
done and he had a movie projector up
there where you could show
advertisements and things like that and
people could react to them and he
invented the whole technique for mining
the unconscious about the hidden
psychological wants that people had
about products this became the focus
group it worked
Victor's breakthrough came with a focus
group study he did for Betty Crocker
foods like many food manufacturers in
the early fifties they had invented a
new range of instant convenience foods
but although consumers have told market
researchers they would welcome the idea
in fact they were refusing to buy them
the worst problem was the Betty Crocker
click mix dictated a series of focus
groups where housewives free associated
about the cake mix we concluded that
they felt unconscious guilt the new
image being promoted of ease and
convenience in other words he understood
that the barrier to the consumption of
the product was the housewives feeling
of guilt about using it but basically
our one hand market make it easy for
themselves but they felt guilty about it
so what you've got to do in those
circumstances is it removed the barrier
barrier being guilt the way to do that
is to give the housewife a greater sense
of participation and how do you do that
by adding an egg simple as that recently
dictor told Betty Crocker - quite an
instruction on the packet that the
housewife should add an egg it would be
an unconscious symbol he said of the
housewife mixing in her own eggs as a
gift to her husband and so would lessen
the guilt Betty Crocker did it and the
sales soared my cake is ready to see you
may have basic needs that the consumer
himself herself doesn't fully understand
you have to know what those needs are in
order to fully exploit the consumer
[Applause]
is it wrong to give people what they
want by taking away their defenses
helping bring remove their defenses they
seem so much longer than last year's it
is nearly four is longer in some models
o dicta success led to a rush by
corporations and advertising agencies to
employ psycho analysts they became known
as the depth force and they promised to
show companies how to make millions by
connecting their products with people's
hidden desires dicta himself became a
millionaire famous for inventing slogans
like a tiger in your tank even the
marketing of the Barbie doll came from a
children's focus group and though it
goes the dicta was convinced that this
was far more than just selling like an
affluent he believed that the
environment could be used to strengthen
the human personality and products have
the power both to sate in a design and
give people a feeling of common identity
with those around them it was a strategy
for creating a stable society dictor
called it the strategy of design
so the spell of stable sizzle you have
to know that modern man quite often
tries to work off his frustrations by
spending on self gratification modern
man is eternally ready to fill out a
self-image by purchasing products which
complement if you identify yourself with
a product it can have a therapeutic
value it improves your self-image and
you become a more secure person and you
have suddenly this confidence of going
out in the world and doing what you want
successfully planets believe that that
would then improve the role of our
society and become the best Society on
this planet
by the early fifties the ideas of
psychoanalysis have penetrated deep into
American life psychoanalysts themselves
became rich and part when he had
consulting rooms overlooking Central
Park in New York politicians and famous
writers like Arthur Miller and Tennessee
Williams became their patients the
mission cannot just help but to
understand the hidden roots of human
behavior
we were sought after Washington was
interest in what we think you know they
the important important writers
important politicians were undergoing
circle analysis it was we had we had
waiting lists because there were so many
patients that wanted to be analyzed so
it gave us a little bit of a swell head
and as the psychoanalyst ideas took hold
in America a new elite began to emerge
in politics social planning and in
business not lead this elite was the
assumption that the masses were
fundamentally irrational to make a
free-market democracy like American work
one had to use psychological techniques
to control mass irrational
they actually believed that this elite
was necessary because individual
citizens were not capable if left alone
of being democratic citizens the elite
was necessary in order to create the
conditions that would produce
individuals capable of behaving as a a
good consumer and also behaving as a
democratic citizens they didn't see
their activities as anti-democratic as
undermining the capacity of individual
citizens for democracy quite the
opposite they understood that they were
creating the conditions for democracy's
survival and future the rise of
psychoanalysis to power in America was
an extraordinary triumph for Anna Freud
and her tireless promotion of her ideas
she remained in England living with
Dorothea Berlin on the surface it was an
idyllic life she and Dorothy had bought
a weekend cottage on a Suffolk coast and
in the summers dodges children came from
America to visit with the grandchildren
but underneath things were going badly
wrong there is Bob and Maggie Birmingham
who Anna Freud analyzed in the 1930s had
suffered personal breakdowns and their
marriages were collapsing Bob was
drinking heavily and Lavvy suffered
terrible anxieties the real reasons for
the visits to England were yet more
analysis with Anna Freud
[Music]
the problem was that it didn't look very
good did it because here you have
somebody who's having nervous breakdowns
and is having alcoholic binges and this
is not exactly doesn't really sit well
ah you know from a humane standpoint
obviously this is not desirable you know
you want to help these people but it
also had the wider ramifications of
everybody in an analysis in analytic
circles knew that Bob and Navi were
guinea pigs they were the living proof
that this is a wonderful process it was
very much swept under the rug it really
didn't get out I mean these people had
such their power and influence was such
that you know you were very careful any
fraud was a very powerful person and you
were the grandchildren and she knew a
great deal more than you did about what
went on in your parents lives and so
forth there was not something you were
going to tangle with and you were a
product of the whole situation but at
the same time we all knew that something
was really out of whack
as she grew older she became more and
more important didn't she politically
and scientifically but you didn't know
when to stop she was a bit too nitrus
what she did was always the thing and
she would never climb my knowledge
acknowledged that she could make a
mistake or B of all that is my feeling
but the power and influence of the Freud
family in America was about to go even
more
politicians were about to turn to Anna
Freud cousin Edward Bernays to help in a
time of crisis he was going to
manipulate inner feelings and fears of
the masses to help America's politicians
fight the Cold War I don't mean to say
and no one can say to you that there are
no dangers of course there are risks if
we are not vigilant but we do not have
to be a sterically in 1953 the Soviet
Union exploded its first hydrogen bomb
and the fear of nuclear war and
communism gripped the United States
those in power became concerned about
how to reassure the population
committees were set up and Public
Information films made really the calm
in the face of new threats like nuclear
fallout
if the fallacy of devoting 85% of one's
worrying capacity to an agent that
constitutes only about 15% of an atomic
bombs destroying potential at this point
Edward Bernays was living in New York in
the 1920s he had invented the profession
of public relations and was now one of
the most powerful PR men in America
we worked for most of the major
corporations and advised politicians
including President Eisenhower like his
uncle Sigmund Bernays was convinced that
human beings were driven by irrational
forces the only way to deal with the
public was to connect with their
unconscious desires and fears
Bernays argued that instead of trying to
reduce people's fear of communism one
should actually encourage and manipulate
the fear in such a way as it became a
weapon in the Cold War rational argument
was fruitless what my father understood
about groups is that they are manipular
they're malleable and that that you can
tap into their deepest desires or their
deepest fears and use that to your own
purposes I don't think he felt that all
those public's out there had reliable
judgment that they very easily might
vote for the wrong man or want the wrong
thing so that they had to be guided from
above one of the Navy's main clients was
the giant United Fruit Company they
owned vast banana plantations in
Guatemala in Central America for decades
United Fruit who controlled the country
through pliable dictators it was known
as a banana republic
but in 1950 a young officer Colonel
albums was elected president he promised
to remove United foods control over the
country and in 1953 he announced the
government would take over much of their
land it was a massively popular move but
a disaster the United Fruit when they
turned to firm aids to help get rid of
ourends United Fruit brington Bernays he
basically understood the way United
Fruit Company had to do was change this
from being a popularly elected
government that was doing some things
that were good for the people there into
this being very close to the American
Shore a threat to American democracy
that being at a time in the Cold War
when Americans responded to issues of
the Red Scare and what communism might
do he was trying to transform this and
brilliantly did transform it into an
issue of a communist threat very close
to our shores
taking United Fruit again as a
commercial client out of the picture and
making it look like a question of
American democracy American values being
threatened in reality Arbenz was a
Democratic Socialist with no links to
Moscow
but Bernays set out to turn him into a
communist threat to America he organized
a trip to Guatemala for influential
American journalists few of them knew
anything about the country or its
politics vernie's arranged for them to
be entertained and to meet selected
Guatemalan politicians who told them
that √°rbenz was a communist controlled
by Moscow during the trip there was also
a violent anti-american demonstration in
the capital many of those who worked the
United Fruit were convinced it had been
organized by Bernays himself we also
created a fake independent news agency
in America called the middle American
Information Bureau it bombarded the
American media with press releases
saying that Moscow was planning to use
Guatemala as a beachhead to attack
America all of this have a desired
effect in Guatemala the Jakub Arbenz
regime became increasingly communistic
after its inauguration in 1951
communists in the congress and high
governmental positions controlled major
committees labor and farm groups and
propaganda facilities they agitated and
led in demonstrations against
neighboring countries and the United
States well with profoundly new in terms
of what Bernays did is he took this
menace to our backyard in Guatemala for
the first time we saw Reds a couple
hundred miles from New Orleans who Eddie
Bernays had us believing were true
threat to us it was going to be a Soviet
outpost in our backyard
well what Bernays was doing was not just
trying to blacken the Arvin regime he
was part of a secret plot President
Eisenhower had agreed that America
should topple the arbenz government but
secretly the CIA were instructed to
organize a coup working with the United
Fruit Company the CIA trained and armed
a rebel army and found a new leader for
the country called Colonel Armas the CIA
agents in charge was Howard hunt later
one of the Watergate babies what we
wanted to do was have a terror campaign
to terrify our beds particularly terrify
his troops much as the German Stuka
bombers terrified the population of
Holland Belgium and Poland at the onset
of World War two and just rendered
everybody paralyzed as planes flown by
CIA pilots dropped bombs on Guatemala
City Edward Bernays carried on his
propaganda campaign in the American
press he was preparing the American
population to see this as the liberation
of Guatemala by freedom fighters a
democracy
he totally understood that the cool
would happen when the public in the
press when conditions in the public and
the press allowed for it could happen
and he created those conditions he was
totally savvy in terms of just what he
was helping create there in terms of his
overthrow but ultimately he was
reshaping reality reshaping public
opinion in the way the undemocratic and
manipulative on June 27th 1964
Colonel Albans fled the country and arm
at arrived as the new leader within
months Vice President Nixon visited
Guatemala in an event staged by United
fruits PR department he was showing
piles of Marxist literature that had
been found at this said in the
presidential palace
[Applause]
this is the first time in the history of
the world that the communist government
has been overthrown by the people and
for that we congratulate you and the
people of Guatemala for the support they
have given and we are sure that under
your leadership supported by the people
whom I have met by the hundreds on my
visit to Guatemala that Guatemala is
going to enter a new era in which there
will be prosperity for the people
together with liberty for the people
thank you very much for allowing us to
see this exhibit of communism in
Guatemala
good work and for dinner see what Mother
has per dessert banana Gingerbread
shortcake
just another of the many tempting ways
in which this nutritious fruit can be
prepared so now that you've seen where
bananas come from before they reach your
table our journey to banana land is
ended we hope you enjoyed the trip we
know you like bananas ranae's have
manipulated the American people but he
had done so because he like many others
at the time believed that the interests
of business and the interests of America
were indivisible especially when faced
with the threat of communism but Bernays
was convinced that to explain this
rationally to the American people was
impossible because they were not
rational
instead one had to touch on their inner
fears and manipulate them in the
interests of a higher truth
he coated the engineering of consent he
was doing it for the American Way of
life
and to which he was devoted this is
sincerely devoted and yet he felt the
people were really pretty stupid and
that's the paradigm if you don't leave
it up to the people themselves but force
them to choose what you want them to
choose however suddenly then it's not
democracy anymore
it's something else it's being told what
to do it's being it's it's that old
authoritarian thing but the idea that it
was necessary to manipulate the inner
feelings of the American population in
the interests of fighting the Cold War
now began to take root in Washington
above all in the CIA who were going to
take it much further
they were concerned that the Soviets
were experimenting with psychological
methods to actually alter the memories
and feelings of people the aim need to
produce more controllable citizens it
was known as brainwash psychologists in
the CIA were convinced that this really
might be possible and that they should
try to do it themselves
amet human being being built up at their
particular carrier was that there was a
great deal of vulnerability in every
human being
and that that vulnerability could be
manipulated to program somebody to be
something that I wanted them to be and
they didn't want to be that you could
manipulate people in such a way that
they could be automata and if you will
for whatever your own purposes were this
was the image that people thought it was
possible in the late fifties the CIA
poured millions of dollars into the
psychology departments of universities
across America they were secretly
funding experiments on how to alter and
control the inner drives of human beings
the most notorious of these experiments
was run by the head of the American
Psychiatric Association dr. Ewen Cameron
like many psychiatrists at that time
Cameron was convinced that inside human
beings were dangerous forces which
threatened society but he believed that
it was possible not just to control
these forces but actually remove them he
thought that psychiatry should not just
concentrate on sick people mentally ill
but should actually go into government
that politicians should listen to
psychiatrist psychiatrist should be in
every Parliament and should direct and
monitor political activities because
they knew in a rational scientific way
what was good for people
cameron had set up a clinic in a
hospital in montreal called the Alan
memorial it is now long since closed
down Cameron took patients who suffered
a wide range of mental problems his
theory was that these resulted from
forgotten or repressed memories but he
was impatient with the idea of using
psychotherapy to uncover them instead he
would simply wipe them
Cameron used drugs including LSD and the
technique of ECT electroconvulsive
therapy
it was conventionally used at that time
to relieve depression but Cameron was
going to use it in a new way to produce
new people he was really using it to try
and change the fundamental function of
the individual to alter their past
memories their past ways of behaving and
as I think he said at one point is to
just sort of erase everything from their
past so that you then had a slate in
which you could record new ways of
behavior and so he used massive doses of
shock people receiving several shots a
day and over a course of course of time
hundreds of ECT treatments so that they
were just reduced to a sort of a very
primitive vegetable state I don't
remember what happened to me I was
introduced to dr. Cameron and I don't
remember dr. Cameron at all I don't
remember any of that they shipped me up
to what they called the sleep room and
they gave me all of these electro
convulsive shock treatments and mega
doses of drugs and LSD and all of that
and I have no memory of any of that
nothing in the of that time of the Allen
memorial or any of my life previous to
that all gone white and then having
patterned somebody or brought them down
to where basically nothing but the
essential functions of the body were
going on in terms of breathing and
things of this nature
then he would begin to feed material
into these individuals positive material
such that the brain would be programmed
in a positive way so that the individual
would be completely altered then he put
these tapes under our pillows called
psychic driving he would he would then
put back into this empty brain a program
of whatever sort he decided upon and the
people like myself would wake up another
person I guess in fact Cameron's
experiments were a complete disaster all
he managed to produce were dozens of
individuals with memory loss and the
ability to repeat the phrase I am at
ease with myself and it was not an
isolated case almost all the experiments
the CIA funded were equally unsuccessful
despite their ambitions American
psychologists were beginning to find out
how difficult it was to understand and
control the inner workings of the human
mind
we had been really chasing a phantom if
you will an illusion that the human mind
was more capable of manipulation from
the outside by outside factors than it
is we found out that the human being is
extremely complex learning there were no
simple solutions
but you've just got to bear in mind that
these were very strange times the
psychoanalyst had come to power in
America because of their theory that
they knew how to control the dangerous
forces inside human beings but now the
psychoanalyst
were about to face a high-profile
failure it would lead people to begin
questioning the very basis of their
ideas
it began in Hollywood the film industry
had become fascinated by psychoanalysis
and Anna Freud was a powerful influence
on dozens of analysts in Los Angeles
they treated film stars directors and
studio bosses Anna Freud closest friend
was the most sought-after of all Ralph
green stealing and in 1960 the most
famous star in the world turned to green
super health Marilyn Monroe was
suffering from despair and had become
addicted to alcohol and drugs well when
I walked in degenerate he was now on the
road I made a picture with it
got along but he just didn't read not
read yeah and the only thing was it that
was trying to show her Romy
never got around on me while I was
trying to show her a bad day the way a
family life ought really to be so we
were walking a dog address I said what
the hell are you doing here I said you
never helped me to dinner and he said
you weren't that sick and I said oh I
only said the one is just this child has
no no frame of reference in other words
she doesn't know where she what the goal
is
what Grimson did was follow on a Freud's
theory
if Marilyn Monroe could be taught to
conform to what society considered a
normal pattern of life that would hug
her ego control her inner destructive
urges but greensand pushed it to an
extreme he persuaded Monroe to move into
a house nearby that was decorated like
his own he then took her into his own
family life and she his wife and his
daughter played at being Monroe's own
family greens and himself would become
the model of conformity so this someone
whom she regarded as important and how
she idealized if he turned out to be a
very gratifying father figure she our
ego would benefit from that that was the
theory his wife and children everyone
was involved in
the person they were strengthening the
mind they were strengthened the agent
that controls inner life against
adversity against insufficiency against
too much frustration so that Marilyn
Monroe would no longer be a helpless
person looking for love she have enough
love
[Music]
but despite all his efforts Greenstein
was unable to help Marilyn Monroe on
August the 5th 1962 she committed
suicide in her house
[Music]
the suicide shocked many in the analytic
community including Anna Freud and
high-profile figures in American Life
who had previously been enthusiasts for
psychoanalysis now began to question why
psychoanalysis have become so powerful
in America was it really because it
benefitted individuals have it in fact
become a form of constraint in the
interests of social order
critics included Monroe's ex-husband
Arthur Miller my argument with so much
psychoanalysis is the preconception that
suffering is a mistake or a sign of
weakness or a sign even of illness when
in fact possibly the greatest truths we
know have come out of people suffering
that the problem is not to undo
suffering or to wipe it off the face of
the earth but to make it inform our
lives instead of trying to cure
ourselves of it constantly and avoid it
and avoid anything but that lobotomized
sense of what they call happiness
there's too much of an attempt it seems
to me to think in terms of controlling
man rather than freeing of defining him
rather than then then letting go and
it's part of the whole ideology of this
age which is power-mad
hey have you heard about the crazy new
way I'm at today it cracked on a screen
too quick to sing till you get it
subliminally
at the same time an onslaught was
launched on the way psychoanalysis was
being used by business to control people
The Voice blow came with a best-seller
for hidden persuaders written by Vance
Packard to Q's psychoanalyst of reducing
the American people to emotional puppets
whose only function was to keep the mass
production lines running they did this
by manipulating people's unconscious
desires to create longings for ever new
brands and models they had turned the
population into unwitting participants
in the system of planned obsolescence
the second blow came from an influential
philosopher and social critic Herbert
Marcuse I have been trained in
psychoanalysis this is a childish
application of psychoanalysis which does
not take at all in contrary to
consideration for the very real
political and systematic waste of
resources of Technology and of the
productive process for example planned
obsolescence for example the production
of innumerable brands and gadgets were
in the last another is always the same
the production of innumerable different
box of automobiles and this prosperity
at the same time consciously
unconsciously leads to a kind of
schizophrenic existence I believe that
in this society and incredible quantum
of aggressiveness and destructiveness is
accumulated precisely because of the
empty prosperity which then simply
evolved
mark oozes argument was not simply that
psychoanalysis had been used for corrupt
purposes it was more fundamental mark
Uther said that the very idea that you
needed to control people was wrong human
beings did have inner emotional drives
that they were not inherently violent or
evil it was society that made these
drives dangerous by repressing and
distorting them Anna Freud and her
followers had increased that repression
by trying to make people conform to
society and so doing they made people
more dangerous not less Mercruiser
challenged that social world and he said
that's a world that should not be
adapted to and in fact what the
individual was adapting to was corrupt
and evil and corrupting in other words
he switched he switched the source of
evil from inward conflict to the society
itself that the sickness of society lay
into society level not at the sickness
of human beings in it and if people did
not challenge that then they were in
fact submitting to evil modern
psychology has a word that is probably
used more than any other word in
psychology it is a word maladjusted it
is a ring in pride of modern child
psychology maladjusted now of course we
all want to live the well-adjusted life
in order to avoid neurotic and
schizophrenic personalities does that
move toward my conclusion I would like
to say to you today in a very honest
manner there are some things in our
society and some things in our world
which I'm proud to be maladjusted and I
call upon all men of goodwill to be
maladjusted to these things until the
good society's real
I must honestly say to you that I never
intend to adjust myself through racial
segregation and discrimination I never
intend to adjust myself to religious
bigotry I never intend to adjust myself
to economic conditions that will take
necessities from the minute to give
luxuries to the few leave millions of
God's children smothering in an airtight
cage of poverty in the midst of an
affluent society the political influence
of the Friday and psychoanalysts was
over instead they were now accused of
having helped to create a repressive
form of social control
Anna Freud and Dorothy Bellingham lived
on in Sigmund Freud's old house in
London in 1917
Dorothy's son Bob died of alcoholism and
in 1973 his sister ma be returned for
yet more analysis with Anna Freud she
went back for more analysis she was
living in in 20 marysville gardens in
the forehead house as I guess she did
when she wasn't with her husband and she
committed suicide she took an overdose
of sleeping pills
in Freud's own house right so I mean
I've you know the obvious there are a
lot of implications that one can draw
from that and I just think she she
happened reached the end of the rope
there although it would seem to be a
very pointed act
I'm obviously suicide is a very
politicized act and to do it in signal
analysis is certainly different from
doing it in riverdale back in New York
next week's episode will tell the story
of the rise to power of the enemies of
the Freud family
they believe that the way to build a
better society was to let the self prove
what they didn't realize is that this
idea of liberation will provide business
and politics yet another way to control
yourself i feeding infinite desire you
know not what it means to be blue
someday you realize and pay for all
those life then you know what it means
[Applause]
[Music]
you
don't settle for anything less than you
can be make your life a masterpiece this
is a series about how Sigmund Freud's
ideas about the unconscious mind have
been used by those intone to control the
masses in an age of democracy last
week's episode showed how Freud's ideas
spread throughout America in the 1950s
they were promoted by his daughter Anna
and by Floyd's nephew Edward Bernays who
invented public relations
he brought Roy's theories it's the heart
of advertising and marketing a man like
you I mean would a car like this what
they both believed was that underneath
all human beings was a hidden irrational
self which needed to be controlled both
of the good of individuals and the
stability of society but the freud
they're about to be toppled from power
by opponents who said they were wrong
about human nature
beginner self did not need to be
repressed in control it should be
encouraged to express it after this
would come a new type of strong human
being and a better society but what in
fact emerged from this revolution was
the very opposite an isolated vulnerable
of the bubble greedy self far more open
to manipulation by both business and
politics than anything
those in town would now control the self
not by repressing it but by feeding its
infinite desires
[Music]
[Applause]
what goes on here is the liberation of
feeling
in other words feelings not just
memories that have been suppressed for
example screaming crying anger you get
persons really angry and they're gonna
let it no no no I could kill you that
I'm an old man listen I can't get all of
strength into this today young people
would get if they had those feelings in
the 1950s a small group of renegade
psychoanalysts began a new form of
therapy they worked in small rooms in
New York City and encouraged their
patients to express their feelings
openly it was a direct attack on the
ideas of the Freudian psychoanalyst who
had become rich and powerful tissue
Americans how to control their feelings
ah ha ha in Floyd Werth
you see they were afraid of the feelings
they believed that what they wanted was
contained people very proper doing the
right thing and living a proper life
that's what they wanted but not a lot
not an intense emotional life Freud
wasn't emotional himself I mean even
he's an intellect fried I was in
intellect - I know but I'm also more
than that now the leader of this group
was a man hated by Freud and his family
he was called Wilhelm Reich Wright lived
an isolated life in a house he had built
for himself in remote mountains near the
Canadian border Reich originally had
been a devoted disciple of Freud's in
Vienna in the 1920s but he had
challenged Freud over the fundamental
basis of psychoanalysis
Freud argued that that's fun human
beings were still driven by primitive
animal instance the job of society is to
repress and control these dangerous
forces right believe the complete
opposite the unconscious forces inside
the human mind he said were good it was
their repression by society that
distorted them that was what made people
dangerous right in frayed had two
fundamentally different views about what
was essential human nature at its core
freud saw an uncontrolled violent war
like raging inferno of emotions right
there these things are not the way human
beings are originally destined to be
they're the result of not permitting the
original impulse to express itself the
underlying natural impulse reich argued
was the libido sexual energy if this
were released then human beings would
flourish but this idea brought him into
direct conflict not only with Sigmund
Freud but Freud's daughter Anna who
believed that the sexual forces in
humans were dangerous if not controlled
my father thought that you should
liberate the libido and have freedom and
he developed the theory rather early
that neuroses were due dat lack of good
orgasm or any orgasm and that was I'm
afraid you know as a virgin I mean this
is very important because she never had
a sexual relation with a man and here
was this man preaching that the way the
health was through orgasm and here was
this woman who had been analyzed by her
father because she was masturbating so
here's this woman who's opposed to
sexuality really and here's this man who
who's preaching sexual freedom I mean it
was bound to be a class wasn't there
the conflict came to a head at a
conference in 1934 in Switzerland Anna
Freud who had by now become the
acknowledged leader of the
psychoanalytic movement forced Wilhelm
Reich out she destroyed his career she
got rid of him very definitely and I
guess part of what I'm doing getting rid
of her well I think that that Anna Freud
shouldn't get away with what she did
that it should be known maneuvering to
get him kicked out of the International
psychotic Association
you're taking revenge how you might say
so or wronging you're right
no righting a wrong we'd better cut that
one up my father for years with yes it
is Reich fled to the United States and
built his home and Anna Burke his ideas
became grandiose to the point of madness
he was convinced that he had discovered
the source of libidinal energy he called
it orgone energy and right built a giant
gun which he said capture this energy
from the atmosphere and concentrated
onto clouds to produce rain
he also sent the gun could be used to
destroy UFOs which threatened the future
of the world in 1956
Reich was arrested by the federal
authorities for selling a device that he
said used organ energy to cure cancer
Reich was treated as a madman he was
imprisoned and all his books and
payphones burned in the order of the
court
a year later Reich died in prison to the
Freudians it seemed as if their main
threat had been removed
but they were wrong what the Freudians
didn't realize was that their influence
in American society was also about to be
challenged and in a way that would lead
not only to their decline but the
dramatic resurgence of likes ideas in
America and throughout the capitalist
world the consumer is king is will make
Sarang makes manufacturers wholesalers
and retailers
whoever wins his confidence wins the
game whoever loses his confidence in
loss by the late fifties psychoanalysis
had become deeply involved in driving
consumers in America most advertising
companies employed psychoanalyst and as
last week's episode showed they had
created new ways to understand consumers
motives bubble with the focus group in
which consumers free associated their
feelings about products out of this came
new ways to market products by appealing
to the hidden unconscious desires of the
consumer when trying to fill a apply
honored well they feared folks for the
great gilder way he revealed it green
things the most intimate is going on but
in the early sixties a new generation
emerged to attach this they accused
American business of using psychological
techniques to manipulate people's
feelings and turn them into ideal
consumers
advertising was manipulation it was a
way to get you to do something that
didn't come out of you it came out of
somebody else somebody else said this
year you should be wearing powder pink
shirts with matching powder pink buck
shoes and I said why that that's not who
I am that's when somebody else is they
wanted you to be somebody who would buy
their stuff this whole feeling of being
somebody else's tool I don't want to be
that I don't want to be somebody else's
man I want to be me in the mid-sixties
of protest movement began on America's
campus one of the students main targets
was corporate and they accused the
corporations of brainwashing the America
comic consumerism was not just a way of
making money it had become the means of
keeping the massive places while
allowing the government to pursue a
violent and illegal war in Vietnam the
students mentor was a famous radical
philosopher could Herbert knock loser
now Kooser had studied psychoanalysis
and was a fierce critic of the Freudians
they had he said helped to create a
world in which people were reduced to
expressing their feelings and identities
through mass-produced objects it
resulted in what he called one
dimensional man conformist and repressed
the psychoanalyst had become the corrupt
agents as those who ruled America it was
one of the most striking phenomena to
see to what extent the ruling power
structure a soldier could manipulate
manage and control not only the
consciousness but also his subconscious
and unconscious off the individuals and
this took place on a psychological basis
by the controls and the manipulation of
the unconscious primary dials which for
it stipulated
think about us dear American people out
there you're all brainwashed kiddies get
all brainwashed that's why it has the
same right now killed a bum but I look
at in a living room you know you're
saying kill me following the logic of
Mark Reese's argument the new student
left set out to attack this system of
social control it was summed up in the
slogan there is a policeman inside all
our heads he must be destroyed and that
policeman was going to be destroyed by
overthrowing the state and the
corporations that had put in there one
group the Weathermen began a series of
bomb attacks on companies that they said
whereas control people's minds through
consumer products and made the weapons
being used in Vietnam there's no way to
be submitted to non-violence in the
middle of the most violent society that
history has ever created I'm not
committed to non-violence in any way we
want to live a life that isn't based on
materialistic values and yet the whole
system of government and the economy of
America is based on profit on personal
greed and selfishness so that in order
to be human in order to love each other
and be equal with each other and not
place each other in roles we have to
destroy the kind of government that
keeps us from asserting our positive
values of life but the American State
fought that one at the Democratic
convention in Chicago in 1968 the police
and the National Guard were Unleashed to
attack thousands of demonstrators
it was the start of a phase of ruthless
repression of the new lacked in America
that culminated in the killing of four
students at Kent State University
eighteen months later in the face of
this the left began to fall apart we
have met the forces of state it was much
bigger and stronger and more powerful
than we realized and at that point what
seemed to happen was that there was a
change in tactics confronted by this
violent repression many of the new left
began to turn to a new idea if it was
impossible to get the policeman out of
one's head by overthrowing the state
instead one should find a way of getting
inside one's own mind
and removing the controls implanted
there by the state in the corporation's
after this become a new self thus a new
society
[Music]
people who had been politically active
were persuaded that if they could change
themselves and be healthy individuals
and if a movement grew up just aimed at
people changing themselves then at some
point all of that positive change going
on well we can say quantity would become
quality and there would be a sort of a
spontaneous transformation of society
but political political activism was not
required it's about making a new you
that if enough people change the way
they were that the society would change
so the personal became political yes the
personal became political without
changing the personal you didn't stand a
chance of changing the political coming
up against the state power of the United
States was not an option
and they outgunned us and to produce the
new self they turned to the ideas and
techniques of Wilhelm Reich since his
death the small group of
psychotherapists have been developing
techniques based on Reich's ideas their
aim is to invent ways that would allow
individuals to free themselves from the
controls implanted in their minds by
society
their center was a tiny old motel on the
remote coast of California it was called
the Esalen Institute the dominant figure
was a psychoanalyst called fritz pilots
curls had been trained by Reich and had
developed a form of group encounter in
which he pushed individuals to publicly
express the feelings inside them
societies had said with dangerous you
should be repressed it's a basic fear of
that thing inside me like a little demon
in there it doesn't come out very often
it's really hard to get it out now put
the thing inside you on that chill talk
to it pearls used to call is getting a
Mahad see in front of a group this if
this were the hot seat and you were
pearls and you would guide me into this
process of self enactment self
revelation a stain present to all the
parts of yourself and noticing it and
then taking ownership of this as the
demon yeah yeah I can come out like you
can right out of him
and I can push him aside where you see
you push I can push you aside give the
people with each one of us I can make
you all cry I can make you all feel
terrible maybe even forever I can
make the mouse this month here do things
and say things I can almost destroy
anyone each one of you if I get out
there isn't one of you that I would
spare not even you but if you know I
feel better I mean I I feel very honest
yeah and you notice the increase of
power it's not it's taking ownership of
who you are and how you act and how you
feel your whole being in the world
in other words giving you autonomy
owning your freedom I'm frightening but
when I have my power I'm frightening see
I've tried you with my power i frighten
you with my power so busy people it is
the muscle little my god I was worth a
damn you okay Abbi okay stop it you it
was not funny that's what I wanted to do
and I did it
[Music]
what pearls and others working at Esalen
believed is that they were creating ways
that allowed individuals to express
their true inner selves to me Oh out of
this they believed would come new
autonomous beings free of social
condition to the map defeated in the
wake of Chicago which was an enormous
dear attractive idea these techniques
can be used to unleash a new powerful
self strong enough to overthrow the old
order
[Music]
in the late sixties and early seventies
thousands flock to Ashland only a few
years before it had been an obscure
fringe Institute now it became the
center of a national movement the
personal transformation the human
potential movement so it became magnetic
people wanted to join this stream of
exploration within seven or eight years
or about 200 of these centers in America
looking mainly to esslyn for the
leadership really since Penn Thursday
and it took out a big political agenda
you could not separate personal
transformation from social
transformation the two go together as
the movement grew the leaders of Esalen
decided to try and use their techniques
to solve social problems they began with
racism they organized an encounter group
for white and black radicals those
groups would be encouraged to express
their inner racist feelings which had
been instilled in them by society by
doing this they would transcend those
feelings and encounter each other as
individuals
I started series of encounters called
racial confrontation as transcendental
experience
we thought that we wanted to get that
kind of black/white confrontation so you
could really get down to see what was
between the two races not by backing off
and trying to be polite
but by going right into the belly of a
beast of this beast of of racial
prejudice and these were extremely
dramatic these were the toughest
workshops ever convened at Esalen
Institute wider you got closer you got
to know what you're looking at you got a
guy selling ponies in the neighborhood
really don't mind
you got a government you got a mail oh
really you got some better in you got
out faster you can vote to you guys get
some Vietnam that's the third official
slave labor
you got building skyscrapers that you
dominate and control economically
politically and tell me that is not
yours it's yours too then the blacks all
got together and attack the whites and
they just let us have it what the call
was peeping somebody peeping somebody
means peeping into their secrets into
their phone in this and so forth like
the white liberal oh they really really
got onto the fibers liberal you know so
don't give me no shit that I'm free your
goddamn line you white Pink's on a bitch
you yeah I don't know what you came down
there for you want a black buck huh
you're looking for stairs
ah what did you come here fuck you
sitting there with your legs I'll get
wild you saw in the drawers now what did
you come here for the black white
encounter groups were a disaster
the black radicals so it is an insidious
attempt to destroy their power by trying
to turn them into liberated individuals
Esalen was removing the one thing that
gave them power and confidence in their
struggle against racism their collective
identity is blacks from my reason your
reason my parodying is your reason for
being here is different from memory so
the human potential movement turned to
another social group the day believe
would benefit from personal
transformation
nuns and this time they were more
successful convent of the Immaculate
Heart in Los Angeles is one of the
largest seminars in America a group of
radical psychotherapists approached the
convent they wanted to try out their
techniques for personal liberation on
individuals whose identities were
defined by a series of external rules
which they had deeply internal condom
anxious to appear modern agreed to the
experiment and we did we can encounter
workshops for several hundred Immaculate
Heart nuns nuns who were reserved and
they tended to be more reserved than
other normal people were told don't be
so reserved let it all out you're a good
person you can afford to be who you
really are you don't need to play the
role of a nun you don't need to keep
downcast eyes and prudence is an
oversold virtue you're trying to assert
yourself trying to find out who you are
who you're becoming at the same time
you're trying to live a life of
dedication of service and you're trying
to make all these things fit into who
you are and you're just you know it's
just it's such a turmoil at times that
you just use to blow a gasket and do
silly crazy things running around the
orchard and stealing or neon and taking
cokes out of the refrigerator and crazy
things I felt like I was being a
hypocrite and I wanted to keep it really
for what I was not for what I was
wearing and so I'm glad for the change
you seem frightened but you'll go along
oh yeah I'm scared to death but that
it's with it the experiment began to
transform the convent the nuns voted to
discard their habits in favor of
ordinary clothes
the psychotherapists found they had
awoken other force darling one of the
things we unleashed was sexual energy
the kind of thing that the church who
had been very good at restraining was no
longer to be restrained one sister who
was a member of the community she got
the idea that she could be freer than
she had been before and she seduced one
of her classmates and then seduced the
mistress of novices
sue is an older woman very reserved and
her program of freeing this older woman
was sexual she drove her to the store
and when they drove back and drove into
the garage she leaned over and gave her
a big kiss on the lips and thereafter
sister who had perhaps never been kissed
before was ready for more the effects of
the experiment on the convent was
cataclysmic within a year 300 nuns
Wilden half the convent petitioned the
Vatican to be released from their vows
and six months later the convent closed
its doors all that was left was a small
group of nuns but they had become
radical lesbian mums the rest gave up
the religious life they cannot be they
did yeah they became persons by the late
60s the idea of self-exploration was
spreading rapidly in America encounter
groups became the center of what was
seen as a radical alternative culture
based on the development of the self
free of a corrupt capitalist culture I
just want the bidam to to be ourselves
and that's for love or experience
positive way of life we don't we don't
say that you're wrong we just want to be
free to be what we want to be or what we
find ourselves to be as we continue to
search over there and it was beginning
to have a serious effect on corporate
America because these new cells were not
behaving as predictable consumers the
life insurance industry in particular
was concerned that fewer and fewer
college students were buying life
insurance when they left University they
are Stan you're young collude American
Beauty market researcher to investigate
you'd studied psychedelics the life
insurance business more than any other
business at the time was built on the
Protestant ethic your wrongly bought
life insurance if you are a person who
sacrifice for the future if you lived in
the present you had no need for life
insurance
they had some sense that maybe the sort
of core values of the Protestant ethic
were being challenged by some of these
new values that were beginning to appear
and I was really astonished that I was
the conventional interpretation the
dominant interpretation was it had to do
with political radicalism but you know
it was clear to us that that was a mask
a cover the core of it had to do with
self expressiveness this preoccupation
with the self and the inner self that
was what was so important to people the
ability to be self expressive
Yankelovich began to track the growth
and behavior of these new expressive
cells what he told the corporations was
that these new things were consumers but
they no longer wanted anything that
would place them within the narrow
strata of American society instead what
they wanted the products that would
express their individuality their
difference in a conformist world very
things if US corporations did not make
products have always had an emotional
meaning what was new was individuality
the idea that this product expresses me
and whether it was a small European car
the particular music system your
presentation of self your clothing for
immediate energy from our muscles and
these become ways in which people can
expend their money in order to say to
the world who they are but the
manufacturers that they had no idea of
what was going on really in the with
consumers and in the marketed life major
advertising companies set up what they
called operating groups to try and work
out how to appeal to these new
individuals the head of one agency sent
a memo to all staff
we must conform he told them to the new
nonconformist we must listen to the
music of Bobby Dylan and go to the
theater
but the problem was few of the
self-expressive individuals would take
part in focus groups the advertisers
were left to their own devices there is
an elusive real that is so right and
makes it there it's the way out of sight
it's tasty little squares of malted
wheat its crispy ham its crunchy and it
takes the only festival all right that's
what I'm saying he's a pro rock with
more rock and poke and there was an even
more serious problem to make products
for people who wanted to express
themselves that mean creating variety
the persistence of mass production that
had been developed in America the only
profitable if they made large numbers of
the same objects this had fitted
perfectly with the limited range of
desires of a conformist Society the
expressive self threatened this whole
system of manufacturing and the threat
was about to grow rapidly go because an
entrepreneur had invented a way of
mass-producing this new independent set
he was called Werner effort some of this
stuff that we traditionally think of as
being in your mind is there actually in
the world which you're moving to that do
I hadn't invented a system could ask
Erhard seminars training hundreds of
people came for weekend sessions to be
taught how to be themselves and estimate
soon copied by other groups like
exegesis in Britain many of our HUDs
techniques came from the human potential
movement he criticized the movement for
not having gone far enough
their idea that there was a central core
inside all human beings was he said just
another limitation on human freedom in
reality there was no fixed self which
meant that you could be anything that
you wanted to be the thesis of the human
potential movement was that there was
something really good down in there and
if you took these layers off what you
were going to wind up with was a kernel
they something that was innately self
expressive that was the true self that
was going to be a wonderful thing in
actuality you found people who'd gone to
the last layer and took off the last
layer and found that what was left was
nothing oh yes sessions were intense and
often brutal the participants signed
contracts agreeing not to leave and to
allow the trainer's to do anything they
thought necessary to break down their
socially constructed identities come on
if I pretended you do I mean it's
question so you better push back now I
do it yeah yeah the real point to this
training was to go down through layer
after layer after layer after layer
until you got to the last layer and
peeled it off where the recognition was
that it's really all meaningless and
empty
now that's existentialism TenPoint s one
step further and that people began to
recognize that there was not only
meaningless and empty but it was empty
and meaningless that it was empty and
meaningless and in that there's an
enormous freedom all the constrictions
all of the rules you placed on yourself
are gone and what you're left with is
nothing and nothing is an
extraordinarily powerful place to stand
because it is only from nothing that you
can create and from this nothing people
were able to invent a life and allowing
them to create themselves invent
themselves you can be what you want to
be I want you to start to make that
sound and on that sound create and
people the world the way you work to
create it
what Earhart did was to say that only
the individual matters that there is no
societal concern that you living a
fulfilled life is all you need be
concerned about s people came out of
those trainings feeling that it wasn't
selfish to think about yourself it was
your highness doing
[Applause]
he'll be back baby hold me like you'll
never let me go the training is that is
two weekends and it was quite an
incredible experience in my life I'll
forever be grateful for the experience I
got a great deal out of it we really
want to know who we are
there are things going on we learn more
and more about ourselves all the time
and to really find out what it makes
what it is that makes us tick and how we
are discovering yourself s became hugely
successful singers film stars and
hundreds of thousands of ordinary
Americans underwent the training in the
1970s but in the process the political
idea that had begun the movement for
personal transformation began to
disappear the original vision had been
that through discovering and expressing
the self a new culture would be born one
that would challenge the power of the
state
[Music]
we will not let them separate our
culture from our politics we are a
people we are all together what is now
emerging was the idea that people could
be happy simply within themselves and
the changing society was irrelevant one
of the proponents of this was Jerry
Rubin in 1968 Rubin as leader of the
Yippies have led the march on Chicago
but now he had undergone s training I
was willing to die and I and I had a
martyr complex in the sense think we all
did and I've given up that idea of
sacrifice and I'm not as I'm not as
overwhelmingly moved by injustice as I
was and now we reincarnated ourselves
from within basically the politics were
lost
and-and-and-and totally replaced by this
lifestyle and and then the desire to
become deeper and deeper into the self
by now a grandiose sense of the self and
my good friend and one of the original
yippie founders Jerry Rubin definitely
moved in that direction and and I think
he was buying into beginning to buy into
the notion that he could be happy and
fully self developed on his own
socialism in one person yes was he alive
in that well although that is course is
capitalism that's the whole joke I think
it's funny
I think it's funny because people spend
so much of their like being bedeviled by
their past and being locked into their
past and being limited by their past and
there's an enormous freedom from that
letting people create themselves
it was only the most vivid and intense
expression of an idea that was spreading
rapidly through all strata of American
society books and television programs
promoted the idea that once first duty
was to be oneself and those monitoring
this shift were astonished at the speed
with which the idea was spreading in
1970 it was a small percentage of the
total population maybe three to five
percent by 1980 it had spread to the
vast majority of the public up to eighty
percent you asked the question how do
you get self actualized you take this
day and you say when I shave every
morning I look in that mirror I say to
myself I really say that I said nobody
is going to ruin this day for you Wayne
Dyer nobody that this preoccupation with
the South from the inner self travelled
and spread throughout the society in the
1970s he helped me to stop living in the
past and start billing from today and
using my experiences in a positive way
to be a better person today and tomorrow
but then the problem comes how do you be
self expressive
and it was at this point that American
capitalism decided it was going to step
in and help these new individuals to
express themselves and in the process
make a lot of money
the first thing they were going to do
was to find a way of getting inside
their heads to discover what these new
beings wanted in order to be themselves
this came not from Madison Avenue but
from one of the most powerful scientific
research institutes in America Stanford
Research Institute in California worked
for corporations and government it had
done much of the early work on computers
and was also working for the Department
of Defense on what would become the Star
Wars project in 1978 a group of
economists and psychologists at asara
decided to find a way to read measure
and fulfill the desires of these new
unpredictable consumers the idea was to
create a rigorous tool for measuring a
whole range of desires wishes values
that prior to that time had been kind of
overlooked they say in business you know
what gets measured gets done we were
basically telling manufacturers if
you're really going to satisfy and not
just the basic needs but individuated
wants whims and desires of more highly
developed human beings you're going to
have to segment you're going to have to
individuate
to do this Sr I turn for help
today's who had become the liberation of
the south
in particular one of the leaders of the
human potential movement a psychologist
called Abraham Maslow through observing
the work at places like esslyn Maslow
had invented a new system of
psychological types he call it the
hierarchy of needs and it described the
different emotional stages that people
went through as they liberated their
feelings at the top was
self-actualization this was the point at
which individuals became completely
self-directed and free of society the
team at SR I thought Maslow's hierarchy
might form the basis for a new way to
categorize society not by social class
but by different psychological desires
and drives to testers they designed a
huge questionnaire with hundreds of
questions about how people saw
themselves their inner values the
questions were designed to see whether
people fitted into Maslow's categories
we were trying to find out what people
really felt like so we asked these
really penetrating questions and we
hired a company that administers surveys
you know to do them they said they've
never seen anything like it usually you
have to send out a postcard in six weeks
and then another postcard then you got
to call the people up you know to get
the return rates up
we had an 86 percent return and they
only sent out one postcard people love
filling out this questionnaire we got
several questionnaires back with a note
attached saying do you have any other
question airs I could fill out because
people we were asking people to think
about things that they had never thought
about before and they liked thinking
about him like you know like what we
felt in song yeah like what they felt
inside what what motivated them what was
their life about what was important to
them it was sort of like wow the answers
were then analyzed by computer it
revealed that the were underlying
patterns in the way people felt about
themselves which fitted Maslow's
categories
and at the top of the hierarchy where a
large and growing group which cut across
all social classes the SR i-team called
them the inner directives these were
people who thought they were not defined
by their place in society but by the
choices they made themselves but what SR
I discovered was that these people could
be defined by the different patterns of
behavior through which they chose to
express themselves self-expression was
not infinite it fell into identifiable
types Ness RI team invented a new term
for it lifestyles they had managed to
categorize the new individualism they
called their system values and
lifestyles vowels for short at the
forefront of this change are three new
Val's groups groups we call inner
director these are people for whom
personal satisfaction is more important
than status or money they tend to be
self expressive complex and
individualistic
[Music]
rob is an I am me I am these are
searching for new values breaking away
from traditions and inventing their own
standards Rob even invented his own name
Rob noxious Jody is an experiential this
is a group seeking inner growth through
direct experience experiential is aren't
in one place much this is the try
anything once proud and all that
activity takes goods and services their
hobbies are hands-on and their
possessions are simple but not always
simply pright a bookseller I sell books
I'm a businessman
it doesn't necessarily believe meaning
that I believe in capitalism it just
happens to be what I'm doing now
SOI created a simplified questionnaire
with just 30 key questions anyone who
answered them could be immediately
fitted into a dozen or so of these new
groups it allowed businesses to identify
which groups were buying their products
from that how the goods could be
marketed so they became powerful emblems
of those groups inner values and
lifestyles it was the beginning of
lifestyle marketing so it allowed people
not just to look at people as
demographics group of age and income and
whatever but to really understand the
underlying motivations I mean most of
marketing was looking at people's
actions and trying to figure out what to
do but what we were doing is we were
trying to look more into people's
underlying values so that we could
predict what is their lifestyle what
kind of house do they live in what kind
of car do they drive so the corporations
were then able to sell things to them by
understanding them by having labels by
knowing what these people look like
where they live what their lifestyles
are if a new product expressed a
particular group's values it will be
bought by them
this is what made the values and
lifestyle system so powerful its ability
to predict what new products
self-actualize ins would choose and this
power is about to be demonstrated
dramatically Val's would show it could
predict not just the products they would
buy but the politicians they were going
to choose to elect the next president of
the United States of America Ronald
Reagan in 1980 Ronald Reagan ran for
president he and his advisers were
convinced they could win on a program of
a new individualism could be an attack
on 50 years of government interference
in people's lives I wrote a speech about
what the people make the basic decisions
get judges out of the way get
bureaucrats out of the way get
centralized government out of the way
I gave Reagan a choice of several titles
for the speech and the one he picked was
let the people rule let the people
regain rule regain control over their
own destiny away from a remote elite in
Washington I would like to think that
the kind of leadership that I would
exercise in Washington is not the kind
of leadership that I would pretend that
I can solve all the problems I've been
discussing here but the together you and
I can I would like to be take the lead
in taking government off the backs of
the American people and turning you
loose to do what I made it was radical
moderate Republicans thought it was
suicide Jimmy Carter called it
ridiculous the press was extremely
negative but the odd thing is that it
polled very well in New Hampshire which
was the first primary state the state
that we had to win what was owned was
that there seems to be a strange mosaic
of support for Reagan's policies the
traditional posters could see no
coherent athlete across class age or
gender
but those who had designed the values
and lifestyle system believed that they
knew why they were testing their system
in both America and Britain and they
were convinced both Reagan's and mrs.
Thatcher's message about individual
freedom would appeal to the group at the
top of their hierarchy beginner
directives because it fitted with the
way they saw themselves they were really
concerned about being individuals being
individualistic and so in the early
stages when we were looking at the
messages that both facture and men
Reagan were putting across we said they
are using words that will really appeal
to a lot of the younger people and
particularly to the people who are
moving towards self-actualization we
call them the inner directed people a
lot of our colleagues said absolutely
ridiculous because inner directives are
very socially aware very socially
concerned they'll never vote
conservative or they'll never vote for
the Republicans but we said if Thatcher
and Reagan continue to appeal to them in
this way they really will and I vision
leadership in taking government off your
backs and turning you loose to do what
you can do so well thank you very much
the idea that the new self actualizing
individuals would choose a politician
from the right not the left seemed
extraordinary but to test their
prediction the values and lifestyles
team did a survey of voting intentions
and they correlated it with their new
psychological catalyst when we said in
our surveys who are you going to vote
for sure enough it was the inner
directives who said they would vote for
Thatcher and for Aiden and they made the
difference in those elections because of
their their voting for Thatcher and
Reagan and it really surprised our
colleagues in within my own organization
it really showed the power of this
approach because it's very difficult to
identify in a direct
is on the street these people who voted
for Thatcher and Reagan leaves in a
directives came from any walk of life
it's really hardly correlated in social
class at all I mean if you just go along
and look at age sex social class you
would never pick them up but if you if
you really go along with a questionnaire
that gets at their values then you can
identify them very easily thoroughly and
that was completely new yeah at the
beginning of 1981 Ronald Reagan was
inaugurated as president but he took
charge of a country was facing economic
disaster the terrible inflation of the
1970s had destroyed much of America's
traditional heavy industries millions
were unemployed the trudys campaign
promises Reagan told the country who
would not step in to help as all
previous government since the war these
united states are confronted with an
economic affliction of great proportions
we suffer from the longest and one of
the worst sustained inflation's in our
national history idle industries have
cast workers into unemployment human
misery and personal indignity in this
present crisis government is not the
solution to our problem government is
the problem but America's ailing economy
was about to be rescued not by
government but by the new groups the
market researchers had identified the
self actualizing individuals they were
about to become the motor what will be
called the new economy
you can be what you want to be recording
me what do you really want tasty product
that's good for me when you want this
for one technique is that we ask people
the same question over and over and over
again and we say what do you want what
do you really want what do you want that
for and they start to talk about it and
they kind of get intimate with what's
going on what we're doing with that
technique is I'm peeling the onion you
want to think of a person kind of having
layers and layers and layers of
protection and thoughts and behaviors
and belief we want to get to that
central core in the wake of the
invention of values and lifestyles a
vast industry of psychological market
research grew up and the old technique
of the focus group invented by the
Freudian psychoanalysts and the fifties
was used in a new and powerful way the
original aim of the focus group have
been to find ways to entice people to
buy a limited range of mass-produced
goods but now focus groups we used in a
different way to explore the inner
feelings of lifestyle groups and out of
that invent whole new ranges of products
which would allow those groups to
express what they felt as their
individuality
and the generation who had once rebelled
against the conformity imposed by
consumerism I embraced it because it
helped them to be themselves what
capitalism managed to do that was
brilliant was to actually create
products that people like me would be
interested in that people like Jerry
Rubin would be interested in capitalism
developed a whole industry at developing
products that evoke a larger sense of
self that that that seemed to agree with
us that the self was infinite that you
could be anything you wanted to be that
they took our philosophy and agreed with
it and then created products that
supposedly help you aids that helped you
be this limitless self the product sells
you a way of life a way of being the
product sells your values you dress this
way and live in a house like this you
have furniture like this if you use this
computer oh boy there's a lot in denim
over milk any car you eat in these
restaurants the eval use their hip this
coolness this is not I repeat not a
marketing scheme so the notion that you
could buy an identity replace the
original movement notion that you are
perfectly free to create an identity and
you were perfectly free to change the
world and make the world anything you
wanted it to be well what I wear is a
statement this vast range of new designs
fitted perfectly with changes in
industrial production Computers now
allowed manufacturers to economically
produce short runs of consumer goods the
old restrictions of mass production
disappeared
as did the worry that had bedeviled
corporate America ever since mass
production had been invented that they
would produce too many goods with the
new sole consumer desire seem to have no
limit in the United States the concern
of companies was always that supply
without strip demand that we would we
were producing too much and that there
was not a market firing you don't hear
that kind of talk anymore
because you've gone from a conception of
a market of limited needs and if you
fill them they're filled to a market of
unlimited ever-changing needs dominated
by self expressiveness that products and
services can satisfy in an endless
variety of ways and where's the change
all the time and consequently economies
have unlimited horizons after this
explosion of desire came what seemed a
never-ending consumer them that
regenerated the American economy the
original idea had been that the
liberation of the self would create new
kinds of people free of social
constraints
that radical change had happened but
while the new beings felt liberated they
had become increasingly dependent for
their identity on business the
corporations had realized that it was in
their interests to encourage people to
feel that they were unique individuals
and then offer them ways to express that
individuality the world in which people
felt they were rebelling against
conformity is not a threat to business
but its greatest opportunity
[Music]
it was innocence the triumph of the self
it was the triumph of a certain
self-indulgence a view that everything
in the world and all moral judgments was
appropriately viewed through the lens of
personal satisfaction indeed the
ultimate ending point of that logic is
that there is no society there is only a
bunch of individual people making
individual choices to promote their own
individual well-being next week's
episode tells the story of how
politicians on the Left in both Britain
and America turn to the techniques
developed by business in order to regain
power what they didn't realize was that
what should work for business would
undermine the very basis of their
political beliefs they would find
themselves trapped by the greedy desires
of the new son
[Music]
[Music]
this is the story of the rise of an idea
that has come to dominate our society is
the belief satisfaction of individual
feelings and desires our highest parent
today we're going to tell you how to get
what ever I can even what I want to
deliver different life that wasn't
available to me in the imagery Rosetta
states have shown how this rise of the
Sun was fostered and promoted by
business we're going to use the ideas of
Sigmund Freud to develop techniques to
read the inner desires of individuals
and then fulfill with products this
final episode is about how that idea
took over politics
it tells the story of how politicians on
the Left in both America and Britain
terms these techniques to regain
they believed that they were creating a
new and better form of democracy one
that truly responded to the inner
feelings of individuals but what the
politicians didn't realize was that the
aim of those who had originally created
these techniques have not been to
liberate the future but to develop a new
era controlling in an age of mastermind
[Music]
the roots of the story lie way back in
the America of the 1920s with one man he
was called Edward Bernays a nephew of
Sigmund Freud
Bernays had been one of the inventors of
the profession of public relations and
he was fascinated by his uncle's theory
that human behavior was driven by
unconscious sexual and aggressive drives
many of Burnett his clients were large
American corporations and he was the
first person to show them how they could
sell many more products if they link
them through images and symbols to those
unconscious desires Freud identified
the strategy he offered them was that
people could now look at the goods that
were emerging within this society and
not merely view those Goods as things
that they needed in order to deal with
some specific material want but also as
goods which would stroke and respond to
deep emotional yearnings you know how
this bar of soap or this bag of flour
will make you a happier more successful
more sexually appealing less beautiful
person somebody to be admired rather
than the vile the powerful people in
that world are those people who are
capable of reading the public mind and
giving the public what it wants in those
terms and Bearnaise visit the continent
the nays was the guy who was the
foremost articulator of the theories
which were driving this new system by
the 1980s
Bernays his ideas that come of age vast
industry had grown up in america devoted
to reading the inner desires of
consumers but it's hard as the technique
of the focus
Revis episodes have shown how the
focus-group was invented by
psychoanalysts employed by US
corporations the aim was to allow
consumers to express their inner
feelings and mean this is patients did
in psychoanalysis the information is
then used to promote and design new
products that would fulfill those
desires and Edward Bernays who is now
nearly a hundred years old the
celebrated is the founding father it is
marketing world over here there you go
doctor what
tell me again what the doctor is what
are we dealing with whether the father
of learning which really is the concept
that people will believe me more if you
call me done oh good idea and Bearnaise
his ideas and techniques were also about
to conquer Britain in the 1980s unlike
America the ruling elites in Britain had
always distrusted the idea of pandering
to the masses it was epitomized by the
patrician elite who ran the BBC even as
late as the sixties popular programmes
were referred to as groundbait their
real job is to lure the viewers into
watching the more serious programmes the
elites knew was good
and market research reflected this
attitude individuals were observed and
classified by market researchers
according to their social class from A
through C to D and E
[Music]
probably their most BCPL I think by
these of way that carries our luggage
all dear xergiok say no taxi and all
Stockton in the bags like that I think
the lady possibly has her own hair which
is hair as an indicator regional
managers guess they are probably are a
skilled workforce Iscariot omnia skilled
worker I would agree there yes I'm
certain apprenticeship all done some
depth is so gratifying I'll agree then
yes we need to go see anything sir yes
when people were asked their opinion
about both products and politics they
were selected by social class and asked
only strictly factual questions about
what they thought leaving your own
partisan with is on one side who do you
think will win this Wolfgang Nathan
labor and tell me which you prefer
which part if you think you'll be voting
for this time this little everything for
different and who do you think will be
shaken and share with you the idea that
one might ask people what they
themselves felt in design and then give
it to was seen as alien to the runing
aliens and to challenge their belief
that Vania what was best for the public
whatever those in other places we write
a state for example where a post would
have been used before elections to
interpret the mood of the public and
then you were good people more they want
to have and that's what they often have
but again this could be nice be more
democratic I just know it's very
dangerous present I think though when
polls I use in this life the plan and
the economic crisis of the mid seventies
British industry was forced to begin to
pay attention to the inner feelings of
consumers as the recession deeper
consumer spending fell dramatically and
the advertisers insisted that the only
way for companies to survive was to make
their advertising more effective and to
do this they have to delve into people's
underlying psychological motives for
purchase
the advertising industry started to
bring in Americans to run focus groups
with British housewife
everyone is a unique person and even
though you're a group of ten today we
don't want a group opinion and we want
to know your ideas and your thoughts no
matter how crazy it might be please let
your imagination run wild because that's
how very crazy things like instant
coffee got born now can we get somebody
for this lady to be a kitchen sink and
kitchen sink how do you feel with these
things that are being used to clean you
up well I've got to feel clean I've got
to be kept clean I feel that I should
hate it if I was all Boise so I've got
to be easy to clean okay and the
housewife is thingy what would you use
to clean your kitchen sink oh darling
powder I'll cause a cloth to apply the
things on and plenty of water how do you
feel that you're doing this sure I will
salad well I'm satisfied when I have
done it yes so I'm doing my duty I said
it's a job well done
the consumers were encouraged to play at
the products the household cleaners to
car seat bells game is not to talk
rational but act out and reveal their
inner emotional relationship departments
which firmly and unmistakably underline
and then a politician emerged who also
believed that people should be allowed
to express themselves instead of being
controlled by the state the individual
should become the central focus a
society some socialists seem to believe
that people have been numbers in a state
computer we believe they should be
individuals we're all unequal no one
thank heavens is quite like anyone else
however much the Socialists may pretend
otherwise and we believe that everyone
has the right to be unequal but to us
every human being is equally important a
man's right to work as he will to spend
what he earns to own property to have
the state of servant and not as master
they are the essence of a free economy
and on that freedom all our other
freedoms depends
[Music]
mrs. patches vision was of a society in
which the wants and desires and millions
of individuals would be satisfied
through the free market this she
believed would be the engine to
regenerate risk and with her a certain
path in advertising and marketing
industries and flows their task is to
find out what the British people really
wanted and then select the miss new
planet the focus-group flood and those
who run borrowed from the techniques of
psychotherapy to delve ever deeper into
people's feelings about products
we're trying to understand how people
feel about brands how they relate to
brands that is the day what the brand's
personality is has filed consumer demand
sent are there a number of techniques
which are very very helpful for getting
to that to that understanding but in
sumo is giving crayons to doodle to
express their feelings they go inside
their own head pull out their feelings
if somehow get them onto theta then
these are ordinary drinkers expressing
their feelings about drinking Guinness
here you'll see a rich very female
aspect of Guinness if you were
describing a woman who somehow to you of
that character what's all positive Paula
Yates used to lay in bed surrounded with
magazines and chocolates like a 50
starlet out of this research the market
is began to detect a new individualism
in particular among those who had voted
conservative for the first time in 1979
they no longer wanted to be seen as part
of social classes but to express
themselves and crucial to this when a
product they chose to buy we identified
that there was this trend towards what
might be called individualism where
people wanted to still be part of a
crowd but to express themselves as
individuals within it to have their own
personalities to be I suppose their own
men I didn't want to be the same as
everybody else I wanted it to be a
little bit different a little bit
individual it's quite individual
upstairs it's not remarkable but I think
it's quite individual it is experience
Italian is Italian it's expensiveness
good quality different yeah we want to
set our own standards so nobody else has
got what we've got we just didn't want
it there the same as everybody else it's
really different business responded
eagerly to this new individualism
it soon became one of the main forces
driving the growing consumer boom in
Bristol using the data from the focus
groups manufacturers created new ranges
of products that allow people to express
their individuality business also
recategorize people they were no longer
divided by social class but by their
inner psychological needs if the primary
need is security and belonging the core
the rids mainstreamers and if it's
status and the esteem of others then
it's a spiral if it's control its
succeeded and if it's self esteem
performers and this new marketing began
to take over the institution's
previously dominated by a patrician
elite in particular the world of
journals the assault was led by the
profession of public relations in the
past PR had been seen a seedy and
corrupt but now it became a glamorous
business promoting products and clever
[Music]
from one of the Rising Stars was another
member of - Matthew the son of the
liberal em healing clinic what Freud and
other pr's realized was that they could
use their celebrity believers to
infiltrate advertising into the
editorial content of newspapers the
newspapers were offered exclusive
interviews with celebrities but only if
they also agreed to mention products
made by Freud's corporate clients in
terms dictated by the company what
happened with Freud's was that you
effectively got some kind of product
placement or even product the
manufacturers of the product got some
degree of control over how their
products will appear in print so if for
example you did want to rise about
caprices oppression for stuff across
pizza you would sign a contract which
guaranteed that you wouldn't mention
firm Pizza Hut in at least twice in
certain positions in the introductory
paragraph of the article you would agree
to run the Pizza Hut logo that substance
such a size in such and such a place and
of course that you will agree to run the
enclosed pictures of caprese eating her
stuffed crust pizza it was no choice
about how you would run this article in
the press you were effectively told how
to run the article in the press by 5/5
Freud's it's a rise of the corporate
culture and the rise of bit of business
to traditional journalists this
infiltration of advertising into the
editorial pages was a corruption of
their profession
but to mrs. Thatcher's allies like
Rupert Murdoch who owned the Sun and the
time it was part of a democratic
revolution against an arrogant elite who
had to long ignore the feelings of the
masses they hate the system and
communicating with the masses they feel
that newspapers the written word is not
for the masses
that should be left to television or
perhaps to nobody I'm very proud of the
Sun and that the Sun is not represented
tonight in your film you just took page
3 which once seemed so fascinated with
web page 1 page 2 every other page of
the paper
I was typical piece of slanting and
elitism by the BBC who after all in
order to give viewers for this program
put on a very sexy episode of Star Trek
just which are watching out in the room
there I don't think they put it on to
get us viewers I think we just lucky
today proper to carry viewers into these
show you see so it's done by the late
80s missus Patra and her allies in
advertising and the media
I brought the desires of the individual
to the centre of society
as last week's episode shown which was
the same transformation the President
Reagan that brought about in America
both politicians that encourage business
to take over from government the role of
fulfilling the means of the people in
the process
consumers were encouraged to see the
satisfaction of their results as the
overriding parent
Thatcher and Reagan this was a new and
better form of democracy to their
opponents and the parties of the left
they had summoned up the most selfish
and greedy aspects of human nation
Ronald Reagan and Margaret Thatcher both
embraced an economic philosophy but says
the unit of judgment was not only the
individual but it was the individuals
personal satisfaction the individuals
own unique happiness and well-being it
was in a sense the triumph of regarding
individuals as purely emotional beings
who have needs and wants and desires
that they'd be satisfied it can be
satisfied unconsciously it goes way back
to the early part of the 20th century to
fry the two notions of the unconscious
the assumptions that we are in terms of
our rational minds we little corks
bobbing around on this great sea of
hopes and fears and and desires of which
we are only dimly aware and that the
role of a marketer and the role of
somebody selling something including a
politician is to appeal to this great
swamp of desire of unconscious desire
the left believes the opposite the way
to create a better society was not to
treat people as emotional isolated
individuals but to persuade them to
realize they had common interests with
others to help them write about their
individual feelings and fears let me
assert my firm belief that the only
thing we have to fear is fear itself
nameless unreasoning unjustified terror
which paralyzes needed efforts to
convert retreat into advance this idea
had flourished in America in the
depression of the 1930s president
Roosevelt faced with the chaos caused by
the Wall Street Crash encouraged
Americans to join together from trade
unions to set up consumer groups and to
pay for a welfare system for those
trapped in poverty
his aims to create a collective
awareness which would become a powerful
weapon against the unfettered power of
capitalism which should cause the crisis
[Music]
that idea had driven the Democratic
Party for 15 years but now Roosevelt
inheritance railed vainly against the
effects of the self-interest encouraged
by President Reagan
[Music]
there is despair mr. president in the
faces that you don't see maybe mr.
president if you stopped in at a shelter
in Chicago and spoke to the homeless
there maybe mr. president if you asked a
woman who had been denied the help she
needed to feed her children because you
said you needed the money for a tax
break for a millionaire or for a missile
we couldn't afford to use the worst
thing Ronald Reagan did was to make the
denial of compassion respectable he said
you've worked hard you've made your
money
you shouldn't have to feel guilty about
refusing to throw it away on people who
choose to be homeless and who choose not
to work that's what he said he said it
with an elegance and a kind of benign
aspect that disguised its harshness I
think we can do anything about it well
why not if we can work together now to
look after the lights of the people here
I don't see why we couldn't work
together afterwards to clear up the mess
and help build a better world in which
these things can't possibly happen the
qualities we've learned from comradeship
and common suffering are not going to be
wasted after this law it's out of
experience like ours that the new world
will be built that same idea marshalling
the collective parts of the masses to
challenge the entrenched power of wealth
and business it also led the Labour
Party to power in Britain after war in
the 18th labor like the Democrats and
America lost election after election as
millions and once voted button switch
their allegiance to the Conservatives
is going blue just about everywhere
sweeping the country possible well they
are the party of yesterday and tomorrow
is ours in the face of this a growing
number within the Labour Party became
convinced that if they were ever to
regain power labour would have to come
to terms with the new individual
one of them was an advertising executive
called philip google we've been a
lifelong labour support
who'll believe that Labour's leadership
had become corrupted by the same
patrician arrogance that dominated all
Britain's institutions they denigrated
and disapproved of the new aspirations
of working-class voters labour stopped
listening to these people and I remember
the best example of this was after the
election of 1983 which was the election
above all were the people's voices just
were not heard and I had dinner with a
leading Labour Party figures had been
involved in me to feed heavily devolved
in involved in the defeating his wife
said got these working-class people is
working-class people they just you know
we give them education giving chances in
life or they do that read this farm and
they just don't vote for us and there
was such a gap between these people just
trying to make lives for themselves
paralyze themselves and the kind of
elitism of the Labour Party that was
just such a chasm that had to be filled
Guu became part of a small group of
modernizers centered around Peter
Mandelson their aim was to reconnect
labour with the lost voters to do this
google turn to the chat meet in New
Worlds and his work on appetite for
focus
Bhumika mission focus groups in suburban
areas across the country the small
groups of voters who have switched to
mrs. Thatcher we were encouraged not to
talk rationally about policies but to
express their underlying feelings and
what we'll discover was a fundamental
shift in people's relationship to policy
they no longer saw themselves as part of
any group but as individuals who could
demand things from politicians in return
for paying taxes just as business
employers do as consumers and I found
that the people who become consumers
people now wanted to have you know
politics and life on their own terms
I mean not just in politics but all
aspects of life - people see themselves
as they are as autonomous powerful
individuals who are entitled to be
respected are entitled to have the best
not just in you know going to Tesco's or
wherever but the best in terms of health
and in education - all this was about
getting the Labour Party to understand
that people really really really have
changed
and the Labour Party had not an
anticipated body change it would not win
then it goo now set out to try and
persuade the Labour Party they would
have to make concessions to what he
called the new aspirational classes he
was going to face implacable opposition
in the run-up to the 1992 election gules
argued that the only way to win was for
labour to promise not to put up taxes
but the Shadow Chancellor John Smith
angrily refused labor would stick to its
fundamental policies they would fight
the election with the promise of tax
increases to create a fairer society and
as the campaign began it seemed as if
Philip Gould was wrong the traditional
polls consistently showed labour ahead
despite the conservative campaign
message and a Labour government put up
taxes even the Conservatives oldest
allies in the press came convinced by
harping on about tanks because have
attempts of cutting their own church the
wire up the toys must be there not the
men conveying a sense of will and being
in control and unless they can do better
than that I think we're going to lose
because the other thing is that they
still say that they are going to go on
and on with this one single message of
text and I think part of the difficulty
this morning was that you had a whole
lot of people who be going to the same
press conference for seven days at
virtually the same age thrusts at them
and I can't getting bored and restless
and hitting back on it I think the media
sent a big story coming in Vitoria is
being defeated and the name of party too
was convinced he would win finally
returned to power it's now time to meet
the men and women who will form the next
government
never saw your bitch checker John Smith
and now it is time for the next foreign
minister near pedak those running
Labour's campaign believe that by modern
presentation they would have tracked
back the voters well they keep the old
policies but Philip Gould was convinced
that labor are going to lose through his
focus groups he knew that the very
people who were telling the traditional
posters they would vote labor were in
reality preparing to vote concerns and
her self-interest
but they were too embarrassed to admit
it and John Major also illusions because
his focus groups were telling him the
same thing
[Music]
when you mega the poll which neighbor
five points ahead after the Daily Mail
seein up the street a person is feeling
good on the tree they learn his bidding
with opportunity area has been feeling
surprisingly good on the street for some
time unsurprisingly five houses blinding
folks don't ask me to explain it with
the deal anyway
now allows you must sit down we waiting
to go John Major's victory in 1992 was a
disaster for the Labour Party small
group of reformers centred around Peter
Mandelson and Philip Gould were
convinced that the only way for the
party to survive was to change its basic
policies but their ideas were rejected
by John Smith would now become leader
liberal left with to go to work that a
campaign to elect Bill Clinton president
in America
the 1992 election during it and
afterwards people felt under great
strain and really did feel demoralized
and dejected and then to go from this to
the Clinton campaign it was an
extraordinary experience because here
suddenly I found articulated many of the
ideas that I had but not fully myself
being able to encapsulate or to
articulate do you want a president who
will restore the middle class reclaim
the future for the middle class then
restore the American Dream vote for Bill
Clinton in New Hampshire and send a
signal to the country that we are coming
together
what good discover was it like the Labor
Party the Democrats had also been doing
focus groups with swing voters the
difference was that Bill Clinton had
decided to tailor his policies to fit
with these voters desires above all with
their ferocious belief that they should
only pay tax for things that benefited
them not for the welfare of others I
have no idea what percentage of my tax
dollars go to welfare but even if it's a
minuscule percentage you know even if
it's a quarter of percent you know it's
still too much for the people that are
receiving these benefits that that are
basically non-productive the Clinton
team decided that to win they have to
promise tax cuts for these suburban
voters
and they also use the focus groups
throughout the campaign to check every
appearance speech and policy with them
for their approval what Clinton called
The Forgotten middle class became
central figures in a new type of
reactive policies hell evades for the
presidency in the United States had been
prepackaged and designed for many many
years what was new was an attempt to use
very sophisticated or pseudo
sophisticated techniques to plumb the
public psychology to find out precisely
what the desires of the individuals were
and then to come up with a candidate at
a platform and images and words that
exactly responded at those deep desires
this was packaging at a new level this
was polling at an extreme and the middle
class needs a break
government is in the way it's taken more
of your money and giving you less in
return in the name of the hardworking
Americans who make up our forgotten
middle class I proudly accept your
nomination for President of the United
States talk about things that amounted
to people you know it's the economy
stupid okay Clinton's campaign to you
note by James Carville and George
Stephanopoulos did not believe that they
were capitulating to the selfish desires
of the middle classes tax cuts were the
price they have to pay to regain power
but once in path they would still
fulfill traditional democratic policies
and help the poor would be neglected
under Reagan above all with the reform
of health care they would pray to the
tax cuts by cutting defenseman
increasing taxes on the very rich in
this way they believed they were forging
a coalition of the new and the old
voters both of whom could be satisfied
are we for the first time regeneration
tomorrow we're going to win and that
means that more people are gonna have
better jobs people gonna pay a little
less for health care get better care and
more kids are gonna go to better schools
so thanks the Democrat optimism was to
be short-lived in November 1992 Clinton
was triumphantly elected president but
within weeks his administration
discovered that the budget deficit is
far greater than they had anticipated at
a meeting in the White House in January
1993 the head of the Federal Reserve
told them that the deficit was nearly
three hundred billion dollars there was
no way they could borrow any more
without panicking the markets and
causing a crisis the only way to pay for
the proposed tax cuts will be to cut
government spending
not just on defense but on welfare
Clinton was faced with a choice between
the old politics and the new and he
chose the old
the tax cuts were dropped and he tried
to inspire the country with the old
democratic ideal of government spending
without the poor and disadvantaged
tonight I want to talk with you about
what government can do because I believe
government must do more to put people to
work now to create a half a million jobs
jobs to rebuild our highways and
airports to renovate housing to bring
new life to rural communities and spread
hope and opportunity among our nation's
youth health care reform sounds like a
great idea to me well I know but some of
these details should scare the heck out
of me like what well at the start of the
Clint administration many of us
including I believe President Clinton
himself reverted back to an older
tradition tried to lift the public to
talk about genuine ideals beyond the
individual and that reform agenda being
not only universal health care and child
care and dealing with widening
inequalities in our society and
homelessness many things that many
citizens just particularly middle-income
citizens didn't want to deal with the
suburban voters who have been promised
tax cuts were not inspired by Bill
Clinton's vision they felt betrayed and
wanted revenge their opportunity came in
1994 with the congressional elections
the Republicans led by Newt Gingrich
promised huge tax cuts and to dismantle
the wealth
the voters who had defected to Clinton
switch sides yet again and the
Republicans won both houses of Congress
cannon Lance well I think it's a
tremendous vote in favor of smaller
government lower taxes in the sense
renewal of the platform Reagan tradition
and I am after pretty decisive it means
that the welfare state is going to be
less hospitable for people who are not
willing to take responsibility for their
own situation no question about it I
think this is today is the beginning of
the end of the world fair place for
Clinton it was a disaster faced with a
hostile Congress it was no way for him
to get his reforms through his personal
popularity plummeted and it seems
certain he would not be reelected in two
years time
in desperation and without telling his
cabinet Clinton turn for help to one of
America's most ruthless political
strategists Dick Morris what did he want
you to do say this but Clinton was in
serious trouble he had lost the 94
election he had lost control of Congress
and he hired me to come back and help
save him so he was basically asking me
to perform roughly the same role as a
life preserver what if you're driven
what Morris told was the to win
reelection he would have to transform
the very nature of politics the crucial
swing voters in the suburb now thought
and behaved like consumers the only way
to win them back was to forget all
ideology and instead turn politics into
a form of consumer business
content must try to identify their
personal desires and whims and then
promise to fulfill if you followed those
consumer rules they would follow him I
said that I felt the most important
thing for him to do it was to bring to
the political system the same consumer
rules philosophy that we that the
business community has because I think
politics needs to be as responsive to
the whims and the desires of the
marketplace as businesses and should
needs to be a sensitive to the
bottom-line profits or votes as a
business's I think that all of this
involves really a changed view of the
voters so that instead of treating them
as targets you treat them as owners
instead of treating them as someone
something that you can manipulate you
treat them as something you need to
learn from and instead of feeling that
you can stay in one place and you can
manipulate the voters you need to learn
what they want and move yourself to
accommodate it to get inside the minds
of the swing voters more eSport
lifestyle marketing into politics for
the first time we went to one of
America's most prominent market research
plans called concern and commissioned
what they called a neuro personality
poem
it was a massive survey of hundreds of
thousands of voters but the only
political questions advanced were to
find out whether someone was a swing
voter or not
all the other questions with intimate
psychological ones designed to see
whether swing voters fell into
identifiable psychological types while
we were asking people like you know do
you think you're the life of the party
do you think though when you when you
see things that you like to have a list
and organize them do you do you
typically you know try to plan things
ahead or do you like to be more
spontaneous where do you like to go what
sports do you like to play what would
you do with your spouse in a romantic
weekend so we were asking people some
very personal questions about their own
lives to try to see were the kinds of
people that were likely to change their
vote also possessing of certain kinds of
personality traits and in fact they were
the neuro personality poll allowed the
Clinton team to segment swing voters
into different lifestyle types they were
given names like pools and patios or
caps and gowns who were urban
intellectuals living in university towns
from this the team could identify ways
in which they could make individuals
feel more secure in their chosen
lifestyles just as business had learned
to do with products
dick Morris called its small-bore
politics tiny details of people's lives
and personal anxieties which politics
have never even thought about or notice
people who wish now have become the key
to winning car
[Music]
it was an America that focused on
day-to-day practical concerns should I
wear seatbelts should I stop smoking
should I wear a school uniform is my
neighborhood being protected it was a
not so much a new individualism as the
social owner as we had known it had
broken down so we got into people's
heads understood their psychology about
lifestyle about values what they thought
was important what issues they wanted
politicians and particularly the
President to address and these issues
proved to be very very different from
what the conventional wisdom had
suggested at the election campaign began
Clinton revealed Martha's new approach
to a shocked White House all traditional
policies were to be dropped instead he
would concentrate exclusives on policies
that targeted the Warriors of the swing
voters reach X would be fitted into
televisions to prevent children from
watching pornography and mobile phones
he'd be fitted into school buses to make
parents feel more secure stigmas also
persuaded the president to spend his
leisure time in the same way as
particular groups of swing voters he
sent Clinton on a hunting dressed in
exactly the Gortex outfits a group
called Big Sky families he aims to
reflect swing voters lifestyles back to
them
the Liberals in Clinton's cabinet hated
this approach I would say well dick why
have a campaign this was the 1996
campaign if all the president is going
to do is offer up these little bite-size
miniature initiatives that appeal to
people's desires like consumers buying
soap IV chips that you could put in your
teller televisions so you can make sure
that your children did not have
pornography and and school uniforms why
talk about them they're so mundane that
they're so tiny and he would say back if
we don't do this we may not get
reelected and I would say what's the
point of getting getting reelected if
you have no mandate to do anything when
you're reelected and each say what's the
point of having a mandate if you can't
get reelected isn't the ultimate goal
getting reelected
Morris's new politics were an
extraordinary success Clinton's ratings
among the swing voters began to soar and
dick morris along with the marketeer
mark Penn took effective charge of
making White House policy mark Penn set
up a huge call center in an office block
in Denver and every night hundreds of
telephone operators called swing voters
in suburbs across the country to tack
with them every detail of policies that
Clinton was proposing the policy was
made by a group of people manning
telephones in Denver Colorado placing
calls to voters in places like
Westchester and Pasadena and asking them
what they wanted from their government
and asking them very specifically about
specific policies that Bill Clinton was
considering would you be more likely to
support him if he offered this
particular government service or if he
offered that one those people told them
what they thought mark Penn transmitted
that to Bill Clinton and it came out of
his mouth so essentially it was
suburbanite voters suburban voters in
the 90s were creating American domestic
policy and some of its foreign policy as
well yeah mark Penn was polling on
questions like whether we should bomb in
Bosnia things like that Morris also
insisted Clinton make a symbolic
sacrifice of the old politics to
convince the swing voters to trust him
in August 1996 Clinton signed a bill
which ended the system of guaranteed
health for the poor and unemployed
welfare would be cut back after two
years in order to force people into work
the new system was called welfare to
work and would he said via hand up not a
handout
it was the effective end the guaranteed
welfare system created by President
Roosevelt 60 years before for many in
Clinton's cabinet it was also the end of
the progressive political ideal that
Roosevelt had represented the belief
that one used a position of leadership
to persuade the voters to think and
behave as social beings not a
self-interested individual Dick Morris
and the pollsters had won and by that I
mean that the people who ultimately got
to the president
shaped the president's mind were those
who viewed the voters as just a
collection of individual desires that
had to be catered to and pander to it
suggests that democracy is nothing more
and should be nothing more then the pen
during to these unthought about bright
primitive desires primitive in the sense
that they are not even necessarily
conscious just what people want in terms
of satisfying themselves and the same
time of the politics of the South is
about to happen impressed
the 1994 Tony Blair had become the
leader of the Labour Party in the
reforming group centered around Peter
Mandelson the game a part almost every
night Philip Gould ran focus groups with
swing boaters in the suburbs at this
time he was listened to but his hours
and the fears of the new aspirational
classes became the central force shaping
labour party policy in that period I was
talking to people who used to vote
conservative from the considering voting
labour and the wanted understood that
they are financially oppressed and there
are limits to the extent to which
taxation can we improve they think that
crime is an issue that matters to Bremen
should be respected they they want
welfare to go to people who deserve
welfare not to people who do not this
was seen off by many in the Labour Party
as selfish I never saw that it selfish I
believe that dad or mum doing the best
of their family isn't selfish that are
doing the best of their family and
that's what people do a crackdown of
those who make life hell in their local
neighborhoods through noise or disturb
law and order is a labor issue today
[Applause]
philosophy of campaigning is let's
concentrate on swing voters let's focus
group them to find out what they want
and what will appeal to them and let's
just relentlessly push those themes in
the election
something is happening today after
promising to put money in your pocket
the Conservatives are quietly taking it
away Philip Gould was was crucial
because he gave the raw material if you
like for these politicians to do this
kind of politics in that when he came up
with stuff they follow it you know
pretty much without exception Blair
himself would pour over these sort of
twelve page memos and say well this is
what we must do we want people to earn
more to consume the good things at life
we want people to pay lower tax Ron
Brown says the Labour government would
hold the main tax rates unchanged the
Labour government will not increase the
basic rate of tax I want to make it
clear that I will not increase tax and
in fact the Labour Party does that it's
legal
those that aspire to be better to get on
design and be ambitious themself members
will do better with labor groups of
eight people drinking wine and nibbling
you know Cheerios and what they thought
determined effectively everything that
the Labour Party did and although those
running the campaign like to portray the
new approaches their invention it was in
fact copied from the Americans even down
to the phrases that the American
marketers have tested on bear swing
bounces Peter Mandelson and his team
we're in the United States watching what
we do and copied almost verbatim our
approach in their 1997 campaign the
benefit system should be about giving
people a hand up not just a handout
mendelssohn's not a fool it means
anything you saw some it works and why
not doing and I can remember reading
their manifesto and say to myself they
just took it like stacking down you know
on one hand you're proud among another
hand
it and as in America labor was forced to
drop policies that would not directly
benefit the swing voters even if it
meant sacrificing its fundamental
principles the commitment to public
control of industry which was enshrined
as Clause four of the party Constitution
was dropped the aim of clause 4 had been
to use the collective power of the
people to challenge the unfettered greed
of business but now Tony Blair was faced
with crucial voters who no longer saw
themselves as exploited by the free
market they saw themselves as individual
consumers who were fulfilled and give an
identity by what business delivered them
the new Claus floor promised not to
control the free market but to let it
flourish business is more powerful
development it is quicker it is more
creative business is the lifeblood of
the country from this and all the
benefits that society needs employment
investment I think frankly there is only
one party getting business right and
that new label what new labor didn't
suits people who exert power in society
not through the political system or not
through the democratic political system
so it's big business and it's suit
entrenched interests and Institute's the
status quo and you know those three
things of course just off the top of my
head being the things that the Labor
Party is supposed to be you know a
counter force to what that means is big
business get to carry on exerting their
power behind the scenes getting the way
because there's no countervailing
pressure countervailing pressure isn't
going to come from you know 8 people
sipping wine in Kettering here he goes
telling an awful lot of other blue seeds
red as well
very happy very relieved very
exhilarated but those who masterminded
Labour's victory in 1997 so it is a
triumphant vindication of a new form of
democracy their understanding and
fulfilling people's inner desire through
the focus-group
they were giving power to individuals
not treating them as faceless groups who
were told by politicians what was good
I don't believe I don't see focus group
the some marketing tool I see the focus
group as a way of hearing what the
people have to say and I see the focus
group is a way to you former politics
what the people give the people can take
away we are the servants that they are
the Masters 1997 is I think
fundamentally important in that I think
it is the end the end of the elitist
politics is dominated Britain for so
much over the last hundred years
[Music]
in 1939 Edward Bernays Sigmund Freud's
nephew created a vision of a future
world in which the consumer was king it
was at the World's Fair in New York and
Bearnaise called it democracy tea it was
one of the earliest and most dramatic
portrayal of a consumerist democracy a
society in which the needs and desires
of individuals were read and fulfilled
by business and the free market the
World's Fair created a spectacle in
which all of these concerns were met and
they were met by Westinghouse and
General Motors and the American cash
register company and company after
company presented itself as the sort of
centerpiece of a society in which human
desire and human want that human anxiety
would all be responded to and we'd be
all be met purely through the free
enterprise system there was this sort of
notion that the free market was
something that was not guided by
ideologies or by political power it was
something that simply was guided by the
people's will
this was the model of democracy both new
labor and the American Democrats and
bought into in order to regain power
they had used techniques developed by
business to read the desires of
consumers and they had accepted Bernays
his claim that this was a better form of
democracy but in reality the World's
Fair had been an elaborate piece of
propaganda designed by Bernays and his
clients the giant American corporations
privately Bernays did not believe that
true democracy could ever work he had
been profoundly influenced in this by
his uncle's theories of human nature so
I believe that individuals were not
driven by rational thought but by
primitive unconscious desires and
feelings and Bearnaise believed this
meant it was too dangerous to let the
masses ever have control over their own
lives consumers was a way of giving
people the illusion of control while
allowing a responsible elite to continue
managing society
[Music]
it's not that the people are in charge
but that the people's desires are in
charge the people are not in charge the
people exercise no decision-making power
within this environment so democracy is
reduced from something which assumes an
active citizenry to something which now
increasingly is predicated on the idea
of the public as passive consumers the
public as people who essentially what
you're delivering them are doggy treats
the problem for New Labour was that it
believed the propaganda they took at
face value
the idea promoted by business that the
systems invented to read the consumers
mind could form the basis for a new type
of democracy ronson power New Labour
tried to govern through a system that
Philip Gould called continuous democracy
with one work for business in designing
products led the Labour government into
a bewildering maze of contradictory
whims and design for much of Labour's
first term the focus groups said that
the railways were not a high priority
and Labour's policies faithfully
reflectiveness but now those same groups
are blaming the government for not
having invested more money soon in the
railways the point about focus group
politics is that there isn't one because
people had come to Dickie International
and so you have a problem in terms of
deciding what you're going to do if all
you do is actually listen to a mass of
individual opinions as it's very
fluctuating and don't really have any
coherence and crucially and not set in
context so that's why people can say you
know and I want lower taxes and better
public services of course they do you
know who say and do you want to pay more
taxes to get better public services
people are less sure they then don't
believe that if they do pay more taxes
they will be spent on better public
services so you ended up in this quad
mire we're doing here in the tree
because a politician has to say look
this is what I believe I believe that
you should pay slightly more taxes to
make better public services and I pledge
that I'm competent to actually use that
money wise
do you want that vote for me yes or no
and that's what Blair has failed to do
Tony Berto determined sort of tries to
feed back to them what they already
believe and given what that what they
believe is sort of a mode of individual
incoherent contradictory nonsense that's
all he has to offer and then he wouldn't
as why people don't get him you know
instead of getting is because they're
looking for someone to do something that
they can't do themselves which is
actually come up with a coherent
political opinion that they might have
faith in new labor are faced with a
dilemma the system of consumer democracy
that they have embraced has trapped them
into a series of short-term and often
contradictory policies there are now
growing demands that they fulfill a
grand illusion that they use the power
of government to deal with the problems
of growing inequality and the decaying
social fabric of the country but to do
this they will have to appeal to the
electorate to think outside their own
self-interest and this would be
engineers and beer at human beings the
selfish instinct resin individuals which
is a concept of human beings which have
been fostered and encouraged by business
because it produces ideal consumers
though we feel we are free in reality we
like the politicians have become the
slaves our own desires
we have forgotten we can be more than
that but there are other sides to human
nature and luckily here we have two
different views of human nature and of
democracy you have the view that people
are irrational that they are bundles of
unconscious emotion that comes directly
out of Freud and businesses are very
able to respond to that that's what they
have honed their skills doing that's
what marketing is really all about what
are the symbols the music the images the
words that will appeal to these
unconscious feelings politics must be
more than that politics and leadership
are about engaging the public in a
rational discussion and deliberation
about what is best and treating people
with respect in terms of their rational
abilities to debate what is best if it's
not that if it is for them if it is
basically a matter of appealing to the
same basic unconscious feelings that
business appeals to then why not let
business to it business can do it better
business knows how to do it business
after all is in the business of
responding to those feelings
[Music]
I see three red roses too I see them
bloom for me and I think to myself
[Music]
what I wanna know
[Music]
I think
when I won down
[Music]
[Music]