be right over the government plan to
avoid defaulting as well the
unemployment keeps rising and it has to
be brighter for those yeah you know in
excess so much supply of goods which is
this is all borrowed money that our net
debt is only by Thanksgiving hello andy
warhol in the form of a complete filter
cigarette that delivers the day and i 45
malt liquor are you in quite some time
ago by saying all America's corn syrup I
first learned it from my grandmother
dedication now my grandmother was a
wonderful person she taught me how to
play the game Monopoly she understood
that the name of the game is to acquire
she would accumulate everything she
could and eventually she became the
master of the board and then she would
always say the same thing to me she'd
look at me and she'd say one day you'll
learn to play the game one summer I
played Monopoly almost every day all day
long
that summer I learned to play the game I
came to understand the only way to win
is to make a total commitment to
acquisition I came to understand that
money and possessions that's the way
that you keep score and by the end of
that summer I was more ruthless than my
grandmother I was ready to bend the
rules if I had to to win that game and I
sat down with her to play that fall I
took everything she had I watched her
give her last dollar and quit in utter
defeat
and then she had one more thing to teach
me then she said now I don't who is back
in the Box all those houses and hotels
all the railroads and utility companies
all that property and all that wonderful
money not all goes back in the Box none
of it was really yours you got all
heated up about it for a while but it
was around a long time before you sat
down at the board and it will be here
after you're gone
players come players go houses and cars
titles and clothes even your body
because the fact is that everything I
clutch and consume and hoard is going to
go back in the box and I'm going to lose
it all you have to ask yourself when you
finally get the ultimate promotion when
you've made the ultimate purchase when
you buy the ultimate home when you have
stored up financial security and climbed
the ladder of success to the highest
rung you can possibly climb it and the
thrill wears off and it will wear off
then what
how far do you have to walk down that
road before you see where it means
[Music]
surely you understand it will never be
enough so you have to ask yourself the
question what matters
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
when I was a young man growing up in New
York City I refused to pledge allegiance
to the flag of course I was sent to the
principal's office
and he asked me why don't you water
pledge allegiance everybody does I said
everybody once believed here it was
black but that doesn't make it self I
explained that America owed everything
it has to other cultures and other
nations and then I would rather pledge
allegiance to the earth and everyone on
it
needless to say it wasn't long before I
left school entirely and I set up a lab
in my bedroom there I began to learn
about science and nature I realized then
that the universe is governed by laws
and that the human being along with
society itself was not exempt from these
laws then came the crash of 1929 which
began what we now call a Great
Depression
I found it difficult to understand why
minions were out of work homeless
starving while all the factories were
sitting there
the resources were unchanged it was then
that I realized that the rules of the
economic game were inherently invalid
shortly after came World War two where
various nations took turns
systematically destroying each other I
later calculated that all the
destruction and wasted resources spent
on that war could have easily provided
for every human need on the planet since
that time I have watched humanity set
the stage for its own extinction I have
watched as a precious finite resources
are perpetually wasted and destroyed in
the name of profit and FreeMarkets I
have watched the social values of
society be reduced into a base
artificiality of materialism and
mindless consumption and I have watched
as the monetary powers control the
political structure of supposedly free
society I'm 94 years old now and I'm
afraid my disposition is the same as it
was 75 years ago this shit's got to go
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Music]
so you're a scientist and somewhere
along the way hammered into your head is
the inevitable nature versus nurture and
that's at least up there with coke
versus Pepsi or Greeks versus Trojans so
nature versus nurture this by now
utterly oversimplifying view of where
influences are influences on how a cell
deals with an energy crisis up to what
makes us who we are on the most
individualistic levels of personality
and what you've got is this complete
false dichotomy built around nature as
deterministic at the very bottom of all
the causality of life is DNA and the
code of codes and the Holy Grail and
everything is driven by it and at the
other end a much more social science
perspective which is we are social
organisms and biology is for slime molds
humans are free of biology and obviously
both views are nonsense what you see
instead is it is virtually impossible to
understand how biology works outside the
context of environment one of the most
crazy making yet widespread and
potentially dangerous notions is oh that
behavior is genetic now what does that
mean it means all sorts of subtle stuff
if you took new modern biology but for
most people out there what it winds up
meaning is ah a deterministic view of
life one rooted in biology and genetics
genes equal things that can be changed
genes equal things that are inevitable
and that you might as well not waste
resources trying to fix might as well
not put societal energies into trying to
improve the
it's inevitable it's unchangeable and
that is sheer nonsense it is widely
thought that conditions like ADHD are
genetically programmed conditions like
schizophrenia are generally programmed
the truth is the opposite nothing is
genetically programmed they're very very
diseases I mean small handful extremely
sparsely represented in the population
that are truly genetically determined
most complex conditions might have a
predisposition that has a genetic
component but a predisposition is not
the same as a predetermination the whole
search for the source of diseases in the
genome
I was doing to failure before anybody
even thought of it because most diseases
are not genetically predetermined heart
disease cancer strokes rheumatoid
conditions autoimmune conditions in
general mental health conditions
addictions bees are none of them
genetically determined breast cancer for
example out of 100 women breast cancer
only seven will carry the breast cancer
genes 93 do not and out of 100 women who
do have the genes not all don't look at
cancer genes are not just things that
make us behave in a particular way
regardless of our environment Gene's
give us different ways of responding to
our environment
and in fact it looks as if some of the
early childhood influences as a kind of
child rearing affect gene expression
actually turning on and off different
genes to put you on a different
development developmental track which
may suit the kind of world you've got to
deal with so for example a study done in
Montreal with suicide victims looked at
autopsies of the brains of these people
and it turns out that if a suicide
victim these are usually young adults
had been abused as children the abuse
actually caused a genetic change in the
brain that was absent in the brains of
people who are not being accused that's
an epigenetic effect epi means on top of
so that so that the epigenetic influence
is what happens environmentally to
either activate or deactivate certain
genes in New Zealand was a study that
was done in a town called Dunedin in
which a few thousand individuals were
studied from birth up to their into
their 20s
what they found was that they could
identify a genetic mutation an abnormal
gene which did have some relation to the
predisposition to commit violence but
only if the individual had also been
subjected to severe child abuse in other
words a child with this abnormal gene
would be no more likely to be violent
than somebody else and in fact they
actually had a lower rate of violence
than people with normal genes as long as
they want to be as this children great
additional example of the ways in which
genes are not be all and all fancy
technique where you can take a specific
gene out of a mouse and that Mouse and
it's descendants will not have that gene
you have knocked out that gene so
there's this one gene that codes for a
protein that has something to do with
learning and memory and this fabulous
demonstration knock out that gene and
you have a mouse that doesn't learn as
well who a genetic basis for
intelligence what was much less
appreciated in that landmark study that
got picked up by the media left and
right is take those genetically impaired
mice and raise them in a much more
enriched stimulating environment in your
normal mice in a lab cage and they
completely overcame that deficit so when
one says in a contemporary sense that oh
this behavior is genetic to the extent
that that's even a valid sort of phrase
to use what you're saying is there is a
genetic contribution to how this
organism responds to environment genes
may influence the readiness with which
an organism will deal with a certain
environmental challenge you know that's
not the version most people have in
their mind and not to be too soapboxing
but run with the old
sort of version of its genetic and it's
not that far from history of eugenics
and things of that sort it's a
widespread misconception that's
potentially fairly dangerous one one
reason that the sort of biological
explanation for violence one reason that
hypothesis is potentially dangerous it's
not just misleading it can really do
harm is because if you believe that you
could very easily say well there's
nothing we can do to change the
predisposition people have to becoming
violent all we can do if somebody
becomes violent is punish them you know
lock them up or execute them but we
don't need to worry about changing the
social environment or the social
preconditions that may lead people to
become violent because that's irrelevant
the genetic argument allows us the
luxury of ignoring past and present
historical and social factors and in the
words of we may not euro in The New
Yorker very astutely said it's on the
genes an explanation for the way things
are that does not threaten the way
things are why should someone feel
unhappy or engage in antisocial behavior
when that person is living in the freest
and most prosperous nation on earth it
can't be the system there must be a flaw
in the wiring somewhere which is a good
way of putting it
so the genetic argument is simply a
cop-out which allows us to ignore the
social and economic and political
factors that in fact underlie
many troublesome behaviors addictions
are usually considered to be a
drug-related issue but looking at more
broadly I define addiction as any
behavior that is associated with craving
with temporary relief and with long-term
negative consequences along with an
impairment of control over it so that
the person wishes to give her a give it
up or promises to do so but can't follow
through when you understand that then
you can see that there are many more
addictions than simply those related to
drugs there's workaholism addiction to
shopping to the Internet to video games
there's the addiction to power people
have power but they want more and more
more and nothing is ever enough for
acquisition corporations that must own
more and more the addiction to oil that
leads to the wealth and to the products
made accessible to us by oil
look at the negative consequence on the
environment we're destroying the very
earth that we inhabit for the sake of
that addiction but these addictions are
far more devastating in the social
consequences than the cocaine or heroin
habits of my Downtown Eastside patients
yet they're rewarded and considered to
be respectable the tobacco company
executive that shows a higher profit
will get a much bigger reward it doesn't
face any negative consequences legally
or otherwise in fact is a respected
member of the board of several other
corporations
but tobacco smoke related diseases kill
5 and 1/2 million people our underworld
every year in the United States they
kill 400,000 people a year and if people
addicted to what to profit to such a
degree or they'd addicted that they're
actually in denial about the impact of
their activities which is typical for
addicts and denial and that's a
respectable it's respectable to be
addicted to profit no matter what the
cost
so what is acceptable and what is
respectable is a highly arbitrary
phenomenon our society and it seems like
the greater the harm the more
respectable the addiction there's a
general myth that drugs in themselves
are addictive in fact the war on drugs
is predicated on the idea that if you
interdict the source of drugs you can
deal with addiction ality now if you
understand addiction in the broader
sense we see that nothing in itself is
addictive no substance no drug is by
itself addictive and no behavior is by
itself addictive many people can go
shopping without becoming shopaholics
not everybody becomes a food addict not
everyone who drinks a glass of wine
becomes an alcoholic so the real issue
is what makes people susceptible because
it's the combination of a susceptible
individual and to potentially addictive
substance or behavior that actually then
makes for the four full flowering of
addiction in short it's not the drug
that's addictive it's the question of
the susceptibility of individual to
being addicted to particular substance
or behavior if you wish to understand
what that makes us some people
susceptible we actually have to look at
their life experience the old idea
although it's always still broadly held
that addictions are due to some genetic
cause is simply scientifically untenable
what the case is actually is that
certain life experiences make people
susceptible life experiences that not
only shape the person's personality and
psychological needs but also their very
brains in certain ways and that process
begins in utero it's been shown for
example that if you stress mother's
during pregnancy their children are more
active traits that predispose them to
addictions and that's because
development is shaped by the
psychological and social environment so
the biology of human beings is very much
affected by and programmed by their life
experiences being in a utero environment
does not begin at birth
environment begins as soon as you have
an environment as soon as your fetus you
are subject to whatever information is
coming through mom's circulations
hormones levels of nutrients great
landmark example of this something
called the dutch hongerwinter 1944 Nazis
occupying Holland for a bunch of reasons
they decide to take all the food and
divert it to Germany for three months
everybody there is starving tens of
thousands of people starve to death what
the Dutch hunger winter effect is if you
were a second or third trimester fetus
during the starvation your body learned
something very unique during that time
as it turns out the second third
trimester something that your body is
going about trying to learn about the
environment is well how menacing of the
place is and out there how plentiful how
how much
nutrients am I getting by way of moms
circulation be a fetus who is starving
during that time and your body programs
forever after to be really really really
stingy with your sugar and fat and and
what you do is you store every bit of it
be a Dutch hunger winter fetus at half a
century later everything else being
equal you are more likely to have high
blood pressure obesity or metabolic
syndrome that is environment coming in a
very unexpected place you can stress
animals in the laboratory when they're
pregnant and their offspring will be
more likely to use cocaine and alcohol
as adults you can stress human mothers
for example in a British study women who
are abused in pregnancy will have higher
levels of the stress hormone cortisol in
their placenta at birth and their
children more likely have conditions
that predispose them to addictions by
age 7 or 8 so any real stress already
prepares the gun for a konso mental
health issues Israeli study done fired
on children born to mothers who break or
pregnant prior to the onset of the 1967
war the deferment was a very stressed
and their offspring have a higher
incidence of schizophrenia than the
average cohort so there's plenty of
evidence now that prenatal effects have
a huge impact on the developing human
being
the point of a human development and
specifically human brain development is
that it occurs mostly under the impact
of the environment and mostly after
birth now if you compare us to a horse
which can run on the first day of life
we see that we are very undeveloped we
can't develop we can't muster that much
neurological coordination balance muscle
strength visual acuity until a year and
a half two years and that's because the
brain development that in the horse
happens in the safety of the womb in the
human being has to happen after birth
and that has to do with simple
evolutionary logic as the head gets
larger which is what makes us into human
beings be burgeoning of the forebrain is
what creates the human species actually
at the same time I walk on two legs so
our pelvis narrows to accommodate time
so now we have a narrower pelvis a
larger head bingo we have to be born
prematurely and that means that the
brain development that in other animals
occurs in utero in us occurs after birth
and much of that under the impact of the
environment and the concept of neural
Darwinism simply means that the circuits
that get the appropriate input from the
environment will develop optimally and
the ones that don't will either not
develop optimally or perhaps not at all
if you take a child with perfectly good
eyes at birth you put in their dark room
for five years he'll be blind thereafter
for the rest of his life because the
circuits of vision require light waves
for their development and without that
even the rudimentary circuits present
and active at birth will atrophy and die
and new ones will not develop
there's a significant way in which early
experiences shape adult behavior and
even and especially early experiences
for which there's no recall memory it
turns out that they're two kinds of
memory there is explicit memory which is
recall so when you can call back facts
details episodes circumstances but the
structure in the brain called the
hippocampus which encodes recall memory
it doesn't even begin to develop fully
until a year and a half and it's not so
developed or much later which is why
hardly anybody has any recall memory
prior to 18 months but there's another
kind of memory which is called implicit
memory which is in fact an emotional
memory where the emotional impact and
the interpretation at the child makes of
those emotional experiences is ingrained
in the brain in the form of nerve
circuits ready to fire without specific
recall so give you a clear example
people who are adopted have a lifelong
sense of rejection rate they can't
recall the adoption they can't recall
the separation of a birth mother but
there's nothing there to recall with but
the emotional memory of separation and
rejection is deeply embedded in their
brains hence they're much more likely to
experience a sense of rejection and a
great emotional upset when they perceive
themselves as being rejected than other
people that's not unique to people who
are adopted but it's politically strong
in them because of this function of
implicit memory people who are addicted
given that they wonder all the research
literature soon in my experience the
hardcore addicts virtually were all
significantly abused as children or
suffered severe emotional loss their
emotional or implicit memories are those
of a world that's not safe and not not
helpful caregivers who are not to be
trusted and relationships that are not
safe enough to open up to vulnerably and
has their responses tend to be
keep themselves separate from really
intimate relationships not to trust
caregivers doctors and other people are
trying to help them and generally see
the world is an unsafe place and that's
strictly a function of implicit memory
which sometimes has to do with incidents
they don't even recall infants were born
premature are often in incubators and
various types of gadgetry and machinery
for weeks and perhaps months it's not
known that if this showed not touched
and stroked on the back for just 10
minutes a day that promotes the brain
development so human touch is essential
for development and in fact infants were
never picked up will actually die that's
how much of a fundamental need being
held is to human being in our society
there is an unfortunate tendency to tell
parents not to pick up their kids not to
hold them not to pick up babies who are
crying for fear of spoiling them or to
encourage them to sleep through the
night you don't pick them up which is
just the opposite of what the child
needs and these children might go back
to sleep because they give up and every
inch of shut down as a way of defending
against the vulnerability of being
abandoned really by their parents but
the implicit memories will be died of a
world that doesn't give a damn
a lot of these differences are
structured very early in life in the way
they if you like the parental experience
of adversity how tough life is or how
easy it is is passed on to children
whether through maternal depression or
parents being bad tempered with their
kids because they've had a hard day or
just being too tired at the end of the
day and these have very powerful effects
programming children's development
a lot about now but that's early
sensitivity isn't just an evolutionary
mistake it exists again in many
different species even seedlings there's
an early adaptive process to the kind of
environment they're growing up in but
for humans the adaptation is to the
quality of social relations and so early
life how nurturing or how much conflict
how much attention you get is a taster
of the kind of world you may be growing
up in are you growing up in a world
where you have to fight for what you can
get watch your back fend for yourself
learn not to trust others why are you
growing up in a society where you depend
on reciprocity mutuality cooperation
where empathy is important where your
security depends on good relations with
other people and that needs a very
different emotional and cognitive
development and that's what the early
sensitivity is about and parenting is
almost quite unconsciously a system for
passing on that experience to children
as a kind of world a the Great British
child psychiatrist DW Winnicott said
that fundamentally two things can go
wrong in childhood one isn't it things
happen that shouldn't happen and then
things that should happen but don't and
the first category is the traumatic and
abusive and abandonment experiences of
my Downtown Eastside patients and of
many addicts
that's what shouldn't happen but it but
then there is the non-stressed attuned
non-distracted attention of the parent
that every child needs that very often
children don't get they're not abused
Dena neglected and they're not
traumatized but what should happen the
presence of the emotionally available
nurturing parent
just is not available to them because of
the stresses in our society and the
parenting environment and the
psychologist Allan schore calls that
proximal abandonment when the present
the kind is physically present but
emotionally absent
I have spent roughly the last 40 years
of my life working with the most violent
people our society produces murderers
rapists and so on in an attempt to
understand what causes this violence I
discovered that the most violent of the
criminals in our prisons had themselves
been victims of a degree of child abuse
that was beyond the scale of what I ever
thought of applying the term child abuse
to I had no idea of the depth of the
depravity with which children in our
society are all too often treated the
most violent people I saw were
themselves the survivors of their own
attempted murder often at the hands of
their parents or other people in their
social environment or were the survivors
of family members have been killed their
closest family members by other people
the Buddha argued that everything
depends on everything else he says the
one contains the many and the many
contains the one but you can't
understand anything in isolation from
its environment the leaf contains the
Sun the sky and the earth obviously
this has now been shown to be true of
course all around and specifically when
cost of human development the modern
scientific term for it is the
biopsychosocial nature of human
development which says that the biology
of human beings depends very much on
their interaction with the social and
psychological environment and
specifically the psychiatrist and
researcher Daniel Siegel at University
of California Los Angeles UCLA is coined
a phrase interpersonal neurobiology
which means to say that the way that our
nervous system functions depends very
much on our personal relationships in
the first place with the parenting
caregivers and the second place with
other important attachment figures in
our lives and the third place with our
entire culture so that you can't
separate the neurological functioning of
a human being from the environment in
which he or she grew up in and continues
to exist in and this is true throughout
the lifecycle it's particularly true
when you're dependent and helpless and
your brain is developing but it's true
even in adults and even at the end of
life human beings have lived in almost
every kind of society from the most
egalitarian hunting and gathering
societies seem to have been very
egalitarian for instance based on food
sharing gift exchange small bands of
people living predominately off of
foraging but little bit of hunting
predominantly among people you have at
the least known your entire life if not
surrounded by third cousins or closer
and a world in which there is a great
deal of fluidity between different
groups in the world in which there is
not a whole lot in terms of material
culture this is how humans have spent
most of their hominid history and no
surprise that makes for a very different
world one of the things you get as a
result of that is far less violence
organized group violence is not
occurred about lack of human history and
it seems quite clear so where did we go
wrong violence is not universal
it's not symmetrically distributed
throughout the human race there is a
huge variation in the amount of violence
in different societies there are some
societies that have virtually no
violence there are others that destroy
themselves
some of the Anabaptist religious groups
that are complete strict pacifists like
the Amish the Mennonites the Hutterites
among some of these groups the
Hutterites there are no recorded cases
of homicide during our major Wars like
World War two where people were being
drafted they would refuse to serve in
the military they would go to prison
rather than serve in the military in the
kibbutz and Israel the level of violence
is so low that the Criminal Courts there
will often send violent offenders people
have committed crimes to live on the
kibbutz in order to learn how to live a
non-violent life because that's the way
people live there so we are amply shaped
by society our societies and the broader
sense including our theological our
metaphysical our linguistic influences
etc our societies help shape us as to
whether or not we think life is
basically about sin or about beauty
whether the afterlife will carry a price
for how we live our lives or if it's
irrelevant in a broad sort of way
different large societies could be
termed as individualistic or
collectivist and you get very different
people in different mindsets and I
suspect different brains coming along
with that we in America are in one of
the most individualistic of societies
and capitalism being a system that
allows you to go higher and higher up a
potential pyramid and the deal is it
comes with fewer and fewer safety nets
by definition the more stratified a
society is the
you were people you have as peers the
fewer people with whom you have
symmetrical reciprocal relationships and
instead all you have are differing spots
and endless hierarchies and a world in
which you have few reciprocal partners
is a world with a lot less altruism all
right so this brings us to a total
impossible juncture which is to try to
make sense of perspective science as to
what the nature is in human nature you
know on a certain level the nature of
our nature is not to be constrained by
our nature we come up with more social
variability than any species out there
more systems of belief of styles of
family structures of ways of raising
children the capacity for variety that
we have is extraordinary in a society
which is predicated on competition and
really very often the ruthless
exploitation of one human being by
another the profiteering of other
people's problems and very often the
creation of problems for the purpose of
profiteering the ruling ideology will
very often justify that behavior by
appeals to some fundamental and
unalterable human nature so the myth in
our society is that people are
competitive by nature and that they are
individualistic and that they're selfish
the real reality is quite the opposite
we have certain human needs the only way
that you can talk about human nature
concretely is by recognizing that the
certain human needs we have a view in
need for companionship and for close
contact to be loved to be attached to to
be accepted to be seen to be received
for who we are if those needs are met we
will video up and to people who are
compassionate and cooperative and and
who have empathy for other people so
the opposite that we often see in our
society is in fact a distortion of human
nature precisely because so few people
have their needs met so yes you can talk
about human nature but only in the sense
of basic human needs that are
instinctively evoked or I should say
certain human needs that lead to certain
traits if they are met in a different
set of traits if they are denied so when
we recognize the fact that the human
organism which has a great deal of
adaptive flexibility allowing us to
survive in many different conditions is
also rigidly programmed for certain
environmental requirements or human
needs a social imperative begins to
emerge just as our bodies require
physical nutrients the human brain
demands positive forms of environmental
stimulus at all stages of development
while also needing to be protected from
other negative forms of stimulus and if
things that should happen do not or
things that shouldn't happen do it is
now apparent that the door can be opened
for not only a cascade of mental and
physical diseases but many detrimental
human behaviors as well so as we turn
our perspective now outward and take
account for the state of affairs today
we must ask the question is the
condition we have created in the modern
world actually supporting our health is
the bedrock of our socio-economic system
acting as a positive force for human and
social development and progress or is
the foundational gravitation of our
society actually going against the core
evolutionary requirements needed to
create and maintain our personal and
social well-being
so one might ask where did this all
begin what we have today have really a
world in a state of cumulative collapse
you had get it started with John Locke
and John Locke introduces property and
that has three provisos for just private
right and property and the three
provisos are that there must be enough
left over for others and that you must
not let it spoil and that you most of
all must mix your labor with it
this seems justified you mix your labor
with the world then you're entitled to
the product and as long as it is enough
left over for others and as long as it
doesn't spoil you don't allow anything
to go to waste that's okay well he
spends a long time of his famous
treatise of government and its since
been the canonical text for economic and
political and legal understanding is
still better than a classic Texas study
well what he did is it after he gives
the provisos and you're almost thinking
at the time whether you're for private
property or not he's given a very very
good and plausible and powerful defense
of private property here well he drops
him he drops him like that right in one
sentence he says well once the
introduction of money came in by men's
tacit consent then it became and he
doesn't say all the provisos are
canceled their race but that's what
happens so now we have not product in
your property earned by your own labor
oh no money buys labor there's no longer
consideration of whether there's enough
left over for others there is no longer
consideration of whether it spoils
because he says well money's like silver
and gold and gold can't spoil therefore
money's
be responsible for waste which is
ridiculous we're not talking about money
and silver we're talking about what its
effects are it's one non sequitur after
another just the most startling logical
legerdemain that he gets away with here
but it fits the interests of capital
owners then Adam Smith comes along and
what he adds is the religion to this
Locke started with God made it all this
way this is God's right and now we get
also with Smith coming along he says
it's not only God's I mean he's not
saying this but this is what's happening
philosophically being principled he's
saying it's not only question of private
property that's all now presupposed is
given and that there's money investors
that buy labor given that there's no
limit to how much they can buy of other
men's labor how much they can accumulate
how much inequality that's all given out
and so he comes along and what his big
idea is and again it's just introduced
in parentheses home on puss off you know
when people put out goods for sale and
others you know the supply and other
people buy them with the demand and so
forth how do you how do we have supply
equaling demand or demand equaling
supply how can they come into
equilibrium and that is one of the
central notions of economics is how do
they come into equilibrium and he says
it's the invisible hand of the market
that brings them into equilibrium so now
we have God is actually imminent he just
didn't give the rights to property and
how you know all its wherewithal and its
natural rights of doing all the Locke
said now we have the system itself as
God in fact Smith says when he talks and
you'll ever find this quoted you have to
read the whole the inquiry into the
wealth of nations
he says the scantiness of subsistence
sets limits to the reproduction of the
poor
that nature can deal with this no other
way than elimination of their children
so he anticipated evolutionary theory in
the worst sense I apply if this is well
before Darwin and so he called them the
race of laborers so you can see there
was inherent racism built in here there
was an inherent acceptance life
blindness to kill innumerable children
and he thought will last invisible hand
making supply meet demand and demand
meet supply so see what how wise God is
so you can see a lot of the really very
on this life destructive eco-genocidal
things that are going on now have in a
way a thought gene back in smith to when
we reflect on the original concept of
the so-called free market capitalist
system as initiated by early economic
philosophers such as Adam Smith we see
that the original intent of a market was
based around real tangible life
supporting goods for trade Adam Smith
never fathomed that the most profitable
economic sector on the planet would
eventually be in the arena of financial
trading or so-called investment where
money itself is simply gained by the
movement of other money in an arbitrary
game which holds zero productive merit
to society yet regardless of Smith's
intent the door for such seemingly
anomalous advents was left wide open by
one fundamental tenet of this theory
money is treated as a commodity in and
of itself today in every economy of the
world regardless of the social system
they claim money is pursued for the sake
of money and nothing else the underlying
idea which was mysteriously qualified by
Adam Smith with his religious
declaration of the invisible hand is
that the narrow self-interested pursuit
of this fictional commodity will somehow
magically manifest human and social
well-being
progress the reality is that the
monetary incentive interest or what some
have termed the money sequence of value
has now completely decoupled from the
foundational life interest which could
be termed the life sequence of value
what has happened is that there's a
complete confusion in economic doctrine
between those two sequences they think
that the money sequence of value
delivers the life sequence of value that
and that's why they say if more goods
are sold if GDPs rise and so forth
therefore there be more well-being
enhance well-being we take the GDP to be
a basic layer indicator of social health
well there you see the confusion it's
talking about money sequences of value
that is all the receipts all the
revenues that have group derived from
selling goods and they're confusing that
with life reproduction so that you have
built right into this thing from the
beginning it's a complete conflation of
the money and life sequences of value so
we're dealing with a kind of structured
delusion that becomes more and more
deadly as the money sequence decouples
from producing anything at all so it's a
system disorder and the system disorder
seems to be fatal in society today you
seldom hear anyone speak of the progress
of their country or Society in terms of
their physical well-being state of
happiness trust or social stability
rather the measures are presented to us
through economic abstractions we have
the gross domestic product the Consumer
Price Index the value of the stock
market rates of inflation and so on but
does this tell us anything of real value
as to the quality of people's lives no
all these measures have to do with the
money sequence itself and nothing more
for example the gross domestic product
of the country is a measure of the value
of goods and services sold this measure
is claimed to correlate to the standard
of living of a country's people in the
United States health
counted for over 17 percent of GDP in
2009 amounting to over 2.5 trillion
spent hence creating a positive effect
on this economic measure and based on
this logic it would be even better for
the US economy if health care services
increased more so perhaps to 3 trillion
dollars or 5 trillion since that would
create more growth more jobs and hence
boasted by economists as a rise in their
country's standard of living but wait a
minute what do health care services
actually represent well sick and dying
people that's right the more unhealthy
people there are in America the better
the economy now that is not an
exaggeration or a cynical perspective in
fact if we step back far enough you will
realize that the GDP not only doesn't
reflect real public or social health on
any tangible level it is in fact mostly
a measure of industrial inefficiency and
social degradation and the more you see
it rise the worse things are becoming
with respect to personal social and
environmental integrity you have to
create problems to create profit there
is no profit under the current paradigm
in saving lives putting balance on this
planet having justice and peace or
anything else there's just no profit
there there's an old thing pass a law
created business whether you're creating
a business for a lawyer or whatever so
you know crime does create business just
like destruction creates business in
Haiti we have now roughly 2 million
people incarcerated in this country and
of those many of them are in prisons run
by private corporations Corrections
Corporation of America Wackenhut who
trade their stock on Wall Street based
upon how many people are in jail
now that's sickness but that is a
reflection of what this economic
paradigm calls for so what exactly does
this economic paradigm call for
what is it that keeps our economic
system going consumption or more
accurately cyclical consumption
when we break down the foundation of
classic market economics we are left
with a pattern of monetary exchange that
simply cannot be allowed to stop or even
substantially slowed if the society as
we know it is to remain operational
there are three main actors on the
economic stage the employee the employer
and the consumer the employee sells
labor to the employer for income the
employer sells its production services
and hence goods to the consumer for
income and the consumer of course is
simply another role of the employer and
employee spending back into the system
to enable the cyclical consumption to
continue in other words the global
market system is based on the assumption
that there will always be enough product
demand in society to move enough money
around at a rate which can keep the
consumption process going and the faster
the rate of consumption the more
so-called economic growth is assumed and
so the Machine goes but hold on I
thought an economy was meant to I don't
know economize doesn't the very term
have to do with preservation and
efficiency and a reduction of waste so
how does our system which demands
consumption and the more the better
efficiently preserve or economize at all
well it doesn't the intent of the market
system is in fact the exact opposite of
what a real economy is supposed to do
which is efficiently and conservatively
oriented materials for production and
distribution of life supporting goods we
live on a finite planet with finite
resources where for example the oil we
utilize took millions of years to
develop where the minerals we use took
billions of years to develop so having a
system that deliberately promotes the
acceleration of consumption for the sake
of so-called economic growth' is pure
ecocidal insanity absence of waste
that's what efficiency is absence of
waste this system is more wasteful than
all the other existing systems in his
planet every level of life organization
and life system is in a state of crisis
and challenge and decay or collapse no
peer-reviewed journal in the last 30
years will tell you anything different
that is that every life system is in
decline as well as social programs as
well as our water access and try to name
any means of life that isn't threatened
and in danger you can there isn't there
really isn't one and that's very very
despairing but we haven't even figured
out the causal mechanism we don't want
to face the causal mechanism we just
want to go on you know less what
insanity is where you keep doing the
same thing over and over again though it
clearly doesn't work so you're really
dealing with not an economic system but
I would go so far as to say an
anti-economic system
there's an old saying
tentative market model seeks to create
the best possible goods at the lowest
possible prices this statement is
essentially the incentive concept which
justifies market competition based on
the assumption that the result is the
production of higher quality goods if I
was going to build myself a table from
scratch I would naturally build it out
of the best most durable materials
possible right with the intent for it to
last as long as possible why would I
want to make something poor knowing I
would have to eventually do it again and
expend more materials and more energy
well as rational as that may seem in the
physical world when it comes to the
market world it is not only explicitly
irrational it is not even an option it
is technically impossible to produce the
best of anything if a company is to
maintain a competitive edge and hence
remain affordable to the consumer
literally everything created and set for
sale in the global economy is
immediately inferior the moment that is
produced for it is a mathematical
impossibility to make the most
scientifically advanced efficient and
strategically sustainable products this
is due to the fact that the market
system requires that cost efficiency or
the need to reduce expenses exists at
every stage of production from the cost
of labor to the cost of materials and
packaging and so on this competitive
strategy of course is to make sure the
public buys their goods rather than from
a competing producer which is doing the
exact same thing to also make their
goods both competitive and affordable
this immutably wasteful consequence of
the system could be termed intrinsic
obsolescence
however this is only one part of a
larger problem a fundamental governing
principle of market economics one that
you will not find in any textbook by the
way is the following nothing produced
can be allowed to maintain a lifespan
longer than what can be endured in order
to continue cyclical consumption in
other words it is critical that stuff
break down fail and expire within a
certain amount of time this is termed
planned obsolescence planned
obsolescence is the backbone of the
underlying market strategy of every
Goods producing corporation in existence
while a very few of course would admit
to such a strategy outright what they do
is mask it within the intrinsic
obsolescence phenomenon just discussed
while often ignoring or even suppressing
new advents and technology which might
create a more sustainable durable good
so if it wasn't wasteful enough that the
system inherently cannot allow the most
durable and efficient goods to be
produced planned obsolescence
deliberately recognizes that the longer
any good is in operation the worse it is
for sustaining cyclical consumption and
hence the market system itself in other
words product sustainability is actually
inverse to economic growth and hence
there is a direct reinforced incentive
to make sure life spans are short of any
given good produced and in fact the
system cannot operate any other way one
glance at the sea of landfills now
spreading across the world show the
obsolescence reality there are now
billions of cheaply made cell phones
computers and other technology each full
of precious difficult to mine materials
such as gold coltan copper now rotting
in vast piles usually due to the mere
malfunction or obsolescence of small
parts which in a conservative society
could likely be fixed or updated and the
life of the good extended unfortunately
as efficient as that may seem in our
physical reality living on a finite
planet with finite resources it is
explicitly inefficient with respect to
the market
to put it into a phrase efficiency
sustainability and preservation are the
enemies of our economic system likewise
just as physical goods need to be
constantly produced and reproduced
regardless of their environmental impact
the service industry operates with an
equal rationale the fact is there is no
monetary benefit to resolving any
problems which are currently being
serviced at the end of the day the last
thing the medical establishment really
wants is the curing of diseases such as
cancer which would eliminate countless
jobs and trillions in revenue and since
we're on the subject crime and terrorism
in this system are good well at least
economically for it is employing police
generating high-value commodities for
security not to mention the value of
Prisons that are privately owned for
profit and how about war the war
industry in America is a huge driver of
GDP one of the most profitable
industries producing weapons of death
and destruction the favorite game of
this industry is to blow things up and
then go and rebuild them for profit we
saw this with the windfall billion
dollar contracts made from the Iraq war
the bottom line is that socially
negative attributes of society have
become positively rewarded ventures for
industry and any interest in problem
resolution or environmental
sustainability and conservation is
intrinsically counter to economic
sustainability and this is why every
time you see the GDP rise in any country
you are witnessing an increase in
necessity whether real or contrived and
by definition a necessity is rooted in
inefficiency hence increased necessity
means increased inefficiency
the American Dream is based on rampant
consumerism it is based upon the fact
that mainstream media and especially
commercial advertising all corporations
who need this infinite growth have
convinced us or brainwashed most people
in America and hence the world that we
have to have X number of material
possessions and the possibility of
gaining infinitely more material
possessions in order to be happy that's
just not true
so how why do people continue to buy in
this way which is ultimately
eco-genocidal in its systemic effects
cumulatively and it just is classical
operant conditioning you simply put
inputs of conditioning into the organism
and you have outputs of desired
behaviors or goals or objectives and it
has all the resources of technology and
they boast about how they get into the
minds of infants what they hear is
already making them conditioned to the
brand then you see well that's how
people have been such fools in the way
they've been taught to be fools it's a
value system disorder you know if there
is any testament to the plasticity of
the human mind if there is any proof to
how malleable human thought is and how
easily conditioned and guided people can
become based on the nature of their
environmental stimulus and what it
reinforces the world of commercial
advertising is the proof you have to
stand in awe at the level of
brainwashing where these programmed
robots known as consumers wander the
landscape only to walk into a store and
spend say four thousand dollars on a
handbag that likely cost ten dollars to
make in a sweatshop overseas only for
the brand status it supposedly
represents in the culture or perhaps the
ancient communal traditions which
increase trust and cohesiveness in
society which have now been hijacked by
acquisitive materialistic values where
now annually we exchange
useless crap a few times a year and we
might wonder why so many today have a
compulsion to shopping in acquisition
when it is clear that they have been
conditioned from childhood to expect
material goods as a sign of their status
with friends and family the fact is the
foundation of any society are the values
that support its operation and our
society as it exists can only operate if
our values support the conspicuous
consumption it requires to continue the
market system 75 years ago consumption
in America and much of the first world
was half of what we see today per person
today's new consumer culture has been
manufactured and imposed due to the very
real need for higher and higher levels
of consumption and this is why most
corporations now spend more money on
advertising than the actual process of
product creation itself they work
diligently to create a false need for
you to fill and it happens to work you
know economists in fact not economists
at all they're propagandists of money
value and you will find that all their
models basically get down to token
exchanges that are to the profit of one
side or both sides or whatever but
they're completely disconnected from the
actually existing world of reproduction
in Ohio an old man failed to pay his
electric bill you may be familiar with
the case and the electric company turned
off the electricity and he died the
reason they turned it off was because it
wouldn't have been profitable for them
to keep it on because he didn't pay his
bill do you believe that was right the
responsibility really lies not on the
electric company for turning it off but
on those of this man's neighbors and
friends and associates who are not
charitable enough to enable him as an
individual to meet the electric bill hmm
did I hear that right did he just say
the death of a man caused by not having
money was the responsibility of other
people
effect charity oh well then I guess
we're going to need a whole lot of
infomercials little miserable coin slot
donations for Bodega counters and a
bunch of pickle jars for the billion
people now starving to death on this
planet because of the very system Milton
Friedman promotes whether you are
dealing with the philosophies of Milton
Friedman FA Hyack John Maynard Keynes
Ludwig von Mises or any other major
market economist the basis of rationale
rarely leaves the money sequence it is
like a religion consumption analysis
stabilization policies deficit spending
aggregate demand it exists as a never
ending self-referring self-rationalizing
circle of discourse where universal
human need natural resources over any
form of physical life supporting
efficiency is ruled out by default and
replaced by the singular notion that
humans seeking advantage over each other
for money alone motivated by their own
narrow self-interest will magically
create a sustainable healthy balanced
Society there is no life coordinate in
this whole theory this whole doctrine
what are they doing what are they doing
what they're doing is tracking money
sequences that's all it is is tracking
money sequences presupposing everything
that matters one that there's no life
coordinates whoa no life coordinates to
that all the agents are self-maximizing
preferences seekers that is they think
of nothing other than themselves and
what they can get most for themselves
that that note that's induction that's
the ruling notion of rationality
self-maximizing choice and and the only
thing that they're interested in
self-maximizing is money or commodities
well where does social relations come in
it doesn't except in the exchange to
self-maximize where do our natural
resources come in they don't except to
exploit where
does the family come in as being able to
survive it doesn't they have to have
money in order to purchase any good well
shouldn't an economy deal somewhere with
human need is an athletic fundamental
issue as to satisfy human needs Oh need
isn't even in your lexicon you dissolve
into once and what does it want and that
means money demand that wants to buy
well if it's funnyman Amanda must apply
it's got nothing to do with me because
it maybe the person has no money demand
and desperately needs say water supply
or or it may be money demand wants a
gold toilet seat well where does it all
go to the whole toilet see and you call
this economics like it's really when one
thinks of it it's got to be the most
bizarre delusion in history of human
thought now so far we have focused on
the market system but this system is
actually only one half of the global
economic paradigm the other half is the
monetary system while the market system
deals with the interaction of people
gaming for profit across the spectrum of
Labor production and distribution the
monetary system is an underlying set of
policies set by financial institutions
which create conditions for the market
system among other things it includes
terms we often hear such as interest
rates loans debt the money supply
inflation etc and while you might want
to pull your hair out listening to the
gibberish coming from the monetary
economists modest pre-emptive actions
can obviate the need of more drastic
actions at a later date the nature and
effect of this system is actually quite
simple our economy has or the global
economy has three basic things of
governor one is fractional reserve
banking banks printing money out of
nothing it's also based upon compound
interest when you borrow money you have
to pay back more than you borrowed which
means that you in effect create money
out of thin air again which has to be
serviced by creating still more money we
live in an infinite growth paradigm the
economic paradigm we live in now is a
Ponzi scheme
it's nothing grows forever it's not
possible as a great psychologist James
Hillman wrote the only thing that grows
in a human body after a certain age is
cancer it's not just the amount of money
that has to keep growing its the amount
of consumers consumers to borrow money
at interest to generate more money and
obviously that's not possible
want to find a planet people are
basically vehicles to just create money
which must create more money to keep the
whole thing from falling apart which is
what's happening right now there are
really only two things anyone needs to
know about the monetary system one all
money is created out of debt money is
monetized debt whether it materialized
from Treasury bonds home loan contracts
or credit cards in other words if all
outstanding debt was to be repaid right
now there would not be one dollar in
circulation and two interest is charged
on virtually all loans made and the
money needed to pay back this interest
does not exist in the money supply
outright only the principal is created
by the loans and the principal is the
money supply so if all this debt was to
be repaid right now not only would there
not be one dollar left in circulation
there would also be a gigantic amount of
money owed that is literally impossible
to pay back for it does not exist the
consequence of all of this is that two
things are inevitable inflation and
bankruptcy as far as inflation this can
be seen as a historical trend in
virtually every country today and easily
tied to its cause which is the perpetual
increase of the money supply which is
required to cover the interest charges
and keep the system going as far as
bankruptcy it comes in the form of debt
collapse this collapse will inevitably
occur with a person a business or a
country and typically happens
the interest payments are no longer
possible to make but there is a bright
side of all of this well at least in
terms of the market system because debt
creates pressure debt creates wage
slaves a person in debt is much more
likely to take a low wage than a person
who isn't hence becoming a cheap
commodity so it's great for the
corporations that have a pool of people
that have no financial mobility but hey
that same train of thought also goes for
entire countries the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund which mostly
serve as proxies for transnational
corporate interests give gigantic loans
to troubled countries at very high
interest rates and then once the
countries are deeply in the hole and
can't pay austerity measures are applied
the corporation's swoop in set up
sweatshops and take their natural
resources now that's market efficiency
but wait there's more you see there's
this unique hybrid of the monetary and
market system called the stock market
which rather than you know actually
produce anything real they just buy and
sell money itself and when it comes to
debt you know what they do that's right
they trade it they actually buy and sell
debt so profit from credit default swaps
and collateralized debt obligations for
consumer debt to complex derivative
schemes used to mask the debt of entire
countries such as the collusion of
investment bank Goldman Sachs and Greece
which nearly collapsed the entire
European economy so when it comes to the
stock market and Wall Street we have an
entirely new level of insanity born out
of the money sequence
all you need to know about markets was
written in an editorial in the Wall
Street Journal a couple years ago it was
called lessons of the brain-damaged
investor and in this editorial they
explained why people with slight brain
damage do better as investors than
people with normal brain functionality
why because the slightly brain-damaged
person has no empathy and that's the key
if you don't have any empathy you do
well as an investor and so Wall Street
breeds people who have no empathy to go
in there and to make decisions and make
trades that they have no compunction
about and no thought whatsoever at that
what they're doing might affect their
fellow human being
so they breed these robots these these
people have no souls
and since they don't even want to pay
these people anymore they're now
breeding robots real robots real
algorithmic traders Goldman Sachs in the
high frequency trading scandal they put
a computer next to the exchange the New
York Stock Exchange
this computer this co-located computer
as they call it
if front-runs all the trades on the
exchange and hits the exchanges with
volumes of orders in ways that scalp
pennies and nickels away from the
exchange it just it's like they're
siphoning money all day long they went
one quarter last year 30 or 60 straight
days without a single down bay made
millions of dollars every single day is
that because well that's statistically
impossible when I worked on Wall Street
the way it works is everyone kicks
upstairs to bribes the brokers bribe to
the office manager the office manager
bribes to the Regional Sales Manager the
Regional Sales Manager bribes to the
National Sales Manager it's a common
understanding at Christmas who gets the
biggest bonus at Christmas in an average
broker job is the compliance officer the
compliance officer sits there all day
long he's supposed to be making sure you
don't violate any of the margin rules
and you're complying with the law of
course yeah to the extent that you can
bribe the compliance officer yeah that's
right you are complying with the law so
how does fraud has become the system
it's no longer a byproduct it is the
system
it's like an old Woody Allen joke he
says doctor my brother thinks he's a
chicken and the doctor says take a pill
and that should cure the problem and he
says no doctor you don't understand we
need the eggs okay so the training of
fraudulent claims back and forth between
banks to generate fees to generate
bonuses has become as the GDP producing
growth engine of the United States
economy even though if they're
essentially trading fraudulent claims
that there's actually no hope of ever
paying back their processing and
generating and re-securitizing nothing
if I write 20 billion dollars of the
cocktail napkin and I sell to JP Morgan
while JP Morgan writes 20 million
dollars on a cocktail napkin and we swap
those two cocktail napkins at a bar and
we each pay ourselves a quarter of 1% in
the fee we make a lot of money for a
Christmas bonus we each have on our
books a twenty billion dollar cocktail
napkin which has no real value until
such time as the system is no longer
able to absorb bogus cocktail napkins in
which case we go to the government to
get bailed out and because of Wall
Street in the global stock market there
are now conservatively about 700
trillion dollars of outstanding
fraudulent claims known as derivatives
still waiting to collapse a value
amounting to over 10 times the gross
domestic product of the entire planet
and while we have seen the bailouts of
corporations and banks by governments
which of course comically borrow their
money from banks to begin with we are
now seeing attempts to bailout whole
countries by conglomerates of other
countries through the international
banks but how do you bailout a planet
there is no country out there that isn't
now saturated in debt the Cascade of
sovereign debt defaults we have seen can
only be the beginning when the math is
taken into account it has been estimated
in the United States alone that income
tax would need to be raised to 65% per
person just to cover the interest in the
near future economists are now
foreshadowing that within a few days
60% of the countries on the planet will
be bankrupt but hold on let me get this
straight the world is going bankrupt
whatever the hell that means because of
this idea called dead which doesn't even
exist in the physical reality it's only
part of a game that we've invented and
yet the well being of billions of people
is now being compromised extreme layoffs
tent cities accelerating poverty
austerity measures imposed schools
shutting down child hunger and other
levels of familial deprivation all
because of this elaborate fiction what
are we fucking stupid hey hey mozz my
man help a brother out huh grow up kid
[Music]
sadden what's up man you remember that
smokin nebula I hooked you up with a
while back listen ice we're getting
really tired of you you've been given
everything and yet you're waste at all
you got plenty of resources and you know
it why don't you grow up and learn some
responsibility for Christ's sake you're
making your mother miserable you're on
your own pal
yeah whatever now all of this considered
from the waste machine known as the
market system to the debt machine known
as the monetary system hence creating
the monetary-market paradigm which
defines the global economy today there
is one consequence that runs through the
entire Machine inequality
whether it is the market system which
creates a natural gravitation towards
monopoly and power consolidation while
also generating pockets of wealthy
industries that tower over others
regardless of utility such as the fact
that top hedge fund managers on Wall
Street now take home over 300 million
dollars a year for contributing
literally nothing while a scientist
looking for a cure for a disease trying
to help humanity might make $60,000 a
year if they're lucky or whether it is
the monetary system which has class
division built right into its structure
for example if I have 1 million dollars
to spare and I put it into a CD at 4%
interest I will make $40,000 a year no
social contribution no nothing however
if I'm a lower class person and have to
take loans to buy my car or home I am
paying in interest which in abstraction
is going to pay that millionaire with
the 4% CD this stealing from the poor to
pay the rich is a foundational built-in
aspect of the monetary system and it
could be labeled structural classism of
course historically social
stratification has always been deemed
unfair but obviously accepted overall is
now 1% of the population owns 40% of the
planets wealth but material fairness
aside there is something else going on
underneath the surface of inequality
causing an incredible deterioration in
public health as a whole well I think
people often puzzled by the contrast
between the material success of our
societies unprecedented levels of wealth
and the many social failings saying you
know if you look at the the rates of
drug abuse or violence or self-harm
amongst kids or mental illness that's
clearly something going deeply wrong
with our societies what the data that
I've been describing does is simply
shows that intuition that we
people have had for hundreds of years
with inequality is divisive and socially
corrosive but that intuition is truer
than I think we ever imagined
there are very powerful psychological
and social effects of inequality more to
do I suppose with feelings of
superiority and inferiority that kind of
division and and maybe going with the
sort of respect
disrespect people feeling looked down on
at the bottom which by the way is why
violence is more common in more unequal
societies it's the triggers of violence
is so often people feeling looked down
on and disrespected if there is one
principle I can emphasize that is the
most important principle underlying the
prevention of violence it would be
equality the single most significant
factor that affects the rate of violence
is the degree of equality versus the
degree of inequality in that society so
what one is looking at is a sort of
general social dysfunction it's not just
one or two things that go wrong as
inequality increases it seems to be
everything whether we're talking about
crime or health or mental illness or
whatever one of the really disturbing
findings out in public health there is
never ever make the mistake of being
poor or being born poor your health pays
for the endless sorts of ways something
known as the health socio-economic
gradient as you move down from the
highest strata in society in terms of
socioeconomic status every step down
health gets worse for umpteen different
diseases life expectancy gets worse
infant mortality rate everything you
could look at so a huge issue has been
why is it that this grayton exists
totally simple obvious answer which is
if you were chronically sick you're not
going to be very productive so health
causes Drive socio-economic differences
not that in the slightest on the very
simple level that you could look at
socioeconomic status of
year-old and that's going to predict
something about their health decades
later so that's the direction of
causality next one what's it about oh
it's perfectly obvious where people
can't afford to go to the doctor its
healthcare access it's got nothing to do
with that because you see these same
gradients in countries with universal
health care or socialized medicine
okay next simple explanation Oh on the
average the poorer you are the more
likely you are to smoke to drink to all
sorts of lifestyle risk factors stuff
yeah those contribute but careful
studies have shown that explains maybe
about a third of the variability so
what's left and what's left is having a
ton to do with the stress of poverty so
the poorer you are starting off being
you know the person who's one dollar
income behind Bill Gates the poorer you
are in this country on the average the
worse your health is this tells us
something really important the Health
connection with poverty it's not about
being poor it's about feeling poor
increasingly we recognize that chronic
stress is an important influence on
health but the most important sources of
stress are the quality of social
relations and if there is anything that
lowers the quality of social relations
it is the socio-economic stratification
of society what science has now shown is
that regardless of material wealth the
stress of simply living in a stratified
society leads to a vast spectrum public
health problems and the greater the
inequality the worse they become
life expectancy longer and more equal
countries
drug abuse less and more equal countries
mental illness less and more equal
countries social capital meaning the
ability of people to trust each other
naturally greater in more equal
countries educational schools higher in
more equal countries
homicide rates less in more equal
countries
crime and rates of imprisonment less in
more equal countries it goes on and on
infant mortality obesity teen birthrate
less in more equal countries and perhaps
most interesting innovation greater in
more equal countries which challenges
the age old notion that a competitive
stratified society is somehow more
creative and inventive moreover a study
done in the UK called the Whitehall
study confirmed that there is a social
distribution of disease as you go from
the top of the socio-economic ladder to
the bottom for example it was found that
the lowest rungs of the hierarchy had a
4-fold increase of heart disease based
mortality compared to the highest rungs
and this pattern exists irrespective of
access to health care hence the worse a
person's relative financial status the
worse their health is going to be on
average this phenomenon is rooted in
what could be termed psychosocial stress
and it is at the foundation of the
greatest social distortions plaguing our
society today it's caused the monetary
market system make no mistake the
greatest destroyer of ecology the
greatest source of waste and depletion
and pollution the greatest purveyor of
violence war crime poverty animal abuse
and inhumanity the greatest generator of
Social and personal neurosis mental
disorders depression anxiety not to
mention the greatest source of social
paralysis stopping us from
to new methodologies for personal health
global sustainability and progress on
this planet is not some corrupt
government or legislation not some rogue
corporation or banking cartel not some
flaw of human nature and not some secret
hidden cabal that controls the world it
is in fact the socio-economic system
itself at it's very foundation
[Music]
let's imagine for a moment we had the
option to redesign human civilization
from the ground up what if
hypothetically speaking we discovered an
exact replica of the planet Earth and
the only difference between this new
planet and our current one is that human
evolution had not occurred it was an
open palette no countries no cities no
pollution no Republicans just a pristine
open environment so what would we do
well first we need a goal right and it's
safe to say that goal would be to
survive and not to just survive but to
do so in an optimized healthy prosperous
way most people indeed desire to live
and they would prefer to do so without
suffering therefore the basis of this
civilization needs to be as supportive
and hence sustainable for human life as
possible taking into account the
material needs of all the world's people
while trying to remove anything that
could hurt us in the long run that goal
say maximum sustainability understood
the next question regards our method
what kind of approach do we take well
let's see last I checked politics was
the method of social operation on earth
so what do the doctrines of the
Republicans liberals conservatives or
socialists
to say about societal design hmm not a
damn thing okay then what about religion
surely the Great Creator had to have
left some blueprints somewhere no
nothing I can find okay then so what's
left it appears something called science
science is unique in that it's methods
demand not only that the ideas proposed
be tested and replicated but everything
science comes up with is also inherently
falsifiable in other words unlike
religion and politics science has no ego
and everything it suggests accepts the
possibility of being proven wrong
eventually it holds on to nothing and
evolves constantly well that sounds
natural enough to me so then based on
the current state of scientific
knowledge in the early 21st century
along with our goal of maximum
sustainability for the human population
how do we begin the actual process of
construction well the first question to
ask what do we need to survive the
answer of course are Planetary Resources
whether it is the water we drink the
energy we use the raw materials we
utilize to create tools and shelter the
planet hosts an inventory of resources
many of which are demanded for our
survival so given that reality it then
becomes critical to figure out what we
have and where it is this means we need
to conduct a survey we simply locate and
identify every physical resource on the
planet we can along with the amount
available at each location from the
deposits of copper to the most potent
locations for wind farms to produce
energy to the natural fresh water
Springs to an assessment of the amount
of fish in the ocean to the most prime
arable land for food cultivation etc but
since we humans are going to be
consuming these resources over time we
then realize that not only do we need to
locate and identify we also need to
track
we need to make sure we don't run out of
any of this stuff that would be bad and
this means not only tracking our rates
of use but the rates of earthly
regeneration as well such as how long it
takes for say a tree to grow or a spring
to replenish this is called dynamic
equilibrium in other words if we use up
trees faster than they can be grown back
we have a serious problem for it is
unsustainable so then how do we track
this inventory especially when we
recognize that all of this stuff is
scattered everywhere we have large
mineral mines in what we call Africa
energy concentrations in the Middle East
huge tidal power possibilities on the
Atlantic coast of North America the
largest supply of fresh water in Brazil
etc well once again good old science has
a suggestion it's called Systems Theory
Systems Theory recognizes that the
fabric of the natural world from human
biology to the earthly biosphere the
gravitational pull of the solar system
itself is one huge synergistically
connected system fully interlinked just
as human cells connect to form our
organs and the organs connect to form
our bodies and since our bodies cannot
live without the earthy resources of
food air and water we are intrinsically
connected to the earth and so on
so as nature suggests we take all of
this inventory and tracking data and
create a system to manage it a global
resource management system in fact to
account for every relevant resource on
the planet there is simply no logical
alternative if our goal as a species is
survival in the long run we have to keep
track as a whole that understood we can
now consider production how do we use
all this stuff what will our process of
production be and what do we need to
consider to make sure it is as optimized
as possible to maximize our
sustainability well the first thing that
jumps right out at us is the fact that
we need to constantly try and preserve
the planet's resources are essentially
finite so it is important that we be
strategic strategic preservation is key
the second thing we recognize is that
some resources are really not as good as
others in their performance in fact some
of this stuff when put into use has a
terrible effect on the environment which
invariably hinders our own health for
example oil and fossil fuels no matter
how you cut it release some pretty
destructive agents into the environment
therefore it is critical we do our best
to use such things only when we really
have to if at all fortunately for us we
see a ton of solar wind tidal wave heat
differential and geothermal
possibilities for energy production so
we can strategize objectively about what
we use and where to avoid what could be
called negative retroactions' or
anything that results from production or
use that damages the environment and
hence ourselves we will call this
strategic safety to couple in with our
strategic preservation but production
strategies do not stop there we are
going to need an efficiency strategy for
the actual mechanics of production
itself and what we find is that there
are roughly three specific protocols we
must adhere to one every good we produce
must be designed to last as long as
possible
naturally the more things break down the
more resources we are going to need to
replace them and the more waste produced
to when things do break down or are no
longer usable for whatever reason it is
critical that we harvest or recycle as
much as we possibly can so the
production design must take this into
account directly at the very earliest
stages three quickly evolving
technologies such as electronics which
are subject to the fastest rates of
technological obsolescence would need to
be designed to foreshadow and
accommodate physical updates
the last thing we want to do is throw
away an entire computer system just
because it has only one broken part or
is outdated so we simply design the
components to be easily updated part by
part standardized and universally
interchangeable foreshadowed by the
current trend of technological change
and when we realize that the mechanisms
of strategic preservation strategic
safety and strategic efficiency are
purely technical considerations devoid
of any human opinion or bias we simply
program these strategies into a computer
which can weigh and calculate all the
relevant variables allowing us to always
arrive at the absolute best method for
sustainable production based on current
understandings and while that might
sound complex all it is is a glorified
calculator not to mention such
multi-varied decision making and
monitoring systems are already used
across the world today for isolated
purposes it is simply a process of
scaling it out so now we not only have
our resource management system but also
a production management system both of
which are easily computer automated to
maximize efficiency preservation and
safety the informational reality is that
the human mind or even a group of humans
cannot track what needs to be tracked it
must be done by computers and it can be
and this brings us to the next level
distribution what sustainability
strategies make sense here well since we
know that the shortest distance between
two points is a straight line and since
energy is required to power transport
machines the less transport distance the
more efficient producing goods in one
continent and shipping them over to
another only makes sense if the goods in
question simply cannot be produced in
the target area otherwise it is nothing
but wasteful we must localize production
so distribution is simple fast and
requires the least amount of energy
we'll call this the proximity strategy
which simply means we reduce the
travel of goods as much as possible
whether raw materials or finished
consumer products of course it might
also be important to know what goods we
are transporting and why and this falls
under the category of demand and demand
is simply what people need to be healthy
and to have a high quality of life the
spectrum of material human needs range
from core life supporting necessities
such as food clean water shelter to
social and recreational goods which
allow for relaxation and personal social
enjoyment both important factors in
human and social health overall so very
simply we take another survey people
describe their needs demand is assessed
and production begins based on that
demand and since the level of demand of
different goods will naturally fluctuate
and change around different regions we
need to create a demand distribution
tracking system so to avoid overruns and
shortages of course this idea is old
news it is used in every major store
chain today to make sure they keep up
with their inventory only this time we
are tracking on a global scale but wait
a minute we really can't fully
understand demand if we don't account
for the actual usage of the good itself
is it logical and sustainable for every
single human to say have one of
everything made regardless of their
usage no that would be simply wasteful
and inefficient if a person has a need
for a good but that need is only for say
45 minutes a day on average it would be
much more efficient if that good was
made available to them and to others
when needed many forget that it isn't
the goods that they want it is the
purpose of that good when we realize
that the good itself is only as
important as its utility we see that
external restriction or what we might
call today ownership is extremely
wasteful and environmentally illogical
in a fundamental economic sense
so we need to devise a strategy called
strategic access this will be the
foundation of our demand distribution
tracking system which makes sure we can
meet the demand of the populations needs
for access of whatever they need when
they need it and as far as physically
obtaining the goods centralized and
regional access centers all make sense
for the most part placed in close
proximity to the population and a person
would simply come in take the item use
it and when finished return it when it
is no longer needed sort of how a
library works today in fact these
centers could not only exist in the
community and the way we see local
stores today but specialized access
centers would exist in specific areas
where often certain goods are utilized
saving more energy with less repeat
transport and once this demand tracking
system is in order it is tied into our
production management system and of
course into our resource management
system hence creating a unified
dynamically updating global economic
management machine that simply makes
sure we remain sustainable starting with
securing the integrity of our finite
resources moving to make sure we only
create the best most strategic Goods
possible while distributing everything
in the most intelligent and efficient
way and the unique result of this
preservation based approach which is
intuitively counter to many is that this
logical ground up empirical process of
preservation and efficiency which can
only define true human sustainability on
this planet would likely enable
something never before seen in human
history access abundance not just for a
percentage of the global population but
the entire civilization
this economic model as was just
generalized this responsible systems
approach to total earth resource
management and processes designed again
to do nothing less than take care of
humanity as a whole in the most
efficient and sustainable way could be
termed a resource-based economy the idea
was defined in the 1970s by structural
engineer Jacque fresco he understood
back then that society was on a
collision course with nature and itself
unsustainable on every level and if
things didn't change we would destroy
ourselves one way or another all these
things you're saying Jacque could they
be built with what we know today or are
some of these things are you guessing
based on what we know that no all of
these things can be built with what we
know today it would take 10 years to
change the surface of the earth to
rebuild the world into a second Garden
of Eden the choice lies with you
the stupidity of a nuclear arms race the
development of weapons trying to solve
your problems politically by electing
this political party or that political
party that all politics is immersed in
corruption let me say it again communism
socialism fascism the Democrats the
Liberals we want to absorb human beings
all organizations that believe in a
better life a man there are no Negro
problems or polish problems or Jewish
problems or Greek problems or women's
problems there are human problems I'm
not afraid of anybody I don't work for
anyone no one can discharge me I have no
boss I am afraid to live in the society
we live in today our society cannot be
maintained by this type of incompetency
it was great the free enterprise system
about 35 years ago that was the last of
its usefulness now we've got to change
our way of thinking or perish the
horrible reefs of the future of the our
society the way it didn't work and
politics would be causing a horrible fee
lots of people today use the term cold
science because they're analytical and
they don't even know what analytical
means science means closer
approximations of the way the world
really works so it's telling the truth
because what it is a scientist doesn't
try to get along with people they tell
them what their findings are they have
to question all things and if some
scientist comes up with an experiment
that shows certain materials have
certain strengths other scientists have
to be able to duplicate that experiment
and come up with the same results even
if a scientist feels that an airplane
wing due to mathematics or calculations
can hold up a given amount of weight
they still pile sandbags on to see when
it breaks and they say you know my
calculations are right or they're not
correct I love that system because it's
free of bias and free of thinking that
math can solve all the problems yet put
your math to test also I think there's
every system that can be put to test
should be put to test and they're all
decisions should be based upon research
a resource-based economy is simply the
scientific method applied to social
concern an approach utterly absent in
the world today society is a technical
invention and the most efficient methods
of optimized human health physical
production distribution city
infrastructure and the like reside in
the field of science and technology not
politics or monetary economics it
operates in the same systematic way as
say an airplane and there is no
Republican or liberal way to build an
airplane likewise nature itself is the
physical referent we use to prove our
science and it is a set system emerging
only from our increased understanding of
it in fact it has no regard for what you
subjectively think or believe to be true
rather it gives you an option you can
learn and fall in line with its natural
laws and conduct yourself accordingly
invariably creating good health and
sustainable
or you can go against the current to no
avail it doesn't matter how much you
believe you can just stand up right now
and walk on the wall next to you the law
of gravity will not allow it if you do
not eat you will die if you are not
touched as an infant you will die as
harsh as it may sound nature is a
dictatorship and we can either listen to
it and come in harmony with it or suffer
the inevitable adverse consequences so a
resource-based economy is nothing more
than a set of proven life supporting
understandings where all decisions are
based upon optimized human and
environmental sustainability it takes
into account the empirical life ground
which every human being shares as a need
regardless again of their political or
religious philosophy there is no
cultural relativism to this approach
it isn't a matter of opinion human needs
are human needs and having access to the
necessities of life such as clean air
nutritious food and clean water along
with a positively reinforcing stable
nurturing and nonviolent environment is
demanded for our mental and physical
health our evolutionary fitness and
hence the species survival itself a
resource-based economy would be based
upon available resources you can't just
bring a lot of people to an island or
build a city of 50,000 people without
having access to the necessities of life
so when I use a term a comprehensive
systems approach I'm talking about doing
an inventory of the area first and
determining what that area can supply
not just architectural approach not just
design approach but design must be based
on all of the requirements to advance
you
in life and that's what I mean by an
integrated way of thinking food clothing
shelter warmth love all of those things
are necessary if you deprive people of
any of them you have a lesser human
being less capable of functioning as
previously outlined a resource-based
economy's ground-up global systems
approach to extraction production and
distribution is based upon a set of true
economic mechanisms or strategies which
guarantee efficiency and sustainability
in every area of the economy so
continuing this train of thought
regarding logical design what is next in
our equation where does all this
materialize cities the advent of the
city is a defining feature of modern
civilization its role is to enable
efficient access to the necessities of
life along with increased social support
and community interaction so how do we
go about designing an ideal city what
shape should we make it
Square trapezoid well given we're going
to be moving around the thing we might
as well make it as equidistant as
possible for ease hence the circle what
should the city contain well naturally
we need a residential area a Goods
production area a power generation area
an agricultural area but we also need
nurturing as human beings hence culture
nature recreation and education so lets
include a nice open park an
entertainment/events area for cultural
purposes and socializing and educational
and research facilities and since we're
working with a circle it seems rational
to place these functions in belts based
on the amount of land required for each
goal along with ease of access very good
now let's get down to specifics first we
need to consider the core infrastructure
or intestines of the city organism these
would be the water Goods waste and
energy transport channels just as we
have water and sewage systems under our
cities today we would extend this
channeling concept to integrate waste
recycling and delivery itself
no more mailmen or garbage men it is
built right in we could even use
automated pneumatic tubes and similar
technologies Sam goes for transport it
needs to be integrated and strategically
designed to reduce or even remove the
need for wasteful independent
automobiles electric trams conveyors
transveyors and maglevs which can take
you virtually anywhere in the city even
up and down along with connecting you to
other cities as well and of course in
the event an automobile is required it
is automated by satellite for safety and
integrity in fact this automation
technology is in working order right now
automobile accidents kill about 1.2
million people every single year
injuring about 50 million this is absurd
and doesn't have to occur between
efficient City design and automated
driverless cars this death toll can be
virtually eliminated agriculture today
through our haphazard cost-cutting
industrial methods using pesticides
excessive fertilizers and other means we
have successfully destroyed much of the
arable land on this planet not to
mention also extensively poisoning our
bodies in fact industrial and
agricultural chemical toxins now show up
in virtually every human being tested
including infants fortunately there is a
glaring alternative the soilless mediums
of hydroponics and aeroponics which also
reduce nutrient and water requirements
by up to 75% of our current usage food
can now be organically grown on an
industrial scale in enclosed vertical
farms such as in 50-story 1-acre plots
virtually eliminating the need for
pesticides and hydrocarbons in general
this is the future of industrial food
cultivation efficient clean and abundant
so such advanced systems would be in
part what comprise our agricultural belt
producing all the food required for the
entire city's population with no need to
import anything from the outside saving
time waste and energy and speaking of
energy the energy belt would work in a
systems approach to extract electricity
from our abundant renewable mediums
specifically wind solar geothermal and
heat differentials and if near water
potentials tidal and wave power
to avoid intermittency and make sure a
positive net energy return occurs these
mediums would operate in an integrated
system powering each other when needed
while storing excessive energy to large
super capacitors under the ground so
nothing can go to waste and not only
does the city power itself particular
structures will also power independently
and generate electricity through
photovoltaic paints structural pressure
transducers the thermocouple effect and
other current but underutilized
technologies but of course this begs the
question how does this technology and
goods in general get created in the
first place this brings us to production
the industrial belt apart from having
hospitals and the like would be the hub
of factory production completely
localized overall it would of course
obtain raw materials by way of the
global resource management system just
discussed with Demand being generated by
the population of the city itself as far
as the mechanics of production we need
to discuss a new powerful phenomenon
which was sparked very recently in human
history and is on pace to changing
everything it's called mechanization or
the automation of Labor well if you look
around you you'll notice that almost
everything that we use today is built
automatically your shoes your clothes
your home appliances your car and so on
they are all built by machines
in an automatic way can we say that the
society has not been influenced by these
major technological advancements of
course not these systems really dictate
new structures and new needs and they
make a lot of other things obsolete
so we've been going up in the
development and use of technology in an
exponential way so definitely automation
is going to continue you cannot stop
technologies that just make sense labor
automation through technology is at the
bottom of every major social
transformation in human history from the
Agricultural Revolution and the
invention of the plow to the Industrial
Revolution and the invention of the
powered machine to the information age
we live in now through essentially the
invention of advanced electronics and
computers and with regard to advanced
production methods today mechanization
is now evolving on its own moving away
from the traditional method of
assembling component parts into a
configuration into an advanced method of
creating entire products in one single
process like most engineers I'm
fascinated by biology because it's so
full of examples of extraordinary pieces
of Engineering and actually what biology
is the study of things that copy
themselves across some good a definition
of life as we've got again as an
engineer I've always been intrigued by
the idea of machines that copy
themselves RepRap is a three-dimensional
printer that's to say it's a printer
that you plug into a computer and
instead of making two-dimensional sheets
of paper with patterns on it makes real
physical 3-dimensional objects now
there's nothing new about that 3d
printers have been around for about 30
years
big thing about RepRap is that it prints
most of its own parts
if you've got one you can make another
one give it to a friend as well as being
able to print lots of useful things from
the simple printing of basic household
goods in your home to the printing of an
entire automobile body in one swoop
advanced automated 3d printing now has
the potential to transform virtually
every field of production including home
construction console crafting is
actually a fabrication technology the
so-called 3d printing when you directly
build a 3d object from the computer
model using contour crafting it will be
possible to build a 2000 square-foot
home entirely by the machine in one day
the reason that people are interested in
automating construction is that it
really brings a lot of benefits for
example construction is pretty
labor-intensive and although it provides
jobs for the sector of the society it
also has issues and complications for
example construction is the most
dangerous job that there is it is worse
than mining and agriculture it has got
the highest level of fatality almost in
every country another issue is the waste
an average home United States has 3 to 7
tons of waste so this is huge if we look
at the impact of construction and
knowing that about 40% of all materials
in the world are used in construction so
big waste of energy and resources and
big damage to the environment as well
making homes using hammers and nails and
wood with the state of our technology
today is really
absurd and will go the way of our labor
class in regards to manufacturing in the
United States recently there was a study
by economist David autor of MIT that
states that our middle class is obsolete
and being replaced by automation quite
simply mechanization is more productive
efficient and sustainable than human
labor in virtually every sector of the
economy today machines do not need
vacations breaks insurance pensions and
they can work 24 hours a day every day
the output potential and accuracy
compared to human labor is unmatched the
bottom line repetitive human labor is
becoming obsolete and impractical across
the world and the unemployment you see
around you today is fundamentally the
result of this evolution of efficiency
in technology for years market
economists have dismissed this growing
pattern which could be called
technological unemployment because of
the fact that new sectors always seemed
to emerge to reabsorb the displaced
workers today the service sector is the
only real hub left and currently employs
over 80% of the American workforce with
most industrialized countries
maintaining a similar proportion however
this sector is now being challenged
increasingly by automated kiosks
automated restaurants and even automated
stores economists today are finally
acknowledging what they have been
denying for years not only is
technological unemployment exasperating
the current labor crisis we see across
the world due to the global economic
downturn but the more the recession
deepens the faster the industries are
mechanizing the catch which is not
realized is that the faster they
mechanize to save money the more they
displace people the more they reduce
public purchasing power this means that
while the corporation can produce
everything more cheaply fewer and fewer
people will actually have money to buy
anything regardless of how cheap they
become the bottom line is that the labor
for income game is slowly coming to an
end
in fact if you take a moment to reflect
on the jobs which are in existence today
which automation could take over right
now if applied 75% of the global
workforce could be replaced by
mechanization tomorrow and this is why
in a resource-based economy there is no
monetary-market system no money at all
so there is no need a resource-based
economy recognizes the efficiency of
mechanization and accepts it for what it
offers
it doesn't fight it like we do today why
because it is irresponsible not to given
any interest in efficiency and
sustainability and this brings us back
to our city system in the center is the
central dome which not only houses the
educational facilities and
transportation hub it also hosts the
mainframe that runs the cities technical
operations the city is in fact one big
automated machine it has sensors in all
technical belts to track the progress of
Agriculture energy gathering production
distribution and the like now would
people be needed to oversee these
operations in the event of a malfunction
or the light most probably yes but that
number would decrease over time as
improvements continue however as of
today maybe 3% of the city population
will be needed for this job when you
break it down and I can assure you that
in an economic system which is actually
designed to take care of you and secure
your well-being without you having to
submit to a private dictatorship on a
daily basis usually to a job that is
either technically unnecessary or
socially pointless while often
struggling with debt that doesn't exist
just to make ends meet I guarantee you
people will volunteer their time left
and right to maintain and improve a
system that actually takes care of them
and coupled with this issue of incentive
comes the common assumption that if
there isn't some external pressure for
one to work for a living people will
just sit around do nothing and turn into
fat lazy blobs this is nonsense the
labor system we have today is in fact
the generator of laziness not a resolver
of it if you think back to when you're a
child full of life interested in new
things to understand likely creating and
exploring but as time went on the system
pushed you into the focus of figuring
out how to make money and from early
education to study at a university you
are narrowed only to emerge as a
creature which serves as a cog in a
wheel in a model that sends all the
fruits to the upper 1% scientific
studies have now shown that people are
in fact not motivated by monetary reward
when it comes to ingenuity and creation
the creation itself is the reward money
in fact appears only to serve as an
incentive for repetitive mundane actions
a role we have just now shown can be
replaced by machine so when it comes to
innovation the actual use of the human
mind the monetary incentive has proven
to be a hindrance interfering and
detracting from creative thought and
this might explain why Nikola Tesla the
Wright brothers and other inventors who
contributed massively to our current
world never showed a monetary incentive
to do so money is in fact a false
incentive and causes a hundred times
more distortion than it does
contribution good morning class please
settle down the first thing I would like
to do is go around the room and ask what
everyone would like to be when they grow
up we would like to go first okay how
about you Sarah when I grow up I want to
work in McDonald's like my mom
Oh family tradition egg how about you
Linda when I grow up I'm going to be a
prostitute on the street merely like
Jane Oh glamour girl huh
very ambitious how about you Tommy
when I grow up I'm going to be a rich
elitist businessman who works on Wall
Street profits off of the collapse of
foreign economies enterprising and great
to see some multicultural interest as
stated before a resource-based economy
applies the scientific method to social
concern and this isn't limited to simply
technical efficiency it also has the
consideration of human and social
well-being directly and what comprises
it what good is a social system if in
the end it doesn't produce happiness and
peaceful coexistence so it is important
to point out that with the removal of
the money system and the necessities of
life provided we would see a global
reduction in crime by about 95% almost
immediately for there is nothing to
steal embezzle scam or the like 95% of
all people in prisons today are there
due to some monetary related crime or
drug abuse and drug abuse is a disorder
not a crime so what about the other 5%
the truly violent often seeming to some
as being violent for the sake of being
violent are they just evil people the
reason that I frankly think it's a waste
of time to engage in moral value
judgments about people's violence is
because it doesn't advance by one iota
our understanding of either the causes
or the prevention of the violent
behavior people sometimes ask if I
believe in forgiving criminals my answer
to that is no I don't believe in
forgiveness anymore than I believe in
condemnation
since only if we as a society can take
the same attitude of treating violence
as a problem in public health and
preventive medicine rather than as a
moral evil it's only when we make that
change in our own attitudes and
assumptions and values that we will
actually succeed in reducing the level
of violence rather than stimulating it
which is what we do now the more justice
you seek the more hurt you become
because there's no strength justice
there is whatever there is out there
that's it
in other words of people are conditioned
to be racist bigots if they are brought
up in an environment that has a k' said
why do you blame the person for it
they're a victim of a subculture
therefore they have to be helped the
point is we have to redesign the
environment that produces aberrant
behavior that's a problem not putting a
person in jail that's why judges lawyers
freedom of choice such concepts are
dangerous because it gives you
misinformation that the person is bad or
that person is a serial killer serial
killers are made just like soldiers
become serial killers with a rashugal
that become killing machines but nobody
listened was motorists or Assassins
because that's natural
so we blame people we say well this guy
was a Nazi he tortured Jews no it was
brought up to torture Jews once you
accept the fact that people have
individual choices and they're free to
make those choices free to make choices
means without being influenced and I
can't understand that at all all of us
are influenced in all our choices by the
culture we live in by our parents and by
the values that dominate so we're
influenced so they can't be free choices
what's the greatest country of the world
the to answer I haven't been all over
the world and I don't know enough about
different cultures to answer that
question
I don't know anybody to speak some way
as a good old USA players don't get long
there's notes already been and you know
you've been to England though agree to
France no what do you make your
assumptions on they can't answer they
get mad at you because well goddamn who
the hell are you tell me what to think
yeah don't forget you're dealing with
aberrated people they're not responsible
for their answers they're victims of
culture that means they've been
influenced by their culture
you
[Music]
when we consider a resource-based
economy there are often a number of
arguments that tend to come up with
repay the efficiency
hey hey now hold on just a minute
yes I know what this is this is called
Marxism buddy Stalin killed 800 billion
people because of ideas like this my
father died in the gulag war on this one
commoners ashes not like America uses
later but it'll calm down we're in order
and the irrational 'ti of the audience
grew shocked and confused
suddenly the narrator suffered a fatal
heart attack ah and the seemingly
communist propaganda film was no more
[Music]
you know I've said that sort of thing to
people in think tank type of situations
and you know these Club of Rome types
and so forth Marxist one Marxist where
did that come from Oh like if they got
this icon they hold on to is their holy
grail and it's such an easy one you know
people ask if I'm a socialist or a
communist or a capitalist and I say I'm
none of the above and why do you think
why do you think that those are the only
options all of those political
constructs were created by writers who
assume that we lived on a planet of
infinite resources not a one of those
political philosophies even contemplates
that there might be a shortage of
anything I believe that communism
socialism free enterprise fascism are
part of social evolution that you can't
take a giant step from one culture to
another but they're in-between systems
before there's any ISM we've got a life
ground and the life ground is as I just
described most easily as all the
conditions required to take your next
breath and that involves the air you
breathe the water you get the safety you
have the education you can access all
these things that we share and use and
that no life in any culture can do
without so we've got to reset down to
the life ground and the life ground is
no longer any ism it's life value
analysis it's simply a matter of
historical fact that the dominant
intellectual culture of any particular
society reflects the interests of the
dominant group in that society in a
slave owning society the beliefs about
human beings and human rights and so on
will reflect the needs of the slave
owners in a society which again is based
on the power of certain people to
control and profit from the lives and
work of millions of others zone
intellectual culture will reflect the
the dominant group and so that he look
across the board the ideas that pervade
psychology and sociology and history and
political economy and political science
fundamentally reflect certain elite
interests and the academics who question
that too much tend to get shunted to the
side or to be seen as sort of radicals
the dominant values of a culture tend to
support and perpetuate what is rewarded
by that culture and in a society where
success and status is measured by
material wealth not social contribution
it is easy to see why the state of the
world is what it is today we are dealing
with a value system disorder completely
denatured where the priority of personal
and social health have become secondary
to the detrimental notions of artificial
wealth and limitless growth and like a
virus this disorder now permeates every
facet of government news media
entertainment and even academia and
built into its structure are mechanisms
of protection from anything that might
interfere disciples of the
monetary-market religion the
self-appointed guardians of the status
quo constantly seek out ways to avoid
any form of thought which might
interfere with their beliefs the most
common of which are projected dualities
if you are not a Republican you must be
a Democrat if you are not a Christian
you might be a Satanist and if you feel
society can be greatly improved to
consider perhaps I don't know taking
care of everyone you're just a
utopianist and the most insidious of
them all if you are not for the
free-market you must be against freedom
itself I'm a believer in freedom every
time you hear the word freedom being
said anywhere or government interference
said anywhere it means decoded blocking
maximization of turning money into more
money for private money possessors
that's it every other thing they'll say
oh we need more
commodities for people all this freedom
against tyranny and so forth every time
you see it you can decode it down to
that and I think you'll find a
one-to-one correlation with every time
they use it and this is the sense in
which we might call
it's a syntax a governing syntax of
understanding and a value so that it
governs beneath their own recognition of
it so they may not say oh I didn't mean
that at all but in fact that's what they
do just like you may speak a grammar and
you have rules of grammar you follow
without recognizing what the rules are
and so what we have is what I call the
ruling value syntax that underlies this
so every kind of use these words human
interference lack of freedom or freedom
or progress or development you can
decode them all to come back to mean
that of course when you hear the word
freedom it tends to be in the same
sentence with something called democracy
it's fascinating how people today seem
to believe that they actually have a
relevant influence on what their
government does forgetting but the very
nature of our system offers everything
for sale the only vote that counts is
the monetary vote and it doesn't matter
how much any activist yells about ethics
or accountability in a market system
every politician every legislation and
hence every government is for sale and
even with the 20 trillion dollar bank
bailouts starting in 2007 an amount of
money which could have changed say the
global energy infrastructure to fully
renewable methods instead going to a
series of institutions that literally do
nothing to help society institutions
that could be removed tomorrow with no
recourse the blind conditioning that
politics and politicians exist for the
public well-being still continues
the fact is politics is a business no
different than any other in a market
system and they care about their
self-interest before anything else
I don't really honestly deep down
believe in political action I think the
system contracts and expands as it wants
to it accommodates these changes I think
the civil rights movement was an
accommodation on the part of those who
own the country I think they see where
their self-interest lies they see a
certain amount of freedom seems good the
illusion of Liberty give these people a
voting day every year so that they'll
have the illusion of meaningless choice
meaningless choice that we go like
slaves and say Joe I voted the limits of
debate in this country are established
before the debate even begins and
everyone else is marginalized and made
to seem either to be communist or was
some sort of disloyal person a kook
there's a word and now it's conspiracy
see they've made that something that
should not be even entertained for a
minute that powerful people might get
together and have a plan doesn't happen
you're a kook you're a conspiracy buff
and of all the mechanisms of Defense of
this system there are two that
repeatedly come up the first is this
idea that the system has been the cause
of the material progress we have seen on
this planet well know there are
basically two root causes which have
created the increased so-called wealth
and population growth we see today
one the exponential advancement of
production technology hence scientific
ingenuity and to the initial discovery
of abundant hydrocarbon energy which is
currently the foundation of the entire
socio-economic system the free market
capitalist monetary market system
whatever you want to call it has done
nothing but ride the wave of these
advents with a distorted incentive
system and a haphazard grossly unequal
method of utilizing and distributing
those fruits the second defense is a
belligerent social bias generated from
years of propaganda which sees any other
social system as a route to so called
tyranny with various name droppings of
Stalin Mao Hitler and the death tolls
they generated well as despotic as these
men might have been along with the
societal approaches they perpetuated
when it comes to the game of death when
it comes to the systematic daily mass
murder of human beings nothing in
history compares to what we have today
famines throughout at least the last
century of our history have not been
caused by a lack of food
they've been caused by relative poverty
the economic resources were so
inequitably distributed that the poor
simply didn't have enough money with
which to buy the food this would have
been available if they could have
afforded to pay for it that would be an
example of structural violence another
example in Africa and some other areas
well particularly focus on Africa tens
of millions of people are dying of AIDS
why are they dying it's not because we
don't know how to treat AIDS we have you
know millions of people in them in the
wealthy countries are getting along
remarkably well because they have the
medicines that will treat it the people
in Africa who are dying of AIDS are not
dying because of the HIV virus they're
dying because they don't have the money
with which to pay for the drugs that
would keep them a lot Gandhi saw this he
said the deadliest form of violence is
poverty
that's absolutely right poverty kills
far more people but all the wars in
history more people than all the
murderers in history more than all the
suicides in history not only destruction
Allowance kill more people than all the
behavioral violence put together
structural violence is also the main
cause of behavioral violence
oil is the foundation of and that is
present throughout the edifice of human
civilization there are 10 calories of
hydrocarbon energy oil and natural gas
and every calorie of food you and I eat
in the industrialized world fertilizers
are made from natural gas pesticides are
made from oil
you drive oil-powered machines to plant
plow irrigate Harvest transport package
you wrap the food in plastic that's oil
all plastic is oil there are 7 gallons
of oil in every tire oil is everywhere
its ubiquitous and it's only because of
oil that there are 7 billion people are
almost 7 billion people on this planet
right now the arrival of this cheap easy
energy which is equivalent by the way to
billions of slaves working around the
clock to change the world in such a
radical way over the last century and
the population has gone up 10 times but
by 2050 oil supply is able to support
less than half the present world's
population in their present way of life
so the scale of adjustment to live
differently is just enormous the world
is now using 6 barrels of oil for every
barrel it finds
5 years ago it was using 4 barrels of
oil for every barrel it finds a year
from now it's going to be using 8
barrels of oil for every barrel in 5
what's disturbing to me is the lack of
any real effort from governments
worldwide or industry leaders worldwide
to do something different maybe we have
these sort of attempts to build more
wind power to to maybe do something with
tide we've got attempts to make our cars
a little bit more round efficient but
there's nothing which really looks like
a revolution coming along is that these
are all pretty minor and that I think is
pretty frightening and the government's
who are driven by these economists who
don't really appreciate what we're
talking about
are trying to stimulate consumerism to
restore past prosperity in the hope that
they can restore the past they're
printing yet more money lacking any
collateral at all so if if the economy
improves and recovers and growth famous
growth comes back it will only be
short-lived because within a short
period of time counted in months rather
than years it will hit the supply
barrier again but be another price shock
and a deeper recession so I think we go
into a series of vicious circles so you
have the economic growth going up price
spike everything shuts down that's where
we are now then it starts to come up
again but what we have now is this is
this area where there's there's no more
ability to produce cheap energy we're at
the peak were on the down slope of oil
production no way you're going to get
any more out of the ground any faster
which means that things shut down the
price of oil drops which it did in the
early 2009 but then as you have an era
zod so-called recovery the price of oil
starts to come back it's recently been
hovering around $80 a barrel and what we
see is at $80 a barrel now what the
economic and financial collapse people
are having a hard time affording that
we're lowering production right now is
about 86 million barrels a day over ten
years you're looking at roughly 40 bit
of 14 billion barrels a day having to be
replaced there's nothing around which
can come even within 1% of meeting that
sort of demand if we don't do something
pretty quickly there's going to be huge
energy deficiency I think the big
mistake is in not recognizing a decade
or so ago that an advert a concerted
effort needed to be made to develop
these sustainable forms of energy I
think that's something our grandchildren
will look back on with total disbelief
what you people knew that you were
dealing with a finite commodity how
could you possibly have build your
economy around something which was going
to disappear for the first time in human
history the species is now faced with
the depletion of a core resource central
to our current system of survival
and the punchline of the whole thing is
that even with oil becoming more and
more scarce the economic system will
still blindly push its cancerous growth
model so people can go out and buy more
oil powered cars to generate GDP and
jobs exacerbating the decline are there
solutions to replace the edifice of the
hydrocarbon economy of course but the
path needed to accomplish these changes
will not manifest through the market
system protocols required since new
solutions can only be implemented
through the profit mechanism people are
not investing in renewable energies
because there is no money in it in both
long and short term and the commitment
needed to make it happen can only occur
at a severe financial loss hence there
is no monetary incentive and in this
system if there's no monetary incentive
things do not happen and on top of it
all peak oil is just one of many
surfacing consequences of the
environmental-social train wreck gaining
speed today other declines include
freshwater the very fabric of our
existence which is currently showing
shortages for 2.8 billion people and
those shortages are on pace to reach 4
billion by 2030 food production the
destruction of arable crop land from
which 99.7% of all human food comes from
today is occurring up to 40 times faster
than it is being replenished and over
the last 40 years 30% of the arable land
has become unproductive not to mention
that hydrocarbons are the backbone of
Agriculture today and as it declines so
will the food supply as far as resources
in general and our current patterns of
consumption by 2030 we will need 2
planets to continue our rates not to
mention the continual destruction of
life supporting biodiversity causing
extinction spasms and environmental
destabilization across the globe
and with all of these declines we have
the near exponential population growth
where by 2030 there might be over 8
billion people on this planet
energy production alone would need to
increase 44% by 2030 to meet such demand
and again since money is the only
initiator of action are we to expect
that any country on the planet is going
to be able to afford the massive changes
needed to revolutionize agriculture
water processing energy production and
the like when the global debt pyramid
scheme is slowly shutting the entire
world down not to mention the fact that
the unemployment you currently see is
going to become normality due to the
nature of technological unemployment the
jobs are not coming back and finally a
broad social perspective from 1970 to
2010 poverty on this planet doubled due
to this system and given our current
state do you honestly think we will see
anything less than more doubling more
suffering and more mass starvation there
is not going to be any recovery this is
not some long depression that where
sudden someday going to pull out of I
think the next phase we're going to see
after the next round of economic
collapses massive civil unrest when
employment checks stop being paid
because the states have no money left
and when things get so bad that people
lose confidence and their elected
leaders they will demand change if we
don't kill each other in the process or
destroy the environment I'm just afraid
that we might get to the point of no
return and that bothers me no and we do
all we can to avoid that condition it's
clear that were on the verge of a great
transition in human life that what we
face now is this fundamental change of
the life we've known over the last
century there has to be a link between
the economy and the resources of this
planet the resources being of course all
animal and plant life the health of the
oceans and everything else this is a
monetary paradigm that will not let go
until it's killed the last human being
the in group will do all it can to stay
in power and that's what you got to keep
in mind then use the army and navy and
lies or whatever they have to use to
keep in power they're not about to give
it up because they don't know of any
other system have lamech wait they're
kind
[Music]
you
[Music]
Oh
[Music]
[Applause]
[Applause]
[Laughter]
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
take a trip and stronger cars the corner
rather lie just remember that the goal
it's worth all the capture all
we have
[Music]
so sit down
on
[Music]
to me commissioners loving care
[Applause]
[Music]
is sure
[Music]
the clincher
[Music]
Oh
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
you
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Applause]
you
[Music]
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]