howdy this is Jim rut and this is the
Jim rut show listeners have asked us to
provide pointers some of the resources
we talked about on the show we now have
links to books and articles referenced
in recent podcasts that are available on
our website
we also offer full transcripts go to jim
rut show com that's Jim ruts show com
today's guest is Joe brewer Joe is a
complexity researcher innovation
strategist experienced designer and
serial social entrepreneur and to change
strategist working on behalf of all of
humanity and an evangelist for the field
of cultural design I've known Joe for I
don't know seven or eight years and when
I first met him it was in the context of
mimetics particularly around the
vocabulary used in climate change and
that if you use certain words that help
people see the reality of it better than
others just catching up with you Joe are
you still interested in mimetics do you
still do any thinking in that field I
definitely do although I tend to think
of it more in an applied sense as in I'm
very interested in creating mimetic
strategies and implementing them more so
than I am in the theory at this point in
time okay that makes a lot of sense I
certainly see the you're careful with
the words that you use and you use your
words with strategic intent so let's
start off on the first of your words
that I think are important a lot of your
work you use the word regeneration how
would you describe to our audience how
regeneration differs from sustainable or
sustainability yeah I think this is one
of those distinctions that is sort of
nerdy philosophy but it turns out to be
extremely important because regeneration
if you think of something like a
starfish that loses one of its five arms
and has an internal genetically evolved
capacity to regrow that arm that the
regeneration of the LEM is a fair and
apt use of the word and when you dig
deeper into what it actually is
referring to probably the best
name given to it is what Humberto
Maturana and Francisco Varela call auto
police's which is basically any kind of
dynamic pattern for a living organism
that is able to in a kind of biochemical
sense reproduce the conditions of its
starting point so that it can continue
to constitute its own dynamic existence
so their word Auto poiesis as the self
generated ability to self express which
is meant to capture that dynamic so when
we talk about regeneration we're really
describing what living systems do to use
another person's phrase Jeanine pi√±as
from the biomimicry Institute she says
to create the conditions conducive to
life so living systems create the
conditions conducive to life moment just
a moment what's interesting about this
is that you can map this onto any
organism and it immediately evokes the
idea of homeostasis which is that if an
organism is able to dynamically
reproduce its conditions of being alive
then it has a kind of moment-to-moment
stable existence and that is what
homeostasis does and this is where we
draw the link between regeneration and
sustainability homeostasis is the
sustained capacity to be alive for the
organism moment-to-moment so basically a
regeneration is the underlying dynamic
pattern that reproduces the conditions
of sustained existence so sustainability
therefore it is like a dynamic property
or a byproduct of any regenerative
process and I think that difference
turns out to be really important if
you're trying to design for or cultivate
any form of sustainability what you're
actually doing is working with the
patterns of regeneration in order to do
so so you give a tangible example
sometimes that helps our people
understand these ideas a little bit
better give me an example of something
that's regeneration and something that's
sustainable yeah so like an example
would be that there may be a limited
period of time where something can be
sustained but it actually doesn't embody
the dynamics of being a living system so
an example might be to have a way of
living and
a successful business in a certain
window of time say perhaps when there's
a particular mineral that is used for
producing the electronic device that the
company may have and so they can sustain
the existence of their business while
actually depleting the resource because
they're using it up more quickly than
nature would provide so in this case you
can see that the sustainability of the
business may exist for years or even
decades whether underlying it is an
inherently depletion oriented or
extractive pattern that undermines the
ability to reproduce that sustainability
ah perfect so eventually that type of
business is just going to go away
because it's gonna run itself out of
luck yeah as you said earlier it's the
time depth perhaps I know it's not a
topic that you're as interested in as I
am but an example that strikes me about
regeneration one of things I'm very
proud of here is this farm we've owned
for thirty years was a over grazed
depleted mountain farm and over the last
thirty years we've probably added two
inches of topsoil to most of our fields
by using what we think of as
regenerative processes and the soil
wasn't so bad you couldn't grow crops so
it was sustainable for a while but it's
we've now actually improved the ability
to grow crops that should bear fruit for
the next hundred years now one of the
amazing things about understanding the
principles of whatever the living system
is in this case microorganisms and
mycelium in the soil is they connect to
the roots of the plants if you
understand how that works you actually
can increase the productivity of the
system so you don't just keep it at some
fixed level again sustainability can
often if a person's being sloppy about
it something is sustainable if they're
just keeping it at the same measured
level of output which of course true
sustainability science as there was
articulated in the 1970s and 80s and
named in the Brundtland report in 1987
really they meant regeneration they just
used the word sustainability at some
point and it became the kind of go to
term but what has been lost is when
people who are not trained in living
systems start to do things that
they call sustainable there may be
intentional green washing or it could
just be they're ignorant and they're
doing it by accident because they don't
know what the living system patterns are
that they need to be working with and so
I think this distinction is also
important from an educational point of
view if you want to do sustainable
things then you're actually
collaborating with regenerative patterns
and so that understanding whether you
use the word or not is what makes it
truly sustainable makes perfect sense
you know I'm gonna steal an analogy from
business tell me what you think about
this one could think about at least the
the lay use of sustainable as you know
sort of corresponding to the operating
statement in a business the profit loss
statement yeah where make it a little
bit more money than we're spending so
we're doing okay while the balance sheet
shows us what our reserves are do we
have adequate assets are we replenishing
our assets at it adequate sense this
strikes me those two concepts are pretty
damn congruent I think they are and one
person who really knows that subject
very well as a good friend of mine named
Bill Dow who lives in Connecticut and
works for an organization called or 3.0
which is basically a regenerative design
for the whole infrastructure of the
economy working with reporting and
accounting and data structures and
metrics and measurement systems and so
on and he has been a really strong
advocate of what's called context-based
metrics if you have a metric based on
your baseline like well we used five
tons of non recyclable material last
year now we've lowered it to four tonnes
so we're actually you know reducing or
improving our ecological footprint but
we're still depleting the resource then
you're basically using a baseline
instead of a true and adequate context
the true and adequate context is how
much they're in total yeah of whatever
it is you're using how quickly is it
depleted naturally or how quickly is it
regenerated naturally and is your rate
of extraction and depletion equal to or
greater than that rate of regeneration
so without a context-based measure you
really don't know what the hell you're
talking about and it turns out you did a
survey of the research literature and
also the corporate sustainability
literature more than 97% of companies
using so-called sustainability measures
for doing them relative to baselines in
benchmarks meaning they're not context
based and they actually have no clue how
sustainable they are based on those
measures so this this difference you're
drawing a point to is extremely
important yeah I think we're both on
exactly the same page sometimes we may
use a little different language you up
this maybe send me an intro to this guy
bill he sounds real interesting I'd love
to have him on the show because this
sounds to my mind exactly how we should
be thinking about things you know
because as you say I can be a little bit
less shitty in my practices this year
than I was last year and that's a good
thing but we may still be a very long
way away from really a long term stable
situation and if we don't even realize
that then how the heck are we gonna
drive our strategies yeah and I just
called up the link to the report he
published last year which was for the
United Nations Research Institute for
Social Development
so you and resid I think it's how they
pronounce that and the name of the
report is compared to what a
three-tiered typology of sustainable
development performance indicators from
incremental to contextual to
transformational and its point is that
almost everything is incremental when it
needs to at least be contextual and even
contextual doesn't tell you how to
transform a system if your context based
measures show you're not being
sustainable
you got to transform that system and so
this is a 46 page report that he
published last fall that goes into the
depths of this for anyone who's
interested in it and it's just a
fantastic report as we always do we'll
put a link to that report on the episode
page so go to Jim rut show calm and to
the Joe brewer episode and you'll have a
link to that sounds like very
interesting report let's move on to our
next topic Joe you're sometimes
pigeon-holed as a bit of an echo
pessimist do you think that's fair and
and kind of where do you stand on what
can be saved and what will be lost over
the rest of the century I would say that
more than an optimist or a pessimist and
my kind of skeptical analysis at least I
try to be as much as I can an empirical
realist
that said I tend to have a personality
if you're thinking of my neuro type I
tend to be more of an optimistic kind of
person so if you're hanging out with me
and we're drinking beers and making
jokes you'll find I'm pretty upbeat and
have a good sense of humor and tend to
actually if anything be biased toward
thinking better of people and
accidentally making the mistake of them
not being as good as I thought and so on
so personality wise I'm kind of an
optimist but when I look at the
convergent data across different fields
I end up with a pretty sobering point of
view that I try to be as realistic as I
can about but unfortunately you know as
you mentioned at the beginning of the
episode when I was studying the framing
of climate change there was a tendency
for a long time for environmental
activists who were being unstring to try
to go away from doomsday and instead
paint they sort of falsely optimistic
pictures of the future and jumped too
far in the other direction though it's
interesting I get pigeonholed as
pessimistic a lot because I have
embraced an understanding of collapse
which does put me in a place that could
be it understood as pessimistic so what
I think is important is maybe the
difference between the emotional value
valence of the information itself and
the the attempt at least at being
rigorous in the assessment so for
example I think there's a really
powerful book that was written a long
time ago published around 1980
by a person who taught in a department
of sociology but he was actually a human
ecologist named William cotton jr. he
wrote an amazing book called overshoot
which really is a fantastic assessment
of how it's quite likely that we
overshot the carrying capacity of the
planet somewhere in the 1930s or 1940s
and all of the surplus human populations
from then on is actually excessive
relative to any ability to be
sustainable so what's interesting about
a perspective like that is if it turns
out to be completely correct a person
will sound like a pessimist for saying
so now just to give a sense of how the
emotional quality of the information may
be different from the quality of the
analysis I find that
people who know me personally are often
impressed and inspired by my continued
optimism to do everything I can to help
improve the world even though I have a
pretty somber sense of the scale and
depth of the predicament that were in so
let's talk a little bit about the depth
of the predicament that we're in give me
a thumbnail sketch of the rest of the
century as you see it even assuming that
we get more serious than we are right
now about addressing climate change in
fact actually the scenario I use is 2.25
C by the end of the century is my best
guess at where we'll end up but so it
was give me your thoughts yeah I think
um what I often use is my standard
heuristic when I'm just starting to
think about this as I go back to the
famous limits to growth study that came
out in early 1970s issued by the Club of
Rome and led by a group of computer
scientists at MIT and they had a
scenario it wasn't meant to be a
forecast so they weren't trying to
predict the future but they had a
scenario that they called business as
usual and two things that are
interesting about that scenario one is
the real-world patterns of what they
were simulating in terms of resource
allocation those real-world patterns
have actually tracked the
business-as-usual scenario with the
disturbing accuracy and so they
accidentally made a good forecast by
designing this scenario and what's
interesting is when you look at that
scenario as a heuristic one thing that
they described is a cascade of
disruptions to global supply chains
starting somewhere between around 2015
and 2025 for different parts of the
global system and I one of the early
triggers being that there is a an
increasing scarcity of available energy
so think of a peak oil type of an
analysis where as you start to use up
all of the cheaply available oil then
you go to more and more expensive oil
which lowers the margin of returns and
this is often measured as what's called
energy return on energy invested so we
could go into in a moment if we want to
for the sake of listeners and as you get
closer and closer to the amount of
energy you need to produce in order to
get the same amount of energy
is able to be used in the marketplace as
you start to approach that
asymptotically you get up in a place
where there's quite a lot of volatility
in price and so this idea of peak oil
comes out as expressed economically as
fluctuating and volatile measures of
energy prices so what they showed in
that business-as-usual scenario was that
price volatility in the energy sector
caused price volatility in the food
sector which then caused various food
shortages at different places and times
and along kind of in conjunction or
parallel with this key resources being
depleted having their own dynamics that
weren't necessarily related to energy
but to manufacturing or top soils or
other things a long story not quite so
short but shorter is that they showed
human population peaking around 2030
which if you think of what that means
our exponential growth of human
population begins to be balanced out and
cancelled by an exponential growth in
human death to achieve a plateau point
of zero human growth and then it rapidly
declines from there between around 2030
and 2050 or 2060 and they I think they
hit their peak around 8 billion and and
it dropped down to somewhere on to two
and a half billion or not scenario I
find this to be a really useful
heuristic to think with and more
recently there's a Amala called world 7
- the continuation of the same basic
approach limits to growth was based on
what was called world 4 as a fourth
major iteration of that computer
simulation the computational model the
world 7 is using continually updated
data about things like available iron
and zinc and lithium and whatever other
minerals are involved in major
manufacturing processes and they show
most of those rapidly being depleted and
will start to kind of Stonewall
production sometime between 2030 and
2050 which could be considered as
compounding within that
business-as-usual scenario so this was
all without knowing in the early 1970s
they didn't know about climate change
yet and they weren't measuring
biodiversity loss and between then and
now one of the may
developments with Jim I know you've
followed this really closely is the
formalizing and rapid progress in the
fields of complexity science and so one
thing I can say is I think we have a
better understanding now or at least a
better capacity to grapple with what it
means to create supercritical States and
what happens when you have destabilizing
patterns and highly interdependent
systems and all of that that they didn't
have in the early 1970s or if not in the
state of the art we have today so I kind
of combined that sort of a perspective
with a different equally I think
well-thought-out and wealth intended
perspective which is that of the
Stockholm resilience center and this is
a network of Earth System scientists who
created what's called the planetary
boundaries framework may asked a really
interesting question this was around
2007 I think they started asking this
question they asked what are the dynamic
earth system processes that have some
kind of a range of parameters that if
you go outside of them the globalized
economy becomes untenable and goes away
he identified nine of these well eight
really because number nine is a
catch-all for novel entities where like
rogues run away artificial intelligence
and things like that are thrown into
that category but the other eight of
them are things like the ozone hole
ocean acidification climate change loss
of biodiversity one that's called land
system change or degradation of
landscapes and so on and so then they
quickly decided to ask the question of
those mind with the best knowledge
available to us how many have we crossed
and in 2013 they published a paper
saying well according to that best
information we've already crossed four
of them so that tells us in a sort of
definitive way we're in a state of
overshoot and collapse by that
frameworks measurement so I tend to take
that analysis pretty seriously as well
and then try to back engineer out what's
what needs to be done to get back within
that safe operating range and that's
where the regenerative design work
becomes so is
okay that's great now do you really
think that we are that close to the edge
and we'll start to see a rapid drop in
population after 2030 I think that we
are in a really dangerous place where
that scenario is in the kind of you know
Black Swan that tail kind of a thinking
though that scenario becomes more and
more likely with each passing year or at
least it becomes more and more plausible
because really darn hard to give a
rigorous measure of probability to it
but just as an example of a scenario we
could think of for this year that could
start to create that kind of an outcome
there are six major bread baskets in the
world that are major areas of food
production so think of the Upper Midwest
of the United States as one of these six
and with the volatility we have in our
jet streams and weather systems like the
big wildfires in in Australia just a few
months ago due to extreme weather events
that if two of those six bread baskets
were significantly compromised in the
same year by extreme weather events that
that could have a cascading effect of
causing up to a billion people to starve
to death just within one crop one period
of crop losses so the level of fragility
around that possibility is already built
into our global supply chains and add
another factor of what's called the the
blue ocean event which is when we first
have an entire summer without any ice in
the Arctic Ocean what this does is
creates a really strong amplifying
effect for increasing climate change but
it also has the immediate effect of
changing the subtropical jet stream
which in many ways no anchors our
weather systems to specific geographies
so as those jet streams start to become
more volatile than extreme weather event
the events can destabilize or bread
baskets so we're in this place where
we're right on the cusp of a blue ocean
event that we've been very close to it
for a couple of years and it might
happen this summer we don't know for
sure but if we turn out with the blue
ocean event and two of these six bread
baskets to get major crop failures in
the same
year then a billion people could die in
one annual cycle so I'm not saying that
that is going to happen I'm just saying
that that level of fragility in the
interdependencies and that level of them
I would just say rigidity in our in our
ability to be flexible and adapt to that
scale of disruption makes those
scenarios plausible and I think more
likely the further we go into this
danger zone I do like that thinking in
fact interesting you mentioned the
limits of growth Club of Rome report I
was an undergraduate at MIT at the time
it came out and I wrote a refutation of
it for a crackpot libertarian student
newspaper and my argument was they're
thinking about this all wrong the models
were all linear and they do not assume
any adaptation and and of course their
short-term predictions were all grossly
wrong now some of their longer-term
predictions as you point out have been
better but they did not assume that
humans would innovate and adapt to
change and replace this material with
that material you know develop new forms
of crops the Green Revolution etc but
with the things you're talking about are
actually to my mind from a complexity
science perspective more fundamental you
know I tend to be a little skeptical of
metaphysics in general and sometimes I
hear the word wisdom I cringe a little
bit but I've come to think that
understanding the concept of fat-tailed
risks is about as close to wisdom as
well as likely to get here in the 21st
century and the things you point out are
all in that bag of yeah there's a fair
chance that could happen in the next
hundred years because we're talking
about fat-tailed nonlinear interacting
systems that we could stumble into at a
much higher probability than the
old-fashioned Gaussian way of thinking
could occur indeed you know that's why I
am so motivated on climate change you
know I believe humans are adaptive more
adaptive than a lot of people give them
credit for and we could adapt to 2.25
see increase which is my baseline
scenario ie much worse than the
international actors are calling for I
think we could adapt to it
a bit small amount of death a couple
hundred million maybe but you know 2.25
is just a central tendency the reality
is we could very easily stumble into a
positive feedback loop that could
produce much more volatility and much
bigger spikes in climate and those are
the things that could cause really
widespread catastrophe including
couplings to the food systems as you're
talking about so yeah these kinds of
thinking I find much more sobering and
depressing than the Club of Rome linear
models approach now the other thing
about this is I've come to realize that
there are really two psychological
categories of people who can do this
analysis because it's not intellectual
per se obviously a person needs to be
intellectually competent to to dig into
these complexity issues but what's
different about this kind of information
is that it is intellectual yes but it's
also inherently traumatizing it tends to
induce anxiety angst despair pain
depression and related you know what I
would say unresentful aaja chol
responses which means you have a more
limited range of people neuro types of
people who continue in the discomfort of
that information one is your kind of
range of sociopaths Psychopaths or
autistic people or Asperger's people who
just have different ways of processing
emotions so among that kind of lumping
together of what are actually many
different kinds of people because each
of those words represents a spectrum and
not a single stereotype but you know I
found it some really bright like
autistic oriented really analytical
mathematical people no good pattern
analysis you can start to find this
stuff and if you don't have the a
negative emotional feedbacks you can
keep going
so I found there's a set of people who
tend to be really socially awkward not
good communicators bad storytellers but
they do the math well and so you get
some of those and then the other is the
people who are really empathetic meaning
they're able to imagine these scenarios
and try to feel into what they're like
but they somehow build enough buffers in
themselves that it doesn't debilitate
them to stay in it
and so I've been looking for ways to
kind of filter out and filter in these
people to have the conversation about
what this complexity science perspective
has to say so we can work together on
dealing with what are actually
existential risks so I know this is a
really important overlap in all of the
topics you explore in this show yep and
you know you and I have actually argued
about this on Twitter on occasion you
know you do talk a lot about this trauma
and sadness and grief and my reaction
has always been that people
let's just get on with it right I guess
I'm one of those neuro types that say
all right I can see it I can smell it I
can feel it but what does all that have
to do with solving the problem goddamnit
so put those feelings on the shelf and
let's move forward and address how we
are gonna solve it and I suspect there
are a lot more people of that sort than
you might suspect at least that's my
hypothesis yeah I think that the two
ways I've been thinking about this one
is that the people who are ready to just
get on with it are getting on with it
and by and large those of us in that
category are finding each other and
collaborating to the extent possible so
we're we're doing our part and I think
there's been a stable baseline of people
like us doing our part the place where
it starts get challenging is when we see
a pathway like a design pathway for
solving some of these problems they tend
to require us for reasons having to do
with Elinor Ostrom work about how to
govern the Commons they they tend to
require us to be collaborative
participatory you know kind of a blend
of bottom down and top up and they tend
you know really their game be governance
systems that they require us to be able
to work with people who don't have that
neuro tape and so when I start finding
myself working with people who really
are emotionally traumatized by the
information but they care so much about
the consequences that they keep going
that they need a sort of therapeutic
rehabilitation and then also social
supports to continue and it's for that
what I think is actually a much larger
magnitude of people who are also in this
space that actually are not
effective as they need to be because of
the grief and trauma and the negative
emotional reactions that they are there
having themselves or they causing people
around them making them bad
communicators or at least an effective
so I found myself because I've done so
much work in communication strategy and
variations of online organizing just
found that the grief and trauma
conversation always ends up being
important in that community organizing
process and if we fail to do it then we
get a lot of conflicts and problems that
come up because they just weren't being
dealt with effectively so that's one
reason why I tend to harp on it so much
but I also think that our differences in
temperament about this are healthy
because we don't all want to be on
exactly the same page about something
that's important so it's good for us to
have that diversity in the next yeah
that's two different approaches you and
folks that share your perspective and
approach can go help bring in some
people who are maybe marginal if they
don't get this therapeutic approach well
I'll focus on people who are willing to
go line up and take that hill right
we're fighting mode that's always been
my mode right find the willing organize
them into an effective team and go take
the objective and both are useful
there's no doubt about that yeah and
also I think that as we're really
grappling with the seriousness of these
situations it's so helpful to understand
how quickly a phase transition can occur
I don't know you might be familiar with
this paper but there was a report that
came out from Chatham House and what if
there was 2011 but it might have been a
little later there was a big volcano in
Iceland that dropped a giant ash cloud
over Europe and shut down air traffic
flow for about five days Chatham House
being the smart people that they are
they decided to do an analysis of
just-in-time manufacturing and supply
chains and they asked the question how
much longer could that specific
disruption to transport be tolerated by
the global supply chains they came to a
really disturbing conclusion which was
if it continued for an additional three
or four days so we're talking about the
ash cloud shutting down air traffic over
Europe for a total of eight or nine days
that one of the results would be the
different parts of the just-in-time
manufacturing would begin to shut down
their factories because they weren't
getting the inputs they needed to
produce the next step in the production
process and shutting them down was often
a heuristic effect that he shut him down
in a day but it might take you a month
to turn them back on and so what they
created was a scenario of supply chain
breakdown that takes eight or nine days
to initiate from an initial disruption
but it takes as much as 18 months to two
years to turn back on and I think that
kind of hysteresis is yeah we're doing
it right now which is why it's such an
important lesson for us yep for the
audience we're recording this on April
14th I think it's important to time mark
these things because this koban 19
pandemic it looks very different each
week right and so we are running this
experiment in real time and we talked a
fair amount on this show about the
homeostasis versus hysteresis and our
social operating systems what things
will recover and which things won't how
long they will take but I think you know
that Chatham House report and some of
the more pessimistic perspectives on the
Koba 19 shock forget something which is
one of the great beauties of the fat
dumb and happy consumerist culture is we
can do without most of that stuff right
suppose none of us got a new iPhone for
a year would anybody die hell no suppose
nobody bought a new car for a year would
anybody die hell no there were no
civilian cars manufactured in the United
States from 1940 until 1946 did the
world end it didn't so oddly enough the
fact that we are living this hugely fat
dumb and happy life across the West and
now the advanced economies of the
Pacific Rim in the East actually means
we have a vast capability of downsizing
and accepting disruption that has no
real impact on people's life now of
course it'll have financial shitstorms
of prodigious who've studied money very
very carefully understand that money is
not wealth you know wealth is our skills
our assets land buildings you know our
machine tools etc and money is nothing
but
a coordination signalling system which
can be replaced and can be rebooted and
in fact I like to point out the fact
that there was a large-scale experiment
in completely replacing a monetary
system in a crisis which was the
hyperinflations in Germany Austria and
Hungary in 1922 their currencies
inflated by the quadrillions and
essentially wiped out all fixed income
instruments money became worthless etc
they all bit the bullet at about the
same time reintroduced a totally new
currency and amazingly the economy
restarted in a week so I guess I'm
saying that while yes in theory there
will be perturbations and all kinds of
supply chains and this kovat nineteen
shock will be way bigger than thirteen
days worth we also have vast built-in
resilience at least in the rich
countries by not having to do things
that rich people do all the time we
don't need all that stuff
and frankly I find that somewhat hopeful
that some of this Elise will learn we
don't need all that stuff yeah I think
it's really important to recognize that
there is a bias against understanding
both the perspective of Chatham House
and the perspective - you're describing
so there's a really strong tendency for
people to not understand fat tails so
they don't understand how these
compounding risks work and they don't
understand what systems fragility
actually is so there's a lot of truth to
people being blind to that and we're in
a context where please those of us
making important policy decisions need
to be able to think that way and by and
large they're not then on the other side
to be able to understand the system
affordances of adaptation or of creative
response and so an example of this that
I think is really interesting is I want
to say was in the Atlantic Monthly or
one of those magazines sometime around
2007 there was this really nice in-depth
study done where they were looking at
what happened to the city of Detroit
because in the 90s there was a giant
economic collapse and the city went from
about a million people to about 200
thousand people so eighty percent of
their population disappeared in ten
years just because the big auto
manufacturers were laying off and they
were shutting down and people moved away
and what
and by about 2005-2006 was there as a
renaissance of people setting up artist
cooperatives and other know community
gardens and all kinds of interesting
things and all the abandoned houses in
Detroit and so no one saw that coming
not adaptive creativity all unique from
beforehand you would just say oh look at
the measured decimation of the economy
what you don't see is that the
conditions are set for it and ecologists
would call secession which is when you
move from one type of ecosystem to
another one that is able to use up
whatever materials were left behind by
the previous version that's also have
forests form is you have pioneering and
colonizing species that come in and they
rapidly deplete the available resources
but leave behind other ones for example
they don't eat a lot of nitrogen but a
lot of them are embodiments of nitrogen
and they fix it in the soil so then
makes it easier for say less sun
tolerant more shade needing kinds of
plants that need a little bit more
nitrogen to come into this environment
that's now being left behind as those
pioneering species are dying off and I
think there's a general insight here
that is I think relevant to complexity
science writ large and that is that when
we talk about collapse we often think of
it as like this category of negativity
when we actually can see it as an
integral part of many kinds of system
pattern changes there's a collapse of
some previous mode or structure which
actually is what enables the new motor
structure to form and the collapse in
that senses good relative to what is
emerging and in some cases it's
absolutely necessary and so I think
there's a really important opportunity
here to bring this aspect of the
collapse conversation in and maybe a
historic place we could do it is in
quantum mechanics with the collapse of
the wavefunction or collapse isn't bad
at all it's just called measurement and
so I think it's an interesting way of
remembering that the word has a real a
really strong stigma associated with it
but it needn't necessarily although
clearly there are some people that use
it in really depressing ways
yeah a very good point and the other
thing I talk about a fair amount with my
kind of prepper head-on it's funny I've
always believed for the last thirty
years they call a semi prepper and I've
always got a little social discredit for
that guy what a whack job thinking about
 like that right I would say in the
last month I got a return on that Social
Credit and a few dividends but when I
talked about being prepared I always
point out that you can only be prepared
within the context of specific or
approximate scenarios right and this is
where fat tale thinking is really
important there are scenarios that are
probable enough that it's worth
preparing for but way way way way out on
the fat tail let's say the dinosaur
killing asteroids hey know you've been
worrying about that one just put your
head between your legs and kiss your ass
good-bye and so when we say collapse you
know collapse could be like the Soviet
Union I was on a podcast as a guest well
one of the hosts lived through the
collapse of this or a family at least
had lived through the collapse of the
Soviet Union and she made pretty clear
how dire things were on the other hand
nobody died right
their whole socio-economic political
operating system was thrown out the
window a new one came up unfortunately
not as good as it could have been but
probably better than what they had and
that was a collapse but it wasn't a very
extreme one so we should realize that
collapses happen on a continuum and most
of them don't end up at the Mad Max
level yeah and also there's a
recognition by people trying to create
social change that oftentimes we don't
need incremental change we need
transformational change we actually need
to replace one system with another
what's interesting is that that implies
some kind of collapse
it could be a benign engineer to
collapse now let's pause for a moment
shut this thing down and turn the other
one on which is pretty unrealistic but
maybe I'll use that as an extreme
version of a benevolent collapse and
although the extreme other end is like
the Yellowstone Volcano or the meteor
that killed the dinosaurs where it's
pretty much all encompassing and there's
not much you can do about it it turns
out in reality the important things are
about time and space scale linking
which is basically when you have any
kind of a collapse pattern that's
occurring is it too big or too fast for
you to be able to do anything about it
no there's always something that you
could do about it on some time scale and
in some spacial scale so the question is
more about being a I think a semi
prepper is actually a better hedge to
bet than being a full-on prepper who
built some of the skills has some other
capacity set aside but you're still
playing in the old world and I can't go
but criticism of the back-to-the-land
movement in the 60s was that while some
of it has actually become the seeds of
the regenerative movement today and is
absolutely essential to where we are a
lot of it was people who had no clue
what they were doing they made some
mistakes and they came right back into
the mainstream economy and so uh they
kind of did something that they weren't
really competent to do and they weren't
they felt it wasn't the life they wanted
and they left yeah that's a good point
our farm up here in deep in the
mountains of Appalachia we actually
bought from a failed hippie commune
these were classic back-to-the-landers
who showed up here in 1974 and bought a
farm that had been in the same family
since the area was settled in 1715 had
gone father to son for 220 years
literally fathered a son without a break
you know the odds of that are pretty
long the last son decided he liked
drinking more than he did farming so he
sold the farm to the hippies and as you
said they were incompetent they tried
one crop and the other the only one they
could make any money was guess what got
old marriage a wanna and they couldn't
even do that very effectively and they
eventually kind of petered out and after
15 years we bought the place and so one
could understand the heart of the
back-to-the-landers in fact you know why
do we end up buying the place cuz we
always wanted a piece of land and the
ability to you know have some control of
her own destiny but they were entirely
incompetent they did not understand that
farming is a craft and a pretty damn
hard one right it's not only hard work
but it's also great intelligence great
time budgeting understanding the seasons
you gotta do things in the right order
and to your point the new people the new
young people are amazing we have here in
our County the Allegheny mountain
Institute will provide a link to that on
the page which
say school that teaches motivated young
people typically in their mid-20s how to
actually do urban farming small-scale
farming truck farming they're even now
doing animal raising etc and these young
people are extremely impressive they're
leasing and buying land and are doing it
right so we can adapt I don't know why
we got off on that riff but it was a
good one nonetheless it's a good riff
and one of the things about the movement
that we that I'm calling the
regenerative movement which in one sense
if you wanted to give it a shorthand say
permaculture was invented as a kind of
modern version of indigenous ways of
farming and just reinvented in the
roughly 1960s 1970s and between that
time and now you can add in systems
thinking and cybernetics and various
other things that all converge into this
living systems complexity point of view
is now we have incredible sophistication
of business models well like if
someone's doing agroforestry for example
they're not simply regrowing a forest
they're regrowing a force that has
recognizable and measurable ecological
benefit together with economics that
actually make sense and so you can make
money or make materials that cause do
not need to spend money my favorite
personal example of this was that
personal example of people I know and
I'm working with that do this as a group
out of Costa Rica called Black Sheep
regenerative resource management and
they have as its talking with their
founder yesterday and I thought they had
four properties it turns out they've
actually grown in the last year to seven
so they have about 500 acres of land and
more than 12 years experience doing
reforestation but doing it with really
smart permaculture really smart vertical
integration of their supply chain really
smart branding and marketing research
and really smart positioning to access
the global marketplace so they're
bringing the global superfoods and
health foods market to their high
quality high production yield of
turmeric which happens to be a ground
cover crop to help to accelerate
reforestation
and just as an added benefit it's worth
about six million dollars on the market
and so you have this really interesting
way of combining good business smarts
good sort of you know street smarts of
just figuring out how to do things by
doing them together with really damn
good permaculture practice and while
that's not representative everyone doing
permaculture it is sort of the state of
the art at this point in time and
there's a growing number of people that
not only do it but I figured out how to
teach it so we're gonna wanna see a lot
more of these young people knowing what
they're doing in the next ten years then
I think most of us recognize how big
that wave is going to be yeah my wife
and I are very strong supporters of that
that she's on the board of a
organization that makes zero interest
loans to people who are doing
regenerative and permaculture type
farming in our region in central
Virginia and it's actually been a really
interesting program because not a lot of
money necessary five ten thousand
dollars can provide that critical piece
of equipment that allows people to do
exactly what you're saying you know for
instance a cold box to allow them to you
know play the timing of the markets on
vegetables for instance totally changes
the economic dynamics of someone who
doesn't have that cold box so you know a
three thousand dollar cold box changes
the coupling between the producer and
the marketplace in ways that are very
favorable for the producer and we're
happy to do that in our program this has
been a really good interesting deep dive
let's move on to our next topic it's
something you and I have chatted a
little bit I know in the past about
which is this one time phase change in
the human subject that was caused by our
consuming of a large percentage of our
fossil fuels in two hundred years you
know I like to talk about game a as
starting in 1694 with the founding of
the Bank of England at our modern
financial infrastructure and then
accelerated in the 18th century with the
very rapid development of industrial
machinery a lot of it still water
powered and then in the late 18th
century and accelerating into the 19th
century it all went crazy with the
realization that we could replace water
power and animal and human power with
fossil fuels and so we had this amazing
200 year
rocket ship that basically took us from
a world that would have been
understandable to the Romans to a world
that Romans would have no idea what's
going on
you know intensification of our energy
use has been tremendous and had has
allowed humans to reach a whole new
level you know prior to that say in 1890
5% of all humans were essentially
subsistence peasants and herdsmen living
a life of drudgery bad health and lots
of death 50% of the children dying
typically and let's say Western Europe
before they were 5 years old this
one-time consumption of a good chunk of
our fossil fuels along with the science
and technology allowed us to do all that
on the other hand it's dialed in a race
to the edge of the cliff that if we
can't pull ourselves back from that
we're gonna destroy our ecosystem
through climate change and other
depletions of species and soil etc so
this is to my mind very very very
interesting and if people don't
understand this how unique this 200
years is they have no hope in thinking
through the magnitude of the change
necessary to get us to the other side at
least somewhat safely yeah I think if
this is on III guess I like to give
myself to bookmark like two bookends to
this one is the the worst and the best
and then I try to you know bounce around
between them depending on which piece of
it I'm looking at now start with the
worst in the same Stockholm resilience
centre that I mentioned earlier
published a pretty impactful paper about
two years ago where they introduced the
idea of the hothouse earth scenario
which is basically a phase transition to
a trajectory of dramatically increased
warming like 5 degrees Celsius or higher
and when we get into scenarios like that
one thing that happens is massive
reduction in human population and
possible human extinction and I think of
the extreme kind of bookend of
negativity is that this burst of
creativity and increasing social
complexity of the last two or three
hundred years could very much just
springboard us out of the frying pan and
into the fire as it were and just fry us
and have us be done and I think that's a
very very plaus
of all possibility that is still not
extremely likely but is still plausible
so I use it as my most negative bookend
and then my most positive book in is
that we have some kind of a relatively
gentle descent which doesn't mean it's
entirely gentle but maybe the human
population finds a way to come back down
and I say finds a way as if that doesn't
involve some kinds of pandemics and
plagues and starvation's and conflict as
well as demographic transitions and more
educated women having fewer children and
it's kind of some blend of those come to
a lower human population than where the
UN thinks we're going without being
particularly ecological about it and
that is that we get to a place where we
become an evolutionary transition of the
planet for the planet and let me maybe
step back and give a little verbiage to
that because Jim you may know about this
but I'm not sure about your listeners an
evolutionary transition is simply when
two organisms or two aspects of an
ecological system are interacting with
each other in a mutualistic or symbiotic
way and they come to a place where they
become functionally integrated and
natural selection jumps up level or
basically they can no longer survive on
their own because their survival is
interdependent and it's functionally
interdependent so they can't go back to
being separate organisms anymore but now
evolution has jumped to a higher level
of integration so prokaryotic cells -
eukaryotic cells is one of these
transitions and single cell to multi
cells is another going from individual
organisms as social groups is another
and you kind of jump up the game and
human culture is one of the higher ones
one of the later evolutionary
transitions it's occurred where humans
can basically have natural selection
occur at the scale of cultural systems
which is one way we can talk about
cultural evolution or opportunity right
now is to have an evolutionary
transition to the scale of the Earth's
biosphere so basically that humans build
the technical apparatus and the
management systems to maintain a comma
kind of homeostasis on earth which is
what we mean when we talk about
sustainability
and so I think of us as really having a
limited window of time where we can set
in motion that trajectory and I think
mostly what we've done up to this point
is laid in place the pieces of that
trajectory but we haven't actually
walked it yet like all of the systems
science and all the other systems
wandering are in place but we're not
using them well enough so right in that
spot of making this choice Amen I think
you're exactly right and I think we
should you know again mark the fact that
it was this 200 years of intensification
that now gives us those tools right we
now have photovoltaics that are
relatively cost effective we have
electric cars that are pretty amazing we
have massive 4 megawatt wind turbines we
have the ability to build those offshore
you know the in 1800 no way all right
couldn't even think about such things
didn't have even the basics of
scientific knowledge let alone the
material science and engineering so in
some sense we may have used our 200
years well if we can transition to this
kind of system that Joe's talking about
where we take what we've learned over
this 200 year great leap forward and
then make another great leap forward
which is to intentionally embed humanity
within the carrying capacity of the
earth and frankly probably take on the
management of the two systems together
yeah and one of the pieces of this
knowledge that is not given enough
credit like all of the examples you just
gave were more in the kind of physical
manifestation of Technology and and I
know that you understand a lot of the
the non-physical aspects were rather
than on material product aspects one of
the areas where I think we've made
tremendous progress in it for
fascinating historical reasons people
don't recognize is how much has been
learned about how to manage an economy
about how to form effective social
groups about how to cooperate with
people and negotiate and resolve
conflicts and a whole host of other
things that are more in the kind of
sociology and humanities domain
but that are extremely important in all
of this like for example there's a
really rich body of knowledge spanning
across anthropology and evolutionary
studies that seeks to understand the
functional adaptations of religions now
it doesn't mean we need to necessarily
create a new religion although I have
reasons to suspect we might need to
create new religions but leaving that
aside for a moment just coming to
understand what happens when you have
rituals that include synchronous
movement that help people to have more
familial trust among each other and feel
more generous toward each other turns
out that that kind of pro-social
expression of humanity is a really
important thing to know how it works and
so in addition to all of the
technological advances in the what is
normally construed as technology space
we have a huge number of technological
advances in the realm of human knowledge
about being human and working among
humans and so we start to put those
together we actually have the ability to
design our way into a regenerative earth
system meaning the human management is
in partnership with the biosphere of the
earth at all relevant scales and people
call me a somewhat of an eloquent
articulate er of is just how much of
this knowledge exists as we start to dig
into any of the pieces and see how solid
the foundations are they're pretty damn
solid so we have a lot to work with yes
and no I'm gonna push back a little bit
here Joe yes we do have a lot of
knowledge in pieces like for instance
I'm a great fan of the work of Sam Boles
and herb Ginn TISS on how people
actually cooperate for instance what is
it Those seems to be some human
attributes that look for fairness and
insist upon policing and even policing
the policing etc and those things are
extraordinarily important to understand
how to build real societies that work
and know how to be cooperative but on
the other hand I have a knee-jerk
reaction when you use the word design
because I don't think we yet know enough
to actually design the future in the
same way we would design a bridge
probably my biggest personal takeaway
from having been immersed in complexity
science for the last 20 years
frankly epistemic modesty we know less
about
the interactions of complex particularly
human social systems than sometimes we
think we do as you say we have a growing
number of piece parts we know a lot more
about how money couples through the
economy than we used to even though
we're not actually applying it we know
about how small group cooperation
actually works but building that into a
series of fractally based systems of
systems of systems at the scale of 10
billion we're still guessing so I think
it's real important to not use the word
design but rather to talk about an
experimental adaptive way of moving
forward we try things we do probes we
learn we adjust etc I think it's partly
depends on what we how were framing the
word design and because there are types
of collaborative participatory rapid
prototyping emergent facilitated types
of design that really do embody a lot of
complexity principles but I don't want
to get hung up on the word which I think
would be a fun conversation but we're at
a time of urgency so I don't want to you
know engage in and mental masturbation
here but really get into something I
think is almost like a meta shift of
where the focus for design can be placed
which is we can design for how to
increase human competencies as they
relate to managing complexity so for
example there are Pedigo G's that help
people to be more skilled at managing
uncertainty one example is becoming
trained and Improv Theater to teach
people Improv Theater they get better at
working with patterns of emergence and
so you can increase their competencies
in that sense and I think of the lot of
the design of culture is historically
thought of as it sort of create a
blueprint or a plan and manage its
implementation when I completely agree
with you that would be an absolute train
wreck to try to do that the more
interesting thing is to ask how can we
take what is known about developing
human competencies and managing the
capacities for human creativity to
enable humans to manage complexity
better and I think there we can be we
can manage the humility while also
having more confidence that's usually at
small skills and not at large scales
which means we're really working on the
fractals through their decentralization
rather than through their very emergent
kind of macro scale interconnections but
in a sense I think we can do a lot more
than we recognise and one domain of
practice that's come quite a long way as
professional facilitators so many really
capable facilitators of different kinds
whether they're people that convene in
host conferences and events or people
that can do small-scale group therapy
sessions or how they can manage rapid
prototyping among a group of people to
do a consumer market fit using
experience design or a human interface
design or other such things that
actually a lot of that competency does
exist and so it's mostly a question of
what everything applied effectively
right now it's not enough yeah I agree I
have great respect for facilitators even
back in my business career as far back
as the 90s when I found a good one I
hung on to him for dear life writers are
they were independent contractors and
they made an unbelievable difference in
the productivity of a group of say 20
people and that is a real skill that we
need to learn how to use better and I
think you hit on the point that we do
probably have enough knowledge now to
build functioning entities at the lower
end of scale hundreds to a few thousands
of people and as you know myself and
many of my associates have been involved
with the game be world for a number of
years thinking about this we now believe
that we're on the verge of having enough
knowledge to transition to building what
we call proto B's which would be groups
of people living intentionally together
in a more serious game be world on the
scale at the low end of 20 at the high
end of a few thousand structured
fractally up in groups of what we call
Dunbar's and then proto B's and then
maybe pollicis etc I do think the time
is right for that but as you also said
try to build a top-down we have the
wisdom from the mountaintop to tell you
all how to live you know like the Nazis
or the Soviet Union
would be just ridiculous so it strikes
me that we need to build from the bottom
but we need to have a sense of urgency
so that we get there in time and that's
the sort of amazing tension and stress
is how we think about building this game
be world and one of the things that I've
been a a big advocate for in the last
two years and I've done a deep dive to
try to understand the history of it is
the history of bio regionalism and what
it means to live in a bio region it
turns out that all historical
hunter-gatherer societies were
bioregional pretty much by definition
because a bio region for a nonhuman
species is the landscape capable of
providing a full integrated life for the
organism so if you're a starfish you
might be part of a coral reef and the
coral reef is your bio region when you
take that idea and apply it to humans
you have an interesting kind of smearing
and blurring of what it means with
cultural identity as it relates to a
landscape but the functional sense it
ends up having kind of pops out of it as
subsistence circular economies if you
have people living in a craft based
culture where all of their materials are
locally provided they may have a trade
network to other places nearby but
across that trade network you end up
with a subsistence capacity that it maps
onto the functions of the landscape
there might be a watershed or a mountain
range or a coastal estuary or something
like that that actually is the the
ecological grounding of that human
subsistence system for this way of
thinking about human societies
self-organizing to the ecological scale
using the functions or landscapes as
actually has a really strong historical
antecedent that my kind of provocative
way of saying it is all sustainable
cultures in human history were
bioregional and if you find any system
of human cultures where they lived in a
place for extended you know hundreds of
years thousands of years it's because
they organize themselves by a regionally
doesn't mean that they were consciously
doing that that's just a self-organizing
scale and so I think this idea
talking about with proto b if you add
this element of functions of landscape
like a drainage basin of a watershed as
an organizing principle that you use
ecological organize in using the
landscape social organizing using the
skills you are talking about like the
Dunbar number then you can start to
co-create
local living economy which is what we
need to create all over the planet so I
think there's a lot of power and trying
to blend these kind of bioregional
permaculture perspectives with what
you're describing as the proto B's and
learn from each other about how to do
this I agree though I would add one
other thing which is after the free
civilization want to call it while there
was some trade trade is one of the most
amazing inventions of the human race and
so one we imagined in a game be world
there will be trade between the various
entities at every level
however the signalling system ie
whatever replaces the monetary system
will not allow trade to get out of
control I think one of the things that
this Cova 19 that has shown us I've
known it for a long time you've probably
heard me rant about it is that the
engine of money on money returned the
kind of financial system we currently
have forces most of the players in the
economy to go for efficiency at the
expense of robustness ie fish caught in
Northern California is sent to China to
be processed then sent back to Chicago
to be distributed out to Costco it's
crazy right or you know a t-shirt that
used to be made in South Carolina and
the factory provided work for a thousand
families because it could be made five
cents cheaper including all the shipping
back and forth in Bangladesh the town in
South Carolina basically gets shut down
and these t-shirts go flying across the
world back and forth consuming vast
amounts of fossil fuel so I would not be
so strictly bioregional though I do
think bio regionalism is very useful to
organize at the lower levels but I think
it is important that we be very smart
and include an appropriate amount of
trade to take advantage of one of the
few
free lunches in economics which is the
idea of comparative advantage turns out
that in our little Valley here I think
our count are actually our River Valley
here the bull pasture valley is a
bioregional area and it's good for some
things it's very good for cattle grazing
it's reasonably good for corn it's good
for berries but it's not good for grapes
and it's not good for not particularly
good for truck farming so I would see us
to the east the next big Valley much
much bigger the Shenandoah Valley is
really good for grains is really good
for truck farming is good for grazing
but not as good as we are so in fact
historically back in colonial times the
cattle were often driven from the
Shenandoah Valley over here to our
valleys in the summertime or it much
higher elevation and the grass is much
better in the summer so I would say bio
regionalism linked with smart trade is
maybe the first couple of keys for
building up from the bottom but let's
not forget trade trade is huge as long
as it's done honorably ethically not
exploitive ly and it no longer ranged
the necessary yeah one way that I think
about this is that if we just try to
create bio regional economies and we
stop there well we end up with as
fiefdom and then eventually if there's a
shortage of something necessary for one
of those fiefdom to survive they're just
gonna bait and kill people in the next
few time and you're gonna end up with
everything devolving or collapsing back
to lower skills of complexity and so
what's really needed is functional
interdependence between the bio regions
which is exactly what you're saying is
if we have really smart and ethical
trade from one region to another or from
one region to many regions with the kind
of kinder friendlier less intense
version of globalism and we have a
present then that creates that
functional inter dependency which
stabilizes and helps to support the
innovation economies across those
systems which is really going to be
important if we end up with an extended
period of climate volatility if climate
change has led us to a place where we
have maybe a 200 year pair
that's a lot less stable than during
most of the Holocene for a 500 year
period of time then that adaptive
allocation from one region to another is
how the bio regions survive because you
can't grow crops in your bio region if
you just got flooded at exactly the
wrong month of the year and so this need
for smart trade becomes essential for
the interdependencies to support each
other positively if there is a backdrop
of larger instability for a long period
as well yes and as we know just the
basic math the bigger area that can
trade with each other is essentially a
free lunch risk mitigator assuming we
have the right social institutions to
allow that to work you know the weather
varies quite radically we often will
have a drought over in the Shenandoah
Valley and we'll be great here or
vice-versa
even though they're only less than 50
miles apart and in fact interestingly
here in our Highland County there's a
part of the county called little Egypt
and we first bought our place we asked
our local handyman lived in little
legion we said where to get the name
little Egypt they said well back in
1930s there was a drought of still
unprecedented proportion where the crops
failed throughout the whole county and
basically everybody moved a little Egypt
and lived at a subsistence level
together for two years until the drought
broke because in that one little pocket
which is maybe ten square miles of quite
rich soil they had enough rainfall and
so there was an interesting historical
example within the lifetime of people
that are still alive yeah I think of
this what I think I was powerful about
bioregions is the management of the
landscapes themselves so for it for like
a good example this is the Gulf of Maine
so the Gulf of Maine is a shallow and
wet Bay they have a lobster and fishing
economy that think it's been valuated at
3 or 4 billion dollars per year it's a
huge fishery then it has collapsed in
the last few years and one of the
reasons that's collapsed is it's the
fastest warming part of the world ocean
it is warmed by more than five degrees
Celsius since 1980 the reason for that
is that historically there was a
Coldwater occurrence that came from the
Arctic that would push down and enter
into as though Atlantic water was coming
north they would mix into the the day of
the Gulf of Maine and I would keep the
water relatively cool and stable but
what happened was the melting of fresh
water from Greenland which is directly
east now water fresh water was
propagating westward which pushed the
Atlantic Current southward and pushed
out creating a buffer so that the Arctic
water couldn't enter and then a strange
kind of micro oceanography of it dumped
the Atlantic water into the bay and kept
the Arctic water out and so as a result
five degrees Celsius a warming of the
water temperature which is eight or nine
degrees Fahrenheit and that is that
absolutely catastrophic effects to the
fisheries so what's happening now is
there's a management of that coastal
estuary and that M wet Bay which is a
scale of management that's necessary so
I think of this bio regional scale sort
of popping out as a management need
because of these functions of the
landscapes now the larger integration of
the economy from region to region it's
it's more like we've we've over
emphasized globalized markets using
finance as our signalling system we've
undervalued local robust and resilient
economic systems that integrate into it
and if we push back toward a healthier
balance then we have smart trade from
region to region just misses we're
saying and and what pops out is also bio
regional economies they both sort of
come back to our relative stability of
interacting resilience yep that's
exactly right it turns out we were
actually up there in the Gulf of Maine
lobster fishery for a couple of weeks
last September on Deer Isle right at the
very center of it and we actually got to
talk to quite a few the lobster men and
to some of the people who helped manage
that and they've actually turned that
around up there they have had
near-record sustainable crops by
limiting the number of licenses and
traps basically the it's very difficult
to get the lobstering business unless
you inherit lobstering licenses and
boats and traps from your family and
while they're struggling a little bit
with the changing water
temperature it's still near record
levels of sustainable production and the
surveys of the younger ones are actually
very positive the other thing that's
interesting it shows you this is the
adaptation of humans as the water in the
Gulf of Maine is risen a few degrees I
don't think it's five degrees C it might
be 2 or 3 degrees Fahrenheit what they
have found now is that the water
temperature is much more conducive to
farm raised boy stirs than it was before
and so there is now a rapidly spinning
up farmed oyster industry starting to
establish in Maine so let's never
underestimate human ability to adapt I
mean I'm one of my shows recently I had
Dan Schrag one of the leading climate
scientists in the world and he's
actually fairly pessimistic about the
political system getting its
together to deal with climate the way it
should but he always comes back to the
fact that people tend to underestimate
human adaptation human ability to make
the best of a situation you know Heke
the water temperature is getting a
little warmer than optimal for lobsters
but guess what it's getting better for
oysters as an example about you know the
kinds of ways that we can work our ways
through this particularly if we take to
your point really get to know our bio
regional systems and what they're really
all about yeah and there's another piece
of this I think is really interesting is
when people talk about large-scale
systems change they all they often
bemoan the fact the presumed presumed
fact because it's incorrect but they
ballon this fact that there really
aren't good examples there's not good
knowledge of systemic change the truth
is we have a specific domain of practice
that has learned a fantastic amount in
us amazing case studies and how to do
this and that's conservation management
which is what happened in the Gulf of
Maine with that fishery they came
together and they reinvented the fishery
and there are other examples of this in
different parts of the world where
people actually can be quite good at
sustainable management of very complex
systems that marine estuary has five
major rivers running into it and it
spans across what you could call seven
nations if you wanted to because there
are five First Nations tribes
in Nova Scotia there is Nova Scotia in
Canada and then there's the state of
Maine in the United States so there are
in a sense seven nations that are
managing that process really different
cultures of people all within it and
even with that social economic and
environmental complexity that are
managing the recovery the fishery so I
think that our ability to do this is
greater it was like you're saying humans
adapt better than most of us give credit
for but also our ability to manage
systemic complexity is better than we
often realize because we don't see
examples like this and really understand
how they work indeed and they're
essentially recapitulating they may or
may not know it but some of the work
about managing the Commons that was so
well documented and communicated by
Elinor Ostrom who's a author I would
strongly recommend people look at who
are interested in how do we manage a
Commons you know we've all heard of the
famous tragedy of the Commons Garret
Hardin from back in the 60s and yes if
we were all just vicious self maximizers
with no ability to cooperate then the
inevitable game theory result is a
tragedy of the Commons but Elinor Ostrom
won the Nobel Prize for it has
documented that there's long history and
there's lots of ways which we can be
cooperative and not fall into the game
theoretical races to the bottom yeah
it's funny I just gave a webinar about
three weeks ago or I explained the
pro-social framework which combines
Elinor Ostrom work with david sloan
wilson x' work on multi-level selection
and then it adds to it contextual
behavioral science and a particular set
of tools that are called acceptance and
commitment therapy which happens to be
really useful for helping people create
internal wayfinding tools within their
own bodies and minds to move toward the
future self that they want to become and
what they've done is created a powerful
tool set for managing the Commons of any
social group and learning how to do it
better so there's both rigorous and
robust science about this and really
good design principles so Elinor Ostrom
named eight of these design principles
one of them just to get a sense of it is
a Commons can be managed well if there
is a strong sense of shared identity and
shared purpose for the people managing
it you don't have that you're not going
to manage it very well and the second
one is you need to have fair and rapid
conflict resolution if you don't have a
way of fairly quickly resolving the
conflict then you're not going to manage
the Commons very well just go on and on
and she named eight of these and the
magic is how they work together they
actually become a complex adaptive
governance system which is pretty
impressive
absolutely and another example too
happens to be in the also in the fishing
a friend of mine happens to be a salmon
captain on the Alaska Peninsula and they
also have a very very rigorous
essentially cooperative with some help
from the state providing data management
system where you know you only have a
certain number of days per year you can
do for this species and that's very very
tightly controlled with huge penalties
for violating and again they're living
fat dumb and happy er than they ever
have
despite climate change because they can
adapt year by year to the realities of
the situation and take advantage of the
ability to produce a crop without
depleting you know the larger animals
which are the valuable ones yeah one
part of Elinor Ostrom work which we
could describe as the ability to have
adaptive intelligence is basically that
if there are rules for making decisions
the members of the group actually can be
participants in changing the rules which
seems like a pretty smart idea
you can't adapt to a changing
environment if you have a set of rules
created for an earlier environment they
don't work in the new one you need to
have a way for the group that's managing
the Commons to be able to change their
own rules and what's interesting is I
think there are naive people who use
ideology way too much to see the world
who hear the word cooperative and they
immediately think of communism and what
they don't realize is a cooperative as
any arrangement that allows a group of
people to work together so a sports team
is a cooperative by this definition and
so is a working group within a company
and so the interesting thing is that a
cooperative is a structure that supports
cooperation towards shared goals and
that may have
any number of ideological embodiments
you can have a capitalist cooperative a
communist cooperative and various other
kinds - what matters most is Elinor
Ostrom showed is does it enable people
to adaptively manage their comments
whatever it happens to be if it does
then they're fine because they'll figure
it out as they go but if not then
doesn't matter their ideology it's gonna
fall on its face eventually cuz they
don't have a governing system that can
tolerate it here here and and having the
good data also again as the fishery
examples show hunting seasons show etc
without good data it's really hard to
make good collective decisions because
everyone falls back in their own
self-interest but if we say hey the
trend line on big lobsters has been
going down to the last three years guess
what people we have to stop taking
lobsters over four pounds and that's
exactly what they do in the Gulf of
Maine every year every fisherman is
giving a little gauge that basically
measures the shell from one point on it
to another that's objective everybody
understands and you may only take
lobsters smaller than the gauge right
and that changes every year so and it
has to be data-driven so the combination
of data and systems thinking and
understanding natural systems allows us
to manage these Commons in a way that
people will tolerate yeah top-down
stupid dictates people will just work
around them but if they know that this
is data-driven and will actually work
you know they'll buy end it into doing
it I'm always interested in people so I
asked one of the captains what happens
to people who cheat right and I go well
sometimes the marine police catch them
but one of the guys was very honest that
more likely they come down to their dock
one day looking to get on their boat and
their boat is gone and then they look
down in the water and they see the boom
yeah yeah this is one of the one of
Elinor Ostrom score design principles is
monitoring of helpful and unhelpful
behavior if you don't have some kind of
monitoring system for the behaviors that
you're governing with so in this case
the size of the catch of the lobster and
of course these monitoring systems need
to have agreement and a sense of
fairness about them so the members of
the group get to help create them but
they also create a specific kind of
transparency which is the data itself
helps you to see
the behaviors of the people its
measurement relevant behavior you're
measuring behavior relevant to what you
care about managing so you don't care
how much someone curses as of throwing
that big lobster back out in the water
you're not measuring that but you are
measuring the size of the lobster shell
and I think this is something that
really matters for governing any kind of
Commons as data comes into the role of
of how you monitor the behaviors and
what it means to monitor them
effectively yeah and can they be inter
subjectively measured ie can other
people see your measurement and come to
the same conclusion very important yeah
very important let me pull up something
you wrote might have been a tweet I
don't really remember might have been a
medium post it said that you were in the
process of articulating a five-year
research program that applies cultural
evolution and complexity to the
emergence of regenerative bio regional
economies seating the ideas into
possibility yet aware it may not take
hold can you say more about a five-year
research program into cultural evolution
and complexity that could provide more
emergence in the regenerative economies
yeah I'm in a conversation with a friend
whose lives in Germany and he's recently
finished his PhD at the University of
hone and I'm his name's Michael Schlow
and I met him while I was helping create
the cultural evolution Society about
four years ago chose a scientific
society for the study of cultural
evolution and I helped as sort of a
community organizer to facilitate the
creation of the society I met Michael at
that time and he did his PhD work in
what is called dedicated innovation
systems which is when you have an
innovation economy that is directed
toward some societal goal so their
innovation systems than their dedicated
ones and his specific goal as dedicated
innovation systems in service to
transitioning toward bio
economies so economies that function and
ecologically and biologically robust
ways of course the country of Germany
where he lives is investing
heavily and renewable energy and other
related things that would be part of
this bio economy so there's a foundation
in Germany that is looking to fund
academic positions for people to support
this transition and my friend Michael
reached out to me a month or so ago and
said that he would like to apply for a
professor position funded by the
foundations he would have five years of
funding for his salary and for a
research team not about a million euros
per year for five years which basically
would support him and a couple of
graduate students or a postdoc you know
small team but big enough to be
meaningful and he felt like he couldn't
really put together a strong enough
proposal on his own because they really
want people that are doing applied work
in multinational contexts so he reached
out and asked me if I would be his PhD
student in the application so that we
could leverage my networks across lots
of different places and we could partner
to build this so it just created a nice
little thinking space for us to ask what
kind of proposal would we put together
if we did that and what we've come up
with is that there's a set of things
that need to be studied in order to be
able to guide the development of
cultural evolution at the scale that's
kind of by a regional scale and I can
just quickly walk you through a couple
of those yeah let's do it let's get down
to some specific love to hear it yeah
cuz because I think this is a really
it's a concrete proposals were proposing
this in a specific context of this
robert bosch junior professorship grant
that Michael Schlow was applying for but
what we named in our you know where
early days of writing this proposal
although it relates to a lot of work
I've done over the years so it's not
like this is a brand new idea for me
this work program as we're calling it as
though it's a research program over five
years and were introduced in a set of
work packages that we would focus on as
a research team the first work package
is narratives and cognitive scaffolding
for a sustainable Bioeconomy so the
kinds of questions we would ask for this
or how do human cultures create a blend
of narratives and social norms
institutional structures technologies
you know built
sure and so on what how do narratives
and worldviews relate to these forms of
well we might call regime resistance and
the old system that would hinder the
transition to a new one as well as those
narratives and social norms that would
help to embody the creation of these
these societal structures a second work
package that we're talking about is
social niche construction and the
creation of functioning groups which is
basically how to create social
environments that are well adapted to
forming functional collaboration with
teams of people so that they can work on
their own local economies and their own
local ecosystems in an effective way so
what I want to do is really apply the
understanding about how niche
construction works in general to the
social niches of human cooperation which
is an area of you to think of it as like
entrepreneurship or innovation studies
related to cooperation and a third area
of research that we're looking at is the
agency of dedicated innovation system
actors or the change agents working on
cultural evolution what we really care
about here is you know how do people
that become actors of systemic
interventions that try to change the
system's themselves how can they
increase their legitimacy among the
people they're working with and also
gather and direct their responsibilities
whether themselves or through
collaboration that works to create
catalyzing change processes which is an
area where I think there's still a lot
of deep questions that we don't know how
to answer and then a fourth area is
revealing the common patterns of
multi-level selection and coevolution
here we're talking about how in any
regional economy there are different
kinds of social organization in one
place to another and different kinds of
social organization from one scale to
another so family is different from
municipal government which is different
from the local church or you know
community grid so you have different
kinds of social organization and they
function in different nested scales so
what we want to do is bring to bear on
these regional economic development
efforts how to study that with rigor and
identify the mechanisms of evolutionary
change
it sounds great yeah this is what the
reason is about you hit a lot of my hot
buttons right it's quite interesting I'm
one that believes that when you're
talking about human systems everything
is coevolution right the context that we
play in is co-evolutionary it's not just
evolution against an environment because
humans are adaptive you make some
changes we all make changes the other
one that I like very much and it's under
appreciated by people who aren't up on
really modern evolutionary theory is
niche construction what is culture but
the ultimate form of niche construction
so yeah I really applaud this work this
is really good I look forward to seeing
it come out I hope you continue to bring
these ideas forth to the public yeah one
of the ideas is that there are a lot of
efforts right now to create these
regional scale economies and so we can
partner with them at all of the
multi-stakeholder networks embodied
within them and set up this research
program to study what they're doing and
feed that information to the people
doing the work so that's what we're
gonna try and do over the next five
years good I'm gonna keep an eye on it
sounds like wonderful work really hope
you get funded and I hope it goes now
let's wrap up with you getting a chance
to tout your online education programs
I've seen some very interesting programs
unfortunately I haven't had a chance to
actually partake of them I think you
call it the earth regenerator study
group is that correct yeah the earthly
generators study group which we can
include a link when we post this online
but the earth regenerator study group
formed at the end of December so it's
only about four months old and it
started because I began writing a book
and felt like I should just give the
manuscript away instead of publishing it
so I invited people to join a study
group around the manuscript for my book
the book's title is the design pathway
for regenerating the earth and what I
was writing about in the manuscript is
sort of a a curriculum in earth
regeneration so the study group formed
around reading the book chapters and
having discussions about them but it
quickly expanded into more we're using
an online platform and mobile app called
mighty networks and in the four months
it's existed it's grown a lot bigger
than I originally thought it's currently
got more than 950 people and as Rob
approaching a thousand and we have the
manuscript the book chapters but also we
have discussions on lots of topics I've
created a section for tools and
tutorials for people to share their
regenerative projects to collaborate
with each other and also twice a month
we do a webinar and the key to all of
this I want people to know is that it's
completely free to join its gift economy
I'm supported by people supporting me on
patreon and I make enough money on
patreon to be all the support my family
while living in Colombia so you can join
all of us you don't have to pay a dime
but if you're appreciate it and want to
throw a nickel my way then by all means
do but what I feel is more important is
to create a community of practice around
how to do this work and that's what
we're trying to do with the study that
we will indeed put a link up to the
study group and I tell you I've seen the
ads for it on Twitter etc and extremely
interesting well Joe I want to thank you
for coming on and frankly I also want to
thank you for the work you're doing for
the human race well thank you Jim I
really appreciate it and I'm glad that
we're friends I always look forward to
our conversations and we do argue let's
not forget that but we always do it with
honesty and good faith and that's the
keys yes indeed
[Music]
production services and audio editing by
jerod Jane's consulting music by Tom
Muller at modern space music com