[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
welcome to the first thing what I think
is going to be a series of interviews
with people from various different
organizations activist groups who talked
about and explore some of the problems
that exist in society and what some of
the solutions for those problems might
be today I've got with me Adam
Maloney also known as Elementium he's
from the zeitgeist movement he's been an
activist for a number of years now has
given talks as a YouTube channel does
open does stalls in public you know
talking to people or free hugs that kind
of thing he's recently done a show of
quantum earth which is available on IMDB
it's a multi award-winning show which
again its purpose is to explore some of
the problems facing the world and
thank you very much and tell me a little
bit about what there's like Joe Smith is
about the sort of things that they
affect for the one of the main ones is
the mathematical unsustainability of the
monetary-market paradigm which is really
a system that's based on infinite
economic growth and consumption but it
exists on the planet virtually finite
resources that sort of thing it says to
me that we really do a little further
kind of thing yes
it's like we're having towards a cliff
edge and I see the ideas of sizes
sustainability that they the kind of
advents of those things can offer
actually in the realm of providing life
needs and educate people as to the real
reality of our interconnectedness really
to be steering us away from intervention
really sustaining the work so if that
one it's also the value system that we
suffer and endure and perpetuate in this
[Music]
humanism which is further destabilizing
to be the linked on may be the sense of
separation and the amendment consumerism
to try and fill the hole caused by that
sense of separation like the yelling
during inextricably linked yeah yeah
this it's also the fact that the
monetary system it requires human labor
and it's based on human labor in order
for people to be paid money to then
spend back into the system and that's
being threatened by the natural
evolution of Technology which we
developed in the very first place to
make our lives easier very the
definition of the term machine is a
labor saving device and when we follow
that train of thought through to its
logical conclusion we realized that all
algorithmic tasks or algorithm jobs as a
way to human life are actually better
suited to mission is it so we should let
machines free us up from that like
wasting labor
and you know allow us to go to the
heuristic tops which are really geared
towards creativity and you know that we
stimulate stretched do you think that
transiting from where we are now to our
be in a series of steps is a realistic
human beings can be so you're talking
about a grassroots level to the
person-to-person that kind of thing
because I mean I I see no mention or
reference whatsoever in mainstream media
coverage of filming i empathy show the
YouTube recently quantum ethics that's
probably the most in-depth you know
widely available examination of our
being I've ever seen other than you know
things like the Venus Project knocking
out their own videos but why do you
think it games so little do you think it
do you think it's seen as a threat or do
you think it is still just a very
various finding interesting
it's all that it's almost on that
precipice there's I'd say there isn't
enough people that are advocating this
this value citizenship and their social
media makeshift to really leave the
incident they're the ones what is
critical mass the web starts to build
then I guess in a sense it is contrary
is completely contrary to how the
current system for a bit more than C I
think that's why the radiating health
policy values is so important to say you
know yes to a certain degree is a threat
to the current establishment but it's
not a threat to humanity
yeah it's only a threat to the collector
system and in terms of like some of the
steps that can be taken in that
direction I think potentially if if the
monthly party does actually start
getting more on the attraction of dollar
attention not just to its own manifesto
create but also the fact that no other
political
two powerful Canaries so that can have
like another appeal that can really stop
propelling it a cynicism in the stream
and you know that can build because
politics is the current means by which
societies are orientated managed and
forward then it just needs to be managed
so you think that the current physical
system could be employed to aid the
transition you don't think the political
system as it stands would need to be
smashed apart
David Bailey the adaptive are used for
knocking not complaining I think yeah
the as I said the political system is
still the current means people you know
the the main thing that the people
to effect effect changes to and if
voting is towards political parties that
do have this idea of sustainability then
that is that would be a point where I
would start saying yeah I think voting
can actually change if for no other
reason that it gets it on the agenda
rather serves as a couple of members of
parliament now they have to be
recognized as something it then of
course for the first-past-the-post
system that we have in essentially makes
it extremely difficult in effort a
long-established party like the Green
Party and I think they've only ever had
one Indian tonight I'm not so sure about
the doing this information I know you
know these are fresh goods the leader of
The Venus Project I've only come across
Charles Eisenstein
I've had a philosopher natural
philosopher kind of think both of those
people say that society has simply not
been prepared to embrace ideas as
radical as money three systems and
whatever has to be seen to fail before
people will be perfectly raised new
ideas you don't know to what extent do
you think that I do I do agree to a
certain extent I think society does need
to be shaken by the lapels hard enough
everything is okay in the current system
is like well maybe not maybe they it's
maybe their need to what what what in
your opinion would it take what what
would be a sufficient shape am i living
in it it's hard to say I mean I think it
depends I mean personally
I don't like things all anyone
especially whether he's ever before
meaningful change come about the end of
the thing yeah I think so I mean
hopefully there will be certain
organizations that can come in and it
may be it is that sort of that forced
backing that forced need to subsist we
can't just fill out this we need
something better
[Music]
there is a certain point where they but
for a lot of people by that they're
they're so entrenched in a cemetery way
of theme that some of them might just go
go down with it so this is this is why I
think it's so important to advocate
[Music]
[Applause]
- long enough for those seeds so that
when people are really really suckling
okay so would you say that they're being
wise individuals the spies in King in
terms are a little bit more
self-sufficiency and I start using my
daughter's 2036 and solar panels on the
roof you know all this kind of thing the
current system not only will to a
certain extent the kind of cancerous
system stop stop the video absolutely
absolutely I mean every person that
doesn't use their credit card because it
doesn't renew their life then at the end
of the years is going some way towards
solving
[Laughter]
[Laughter]
that's why these kind of conversations
are so important to show to say the
complete time absolutely the inversion
of so much of what we take the process
as this is how it is and his attack must
be this is how it's always been
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
so to a certain extent there needs to be
a big contraction in terms of of our
socio-economic scope
[Music]
so well how do you see things like civil
disobedience demonstrations marches
rallies do you see these as effective
means of getting the moment we met
actually at the mini-mart - didn't they
a couple years ago which is which is
exactly that it's a rally tomorrow
people by the placards and maker phones
you to do a megaphone I'm sitting as you
children very common invasive way but do
you think that these things actually
have an impact on those who are not
already thinking about these things it
depends on something this is why at the
last minute March March I was really
quite strongly advocating for people to
march forth I think not only when people
are marching against them and not only
does it create this week angry energy
and something that the police can't
break down but it almost indirectly sent
a message that the public that all these
reprobates are really angry on let's
just ignore them they're not they're
just yelling and then of course whatever
they are angry about it's associated
with reprobates right and therefore not
to be taken seriously
exactly yeah so I think as as long as
it's not something like a March or a
rally at all it is advocating for
something positive and it is something
where people are not afraid to get out
and be identified as something
then I think that can help not just
themselves - himself in a peaceful
manner but also for our message to say
people are just not marching against
something actually also people gives
people something to consider
yeah because it takes hold during
something like the individuation where
people act anonymously as pilot into
allottee and energy and reality
buildings
please then it is a very common process
so even though the zeitgeist movement
explicitly is not a movement that
considers rallies and marches and
demonstrations as a I think you know in
exact words piggybacking off those on
those things to say yes we can see we're
only and we appreciate the line but that
anger needs to be transformed into a pro
activity what kind of social values
would be like to see an advocate with I
don't think
I don't think on the whole human beings
really enjoy to live in that kind of I
mean green compactive and Auntie stuff
and in our mentality I think if people
[Music]
come away yeah I think yeah I think
there's no stairs if you know we didn't
have it was like a handful of yeah I
think more and more people as as as we
start in critical mass if we start
getting enough people to say there's
enough people here
[Music]
[Applause]
and there's a line in there going both
ways where they're shouting and
screaming of use of people turning to
violence and after that smart
communication you could argue that is
itself a form of violence oh I think
that's not physical yeah
certainly engenders that kind of
response in others you know the million
yeah that's fine that's why I myself a
movement definitely appreciates the
value of the Socratic method by asking
questions instead they're just giving
some other piece of information give
someone immediately there's something
okay do I agree with this will do like
this really and you know especially with
our kind culture political white
thinking about things if it's something
that doesn't quite jive with the social
value displayed only they've been raised
with it's easy to just dismiss dismiss
something you don't even think about so
it's easier to dismiss you want someone
a question they become a generator and a
lot of times a lot of people actually
are kind of pop part of the way there
when they say you know different
Italian values in up with em one who
started sable does the social value
system and the socio-economic system
that we've subject
as I said we we do eat like evolution so
it gives America's great deal more skill
to communicate human a lot of patients
are almost going isn't really listen so
this is why things like debate it can
have a function as long as it's you as
well because I think any kind of debate
or discussion should be about what they
know it should be should be a search for
truth right not not a battle of
ideologies not not another battle
between two or more individuals to see
who's right who's wrong
err this is this is not the point it's
about developing the understanding of
everybody is they shouldn't it's a
process not seen America recently burden
in terms of America recently how toxic
the language was between the two sides
you know now though completely unable if
you're a trump supporter how I'm able
you are to talk to a Democrat you know
there's all that going up to what extent
do you see money as responsible for that
I know that's a bit of a bit of a leap
but we have spent you see financial yet
these stratification of society that
money mathematically
[Music]
then talk about absolutely create some
really cool that some who can or can't
talk about the a like what was the
number give me a number
the magnitude by adventure so so yeah
that's it's massively crazily and for
nothing the very emotional of the
military system not only does it
dividers but it also pits us against
product then the very costs you then cut
wages you've got a yeah maybe it won't
work harder because if you're not going
to do it someone else is going to do it
and you're gonna be other business to
the constable yeah so it uses uses that
uses be rich policies to say over there
they're just privileged and they you
know they they're just a personal
assistant the middle classes
a responsibility placed upon them and
then lower-class I said you don't want
to be part of them what you're telling
is to say right the other poor are there
to front in the middle class if you're
working again it's a massive divisive
game the money is subject to the
pre-flare distribution rights over 50%
of all the money goes to the top 1% of
the people within the distribution and
the third that this for easy
distribution applies across many many
many things in nature it seems to almost
be a law of nature right and so this is
- I don't want to say justify but
explained as being somewhat unavoidable
but huge inequities in wealth you know
however halogen they try to society to
smooth these things out it's you know
you're swimming upstream diseases it's
the law of nature so it seems to me one
obvious solution to this is to use
something which is subject breeder
distribution as as a way by which to
organize society people is inevitably
going to exacerbate inequality right
yeah we we know that the preacher
distribution is in effect and if if
something is fundamental is how we
it's almost like the existing ideas the
best ideas ideas ideas
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
something like that yeah they do any
reason people be painting with its title
able to do for themselves
yeah it's the University of Rochester in
New York discovering different levels of
motivation there's like motivation 1.0
is sort of like the biological drives it
ships leave that kind of a yeah
motivation to is like the intrinsic
motivation doing something that you like
doing and then there's the motivation
type that they though they were sent
another lady and motivation I mean yeah
they could show like an actual joy just
for fun just a solo playing for example
be an example okay okay okay
the very existence of play is a
testament to we can be motivated to do
things even two times it's funny because
it's if you do
yeah and that is actually shown to wear
to only really motivate people to do
algorithmic tasks that require no the
higher-order thinking is too simple
simple things like that you're doing it
it's something that you can't really
mess up and some of you just go but when
it's when that kind of motivates that
kind of extensive motivation is applied
to heuristic tasks that require
creativity and calculations of your own
application especially the collaboration
it's shown to actually corrode that kind
of motivation so yeah that's right peers
about that actually goes down doesn't it
as financial incentives go up people
feel more pressure to come up with
something and therefore those processes
whatever they be those mysterious
processes that produce that kind of work
sort of shut down right yeah yeah the
the people study actually reported that
because they were being paid for
regardless of how much they were being
paid with like they were reported that
the activity started to feel like a
statistic that Chinese lovingness gave
it a five active disengaged with their
job okay you know they're just turning
up the paycheck
and and it's it's intuitively if you
think about like this kind of system
they're kind of ridiculous tasks are
given to human being just so they can
get a pace that so they go spend it in
couriers or whatever so you know cut out
cut helping yet the algorithmic tasks
and allocated to humans give those to
machines
let machines take care of the fact and
human beings can do so much more with
the heuristic tasks they can start
moving things forward in ways that we
couldn't even anticipate before because
for so long we have been like in fourth
there are these things that waste our
lives that the road our sense of
motivation and balloons a robust sense
of self-esteem yeah so you're not you're
not one of those people that believes
that if you took them if you remove the
need for people to work most of their
most of their time you you are not one
of the people that believe that people
sit around on their couches scratching
their asses no no no sorry I'm the truth
on the whole scale in terms of the
shelter there will be a certain place
where people go through brilliant yeah
and then there will be a sort of
secretary so right but after a while
that will become very very poor and they
will actually want to do something
[Music]
social incentive not to just be around
people but also to positively affect I
think people harm each other not because
they've really active but because
they've they've been driven down and
injured themselves so much that they
feel they just have to get this out
somehow because this violence whether
it's structural or physical emotional
sexual any kind of if either like those
eternally in itself that the person
starts to injure themselves prevent that
either they either do that or they have
to find some way of just getting them
out
whether it's like picking someone up in
the puddle
like they're getting out some so having
to point some say would you say that
that is in part down to what we said
before about the people being forced to
complete each other the money system
actually forces feet into the center
confrontation yeah confrontations maybe
a little bit too somber certainly
competition and not always healthy
competition I don't think I think most
people would agree that competition
sporting competition so long as it's you
know done in good spirits but I think it
can be very hopeful it can bring the
best out of people it can now push them
so low that they would not be able to
achieve on their own so competition of
that sort of ability can be extremely
good but the type of competition that
we're talking about sorry that you were
talking about is is that of it's a
zero-sum game so the more I have the
less you apply this whereas competition
the sporting sense can be more than a
zero-sum game both parties benefit yet
sure one wins one loses that particular
that particular encounter but both have
benefited from the encounter because
their skill level has been raising they
had a great timing of the thrilling
match and they had a great time if this
isn't on cetera it sounds like a
competition yeah so that it's that yeah
so sorry I've kind of got a loss to my
original question but do you think it is
that impart that source of competition
that creates that sense of anger and
and need to latch out it the world that
you're just talking about ya can do it
it sets a social precedent of other
people not being there with you and
follow you but rather against so
depending on jobs that people are in the
kind of fields they see different
[Music]
particularly under shell and then maybe
they establish a good enough thought
sorts of allegiance to market share to
them and so for instance another shot
but something it's the same kind of shot
immediately then you see the message a
new star
Eric you don't see them I need 25 at the
same interest then you can just exchange
ideas
you're new in competition
yeah yeah I see each other rather than
each other make sense but in terms of
something where's the market then that
person is your enemy it's nice again
enemy is probably slightly strong but I
absolutely understand the point you're
making cannot be correct and if there's
not enough customers for to shop for one
of the lengths and I survived I'm it
actually comes a fight for your survival
almost we can become solutions to the
problems but so many people think that
the solutions means that you know voting
yeah
candidate but then I start seeing that
it's like a bit more radical than that
they are exactly the kind of the kind of
changes we need a far more fundamental
then just changing the different
political puppet as it were on the stage
it uses what tools we have to provide a
human need if you need to provide then
social stress goes down suffering goes
down
addictions to harmful addictions I feel
that what do you say to people that say
that the results based economic tour
money free societal systems in general
are just the latest incarnation of
Marxism and
Marxist ideology designed to undermine
the existing existing structures were
little Rotty say to the plate it's
understandable that's really on the
alternative the people people who are
talking about you have to be associative
mind if stranger even though one kind of
leads to the other but again one thing I
play too
is still ahead centralized power
structures yeah materialist absolutely
all that sort of thing and really
communism never really considered the
idea of why we should have part we've
never conceived of the technological
capability that would have existed 150
years of the people I see you know you
know the ability to actually create a
high standard of living every single
person on this planet we didn't go to
ninth but you know remember that the
technological capability to recycle
enough water and growing our food and so
on without adversely impacting on the
buyers but it's actually within our
product we could do this technology
not some pipe dream oh-ho actually
living in future I mean this is this is
available to us right now with current
technology properly managed properly
organized time we can feed the starving
planet just believe chuckling the thing
we are already growing plenty of food
and we haven't even started on the multi
storey high - sonic towers you know
powered by geothermal energy which has
yet to be started with you know though
there are only all of these pneumatic
potential that we haven't started to
explore yet and you know coming back to
the money thing I hate to keep using the
same job but you know there is no profit
is there a sorting many of these
problems are they don't give out it's
actually there's a financial cost
associated with building desalination
with building lots of so nearly twenty
deserts into solar farms these kinds of
things there are there are large
financial barriers currently to doing
that but fresco would say this is the
wrong kind of question do we have enough
resources to build these things do we
have the manpower do we have tail
if the answer to those questions is yes
well then let's mark the lines and get
this amount of money out of the way
identify us for talking for a long time
but I don't if you've heard this story
in America recently that the potholes
are common which town it could be
hundreds of potholes in this town stop
somebody bitumen and Nagaland working at
home we're standing around waiting to
fill these potholes in the meantime the
mayor and the states were arguing about
who's gonna pay for the 2019 state
budget of the city budget and for the
six months of they'll argue about this
hundreds of Carl Fuerst heisting snapped
axles and so on and so on and when they
finally agreed to pay for the potholes
are all fixed in a couple of days you
know and so this is arguing over who's
gonna pay for it is just such a massive
barrier to getting stuff done and
arranging what you're pointing out is
actually something if something that
benefits human beings requires money to
make plans before it's actually done
then you're you're systematic a mistake
because that's only gonna happen if this
property made and it may benefit human
beings as well that's kind of secondary
to the fact that this property may
because it would benefit human beings
but there's a negative profit
implication then the bottom part
redesign to say okay if we were given
the choice and the task of redesigning a
society then then how did you go about
you know using the current tools and the
most effective tool
how do we go about designing a system to
actually inherently human needs and is
inherently beautiful meeting me
so one rather one of the objection that
you might come across very often is that
this is a naive and utopian theory is
unachievable because it ignores basic
human nature attributes you know the
need to compete with each other for
example people people say the need to
acquire only the things people see these
as you know parts of human nature and
the trying to design a system that
doesn't have these things in it is it's
doomed to failure because it ignores you
know the absolute the absolute isn't
human nature so those sorts of reasons
well for one thing it's always the
negative stuff that people tell nature
always either greed or fair you know
some kind of you know super feeling of
superiority towards the negative stuff
whereas if we think about human behavior
human behavior reflects whatever that
social environment requires so if
there's anything really that can be said
concretely about human nature its
adaptation and that there's predictable
patterns of behavior when objective
objectively demonstrably human needs
yeah I remember really somewhere the
human making human nature is to be very
flexible
shows on something like that I'm excited
explosion but essentially what you're
saying like as human beings we you know
we're we're different in a sense that we
have a cortex which is the reason center
of the brain it's really the kind of
like the center of the brain that gives
the wisdom for the knowledge the brain
[Music]
so you know adaptation really if you
want to think about it we don't really
intend that adaptation is what
determines whether it's it's not
surviving the fittest it's by little the
most adaptable yeah and again back to
something else that I came across that
human beings are particularly
susceptible to input to them because of
the fact we are born so prematurely if
you can compare us to other mammals who
were born able to walk able to see able
to you know seek out nipples straight
away kind of thing human babies are
absolutely helpless because as we walked
on two legs pelvis is narrow as our
frontal cortex has developed head heads
got larger and the combination of these
two things marry pelvises and larger
birth death meant that we had to book be
born and much sooner than perhaps we
otherwise would have done so many human
babies are born really quite furniture
which means that they are subject to
influence from their environment at a
much much earlier stage of development
another magnetar and therefore the sorry
to be becoming a bit of a long question
but therefore the responsibility placed
on the parents and the society at large
for the early development of that child
are enormous right absolutely
and it's in a lot of ways it's
surprising how we've been able to muddle
through so with with so many things at
stake in terms of us about survival it's
it's amazing that we really have gotten
through it for one thing it's a
testament
how jewel we are as expenses how much we
can actually take but yeah you're like
the the responsibility upon preparedness
is larger than people actually do
appreciate the influence during our
pre-linguistic first couple years
underpin yeah yeah we the idea is that
human needs must be left at all points
in life and maybe in turn certain times
especially yeah and more and more with
more impact during those formative years
is when if there are certain amounts of
neglect or suffering during those
formative years then those have ripple
effects you know later on in life that
you know previously were under single
but now they're actually seen more it
does give more credence to the idea that
the social system that we have really
does need to thank those human need
- you know hoist too much of respond not
not just a leader but even more than
that they need to be placed at the very
very very setback and the concept of
sustainability those two things need to
be social and environmental
[Applause]
[Music]
[Laughter]
[Music]
[Music]
responsibility
absolutely so yeah we want one I know
that one of the things that you do on
the encourage of a couple of years where
the things that you do is you go out and
puts falls off his high streets and
offer people three hugs right so what's
the purpose of that day then and she
pops especially firstly what what is the
purpose of that how does it go down kind
of thing and secondly do you think that
there's a danger that things like that
might devalue the impedance or the
gravity of the purpose of the really
very central to that campaign that was
started really just to just help
brighten brighten people's day you know
the idea of physical contact and
affection it's something very very
essential to to the human experience
being a social species the recognition
that there are strangers safe
it's a connection it really helps so
like you know food stuff
[Music]
assisting and even even if people don't
come for her lady and even if only makes
her smile they smile yeah it definitely
does help but for the people you know
the one question I got the month when I
was giving out free hugs is why I do
this and one thing is how bright you can
stay but also fact that they've they
come in and they're now curious about
why I'm doing what I do it definitely
opens the door to say well you know
we've we've shared a moment of actual
life in a platonic affection and and we
should really have a social system that
really does value that definitely does
open the door to discussing about
resource based economy and you know why
we should actually move towards that so
I I think it definitely doesn't detract
from the
[Music]
what a partner versus yeah I think it's
a I think it's a very valid expression
of that that new value system of saying
very much like some of the experiments
I've seen where they they put up a sign
by their pin saying you know I trust you
can you trust me and they put a
blindfold on and just hold their arms
and people come up to them so it's a
demonstration of how you know despite
the you know interesting kind of videos
of my interest it seems to be the people
who have experienced poverty themselves
are generous and most of never
experiencing these just experiments go
out in the street give a couple of
burgers to a homeless guy and
I mean pick up those and I suppose you'd
share your burgers and they you know the
guy living on the street will happily
share one of the two loaders he's been
given but you go around and ask people
sitting in cafes and restaurants or if
you prefer a father and you just get
nowhere so you know I find I find that
very interesting that those in Tennessee
that this would be the tiny sample I
don't know that one can generalize from
there but it does seem like a place of
that the people who a much lower down
economic starter in the economic the
stratification inclined to be generous
with what they feel that they have yes
it completely flies in place
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
but the human character so you think
that's because they're more aware of the
need because they in fear of themselves
in their everyday lives in your family I
probably that and it's also because the
their their consciousness is zeroed in
completely its life I think the kind of
social propensity we have the social
attention
[Music]
[Music]
see this not only what we do to put
money okay I think that's probably a
pretty good spot to end up so thank you
very much indeed thank you
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]