[Music]
and you guys are doing this I started a
similar process for the cognitive
science program with their students
Association Casas and that is turned
into fruition so what I want to talk
today about are the problems of
transformation and aspiration in the
psychology of growth I'm going to start
opportune for me to set up a bunch of
problems that confront us when we want
to talk about growth and unchanging non
trivial fashion so this what I'm going
to do not all of this overview will make
sense but I'll give you a sense of
what's coming I'm going to talk about
the problem with transformation the
central problem I'm going to ask is is
it a rational process is it ultimately a
cognitive process then we move on to
aspiration and the problem with
concluding that development is an
irrational process
the third thing will be to move on to a
discussion of a non inferential form of
rationality that is relevant to
transformation that aspiration but that
will then take us into another problem
the problem of the paradox of self
creation I will then move on to build
the case for how we could potentially
overcome the problem these are all
conceptual problems of course with the
problem of self creation will talk about
dynamical self-organization will talk
about self dissection of the interval
development then I want to get you so
Marc Lewis's work on reciprocal
narrowing and talk about its converse
reciprocal opening and then move on to
discussing enacted analogy as a solution
to the kind of ignorance by the
regulators we find problematic within
transformation so most of that was like
what I extracted they so let's start
with something while the government's
concrete but it's it's at least usually
more interesting so this goes to the
seminal work how they all who literally
wrote the book on transform
experience entitled transformative
experience and I think it's a very
important book and I thought had the
pleasure to meet and work with Lori so
let's start with a thought experiment
experiment establish beautiful result
from this experiment the point of the
thought experiment is to highlight what
is normally backgrounded and bringing
some of our unquestioned intuitions in
deployment so here's the thought
experiment that she uses it involved
your friends come to you and they offer
you offer you just into little evidence
that they can get the follow they can
turn you into a vampire and then she
asked you should you do it should you do
it now what's the problem what's the
problem with this well the problem with
this and we're gonna build this so let's
unpack that this is not going when it's
white this has to do with respect tattle
knowing this is knowing what it's like
there's knowing what it's like to be
drunk knowing what it's like to be sober
it's bound out with a state of
consciousness rather than
a set of beliefs so what are you doing
your perspective annoying well I'm doing
it right now I'm salience landscaping
things are said it's then they felt to
me as salient and this is dynamically
shifting when I turn my attention to her
she stands out she things but now she
stands out of she fades so there's that
dynamic salience landscaping that's
going on I constantly sighs what makes
me call sizing up I'm picking up
particular features I'm for grounding
some background in some others and of
the ones that for grounding I'm
configuring them together and the way
I've configured them together it brings
in what Marlo Conte called optimal grip
so I'm sort of moving around objects to
try and get the best balance between the
detail and the overall I can't never get
all of the information too close too
much detail too far away to get the
gestalt I lose too much and I'm always
shifting around and that shifts
according to you know what problems I
fix that means I'm also a sexualizing
things when I'm seeing everything I'm
seeing it is something I'm seeing this
electronic table all of that is
happening right now right that's aliens
landscaping that sizing up that optimal
thing that specialization now what does
that give me that gives me a sense of
here now what you'd like to be here now
and things are centered on me in that
here now that's what we mean by
perspective we use an aesthetic metaphor
like perspective and painting to try and
talked about the here nowness the way
things are salience landscape sized up a
specialized center it on a point of view
and have the way everything is fitted
together we write we commitment we know
how to manipulate this reliably for
example within psychology we can do
what's called construe level
manipulation so this is a robust finding
in psychology that when
people level of construal that has
significant effects on their cognition
this goes back to an age of practice
from the Stoics called the view from
above I can ask you to sort of imagine
yourself in this room and then imagine
yourself sort of above Toronto was
seeing all Toronto
imagine yourself above the country and
imagine yourself above the planet the
solar system and I can actually also get
you to imagine yourself and what happens
is as I alter your perspective your
sense of identity and your sense of
what's relevant and significant what's
four grounded in background about life
now has huge impacts on your cognitions
as a reliable finding what does this
respect I will give you I'll give you
what your what they look for when
they're trying to make virtual games
when they're trying to make you know
games in virtual reality
that it's most sought after thing is a
sense of presence it's a sense of being
there being here now in the game and
things in the game being here now to you
this is that sense of presence so when I
talked about perspective of knowing
that's what I'm talking about and you
don't have you don't know what what kind
of perspective of knowing you have as a
vampire a perspective of knowing matters
because it really gives you your
situational awareness that tells you
what kills skills you can acquire in
this situation what skills you can apply
in a situation so I don't know what it's
like to be a vampire in that very deep
and important sense I don't know I'm
ignorant of the perspective of knowing
what it's like to be a vampire but
there's another kind of knowing that's
missing I don't know who I'm going to be
this is your participatory knowing
knowing who you are this is knowing by
being I know that I'm Jon by being Jon
it's not just a set of beliefs I
instantiate my identity
I don't just have to go the way I have
beliefs about what's going on in who you
are well there's a continual process of
CO identification
I'm always right now I'm a speaker and
you are an audience I'm not always a
speaker and the people are related to
are not always audiences if I go home
and talk to my partner like this things
are going to portable okay so there's
always an agent I'm assuming the
identity of a particular agent
I'm always signing and what that does is
if open ups of it opens up affordances
between us the affordance this is a
notion from Gibsons before this is
something that's not in me or in the
object but in the way for example let's
do biologically the way evolution has
shaped me and from each construction the
way organisms human beings have shaped
the environment so the biology and the
environment fit together notice that we
have this environment laid out in a
particular way because it affords me
walking around and talking to you
it doesn't afford me flying in because
I'm not a bird but if a bird is here
there'd be there'd be flying affordances
so victims time once famously said and
this would get back to vampires
even if lions could speak we wouldn't
understand what does he mean by that
he means their biological heritage and
the way they shaped the environment and
the way the environment shaped them
gives them a particular pattern of
affordances that I don't have so they
have agent arena relationships that I
don't have because I can't get in
relationships and find those affordances
they don't affect my perspective of
knowing because that those affordances
actually constrain my perspective on
them and so the Lions have a different
age in a relationship and that means
what they find salient and relevant and
important is very different so even if
they could speak it wouldn't make any
sense to me but what is the case for the
Lions is of course the case for vampires
respectable knowing makes us
situationally aware of which affordances
can be appropriated by our skills to
solve our problems so we have this
biocultural niche making that makes
affordances and then I respect how
annoying select of those ones that are
appropriate right now for solving my
problems that's respectable and
participatory knowing and it's exactly
what you laugh with respect to the
vampire so let me give you a comparison
to some more standard kinds of known
just to draw out of what Le Paul is
trying to get us to for it round which
we want a background is what we normally
foreground especially in psychology is
propositional more than procedural
matter so propositional knowing this is
you know propositions are statements
that can be true or false these are of
course prized in science propositional
knowing we manipulate compositions by
inference the results our beliefs may be
collated into theories and you are
guided by a sense of conviction the
conviction I'm convinced I'm convinced
by that argument adopt that belief
that's different from procedural knowing
that's knowing how when how to catch a
ball you know how to ride a bike
this is manipulated by sensory motor
interaction it gives you doesn't give
you beliefs or theories it gives you
skills and expertise and it's
accompanied by a sense of power it's
guided by sense of power
perspective of knowing is manipulated by
attention and awareness as I've
indicated it gives you your situational
awareness and it's guided by a sense of
presence your participatory knowing is
manipulated by various agent arena
restructurings
it gives you affordances and it's guided
by a sense of belonging you belong here
ok so now that we got try to the guts of
what Paul's 22
which the thought experiment does two
things if foregrounds the perspective
open the participatory knowing and then
it shows us how we have a special kind
of ignorance therefore when we finish
this decision we are respectfully
ignorant and we lack participatory
knowing we don't know what it'll be
whether it's going to be like to be a
vampire and we don't know who we're
going to be and this is deeply important
to our agency you say so what well le
Paul's example right he's designed to to
sort of set you up because she says the
vampire example is actually deeply
analogous to many real-world situations
you're going to face here's one child
because before you have a child you do
not know what it's going to be like to
be a parent being a child gives you no
perspective of knowing of what it's like
to be a parent you don't know who you're
going to be because having a child
changes your preferences and your values
and even your sense of identity you
can't live in a purely egocentric manner
anymore it just doesn't work so you
don't know what it's gonna be like you
don't know who you're going to be decide
you enter into a room and a deep
long-lasting romantic relationship with
somebody you don't know what it's going
to be like you don't know who you're
going to be decide to dig up about
entirely new career no it's gonna be
like you're gonna be decide to move to
another culture don't know what it's
gonna be like you don't know
so how you should be a little bit more
concerned because these are some of the
most important decisions you actually
will make in your life now here's what's
problematic about all of this
that perspectival and participatory
ignorance means according to Paul that
we cannot apply standard decision-making
procedures how are we supposed to
probably told like sort of in the
academic literature how do we make a
rational decision what we do is we
assign a probability to the outcome and
then we assign a value to the income and
then we calculate you know usually it's
some you know multiplication function
probability x value and then I can
compare all the other pumps and the one
with the highest product that's the one
I should choose and it's all calculated
it's all computational it's all
inferential it's beautiful and it can't
work in the situations I just pointed
out to you why because you're ignorant
you don't know the incomes you don't
know the outcomes until you've already
gone through the transformation you
don't know the values cuz your values
are not going to be constant from here
and there you're going to be a different
person with a different set of
preferences and different set of values
and notice that the ignorance goes both
ways we've said well I shouldn't do it
but then you don't know what you missing
well that I should do it but then you
don't know what you're going to be
losing
so it looks like this is what Lori seems
to conclude there's no influential way
through such transformative decisions I
want to not take an independent argument
and strengthen employers argument this
is an earlier argument when I presented
this for the person she's others do
there's an argument from jelly fuller so
first of all let's make a distinction
because Fodor is criticizing Piaget
who's you know behind all of this
conference and so we need to invoke when
a piace is no distinction is a
conceptual distinction between
qualitative change quantitative change
and qualitative change so quantitative
change is the increase in concept this
is the idea you can use the same
function and constantly acquire new
information so let's say all think about
all the information I can acquire suit
through an alphabetic literacy and it
can keep acquiring more and more and
more information that's quantitative
qualitative change which of course is
central to Piaget theory of development
because he has a stage one alert
development and the difference between
the stages are qualitative qualitative
change is an increased on in just
content more importantly it is an
increase in competence it's an increase
not in how much but an how many kinds of
things can be knowing no it's in what
you're doing is increasing the kinds of
things you can know by adding new
functions so for example compare that
first situation where I stick with
literacy and all of the information I
can represent with now this situation I
have literacy and then I added Cartesian
graphing now I can represent all kinds
of information that I couldn't represent
before
because I have a Cartesian graphing a
new function that's qualitative change
does that make sense and it would really
talking about transformation and growth
development in a way that we find
interesting then I think what we're
almost always talking about and assuming
exists is qualitative change but Fodor
famously claimed the Piaget's whole idea
of qualitative change and qualitative
development was false why would he come
to such a strong conclusion well one is
that he's Jerry P was Jerry Fodor than
sort of always came to strong
conclusions about everything you don't
want to have dinner with Jake food so
let's take three o'clock photos the
employer famously was of the opinion
that cognition is computation that a
cognitive process is a computational
process what does he mean by that he
means the inferential manipulation of
propositions that's what computation is
prepared the inferential manipulation of
propositions that means you're using
some kind of formal system you're using
a logic a logic is a formal system for
guiding how you inferential e manipulate
propositions that's what a logic is okay
so what does further unexplained well
let's get the notion that we need to
talk about the strength of a logic
because blood is getting weaker or
stronger what makes a logic stronger a
logic is stronger if you can represent
more kinds of arguments think about
think about how this is matching up with
qualitative change a stronger logic can
represent more kinds of arguments it can
implement more kinds of programs so a
very weak logic is propositional logic
that's when you use variables like a or
B to stand for entire compositions and
the problem with that is there's many
kinds of arguments you can't represent
you can't represent arguments that make
use of things like all or some because
prop is propositional logic can't
distinguish between all the time so what
you do is to a stronger logic called
predicate logic the predicate logic
gives you ways of representing things
like all or some arguments based on like
all you know all cars are catalyzed some
Cadillacs are broken does that mean all
cars are broken the problem with that
logic is its weak in the sense that it
can't represent other important kinds of
arguments you want to make you make
arguments that rely on necessity versus
contingency it is necessarily the case
that versus it is only possible that and
so in order to do that you have down
what's called modal logic you see how
each logic is stronger than the logic
before it because each logic can
represent more kinds of arguments than
the logic before so if cognition is
computation if cognition is largely the
inferential manipulation of propositions
to change belief if that's the cognition
is that qualitative change is has to be
from a weaker logic to a stronger logic
that's how you make the qualitative
change in cognition to a stronger logic
because what I'm doing is I'm adding
functions so further I think very
correctly argues that if you think
cognition is solely computation the
inferential manipulation of proposition
by belief and the only thing that
motivates us are our beliefs and our
desires all right then I think he's
right that qualitative development would
mean a change from a weaker logic to a
stronger logic okay and that is what he
does to get you standing on a rug many
people there he says but notice there is
no inferential way to go from a weaker
logic to a stronger logic there is no
way within propositional logic to
manipulate it and get predicate logic or
manipulate the propositions within
predicate logic and get more logic what
does that mean it means that there's no
inferential way to go through
development there's no computational way
to go through development and this would
apply to things that are becoming very
important right now
like Bayesian inference models of
development
now if cognitions computation and
there's no inferential way to go through
it then there is there's no cognitive
way to go through development so Cotto
concludes there's no such thing as
development a question that comes to
mind is let's say the foot is wrong in
there is development absurd but does his
argument therefore compel us to include
because well we might think is well
wedding win at bat choses that
transformation is an inherently
irrational process it's an inherently
irrational process and it's an
inherently non cognitive process there
is no cognitive process through there
there is no rationality governing
transformation and we might be tempted
here as our culture is primarily towards
a kind of philosophical Romanticism
that's very problematic concluding
concluding that transformation is non
positive and irrational is deeply
programmatic this goes to an argument by
Agnes Keller in her book aspiration
let's talk about stuff that we'll talk
about a very important kind of
transformation especially the kind of
thing
we're alluding to when we use the word
growth and this is self-driven
transformation when you are driving
yourself through transformation she has
a name for that process she calls it
aspiration of the title of her book so
what happens in aspiration let's say
here's my current self I don't like I
don't like classical music but I want to
be a music appreciation understanding
and then that results in a new already
had and there are many things that have
that feature to engaging in a liberal
education she famously argues it's
another example of this right if I was
my goal in setting education is to
become a better person self-improvement
that I'm engaged in aspiration okay now
the next argument I've done of me I
can't actually find you're explicitly
making it anywhere I think she should
make it and I think it's directly
implied by the argument she makes but
I'm gonna make the honor the half
because I think it strengthens for
position because I think we can
immediately ask yourself is what about
the aspiration to rationality and to
wisdom because one of the things I
aspire to be is to be a more rational
one of the things I aspire to be is to
be more wise all of you I believe want
to be less irrational and less foolish
yes
I notice how that's the transformative
process now let's put this together
if that transformative process is
inherently irrational and non-cognitive
because we've adopted romanticism but
the problem we get into because it means
the aspiration to rationality and wisdom
is itself irrational and non-cognitive
if I am aspiring to become rational
which would put me through a
transformative process and we've
concluded that transformation is
inherently irrational notice what I'm
getting into I'm getting into the
attempt to become more rational is
itself irrational which is a
performative contradiction
it's a performative contradiction it
would make the attempt to achieve the
rationality performative lis impossible
because you should be more rational
right so you know what you should do you
should aspire to be more rational
oh I can't do that
notice that being rational would be
couldn't be a normative ideal for you a
normative ideal I'm using normative in
the philosophical sense not
psychological all implies in if I say
you ought to do this it implies that you
can do it
so I say to you you ought to become more
rational that means you can do it but
given the performative contradiction you
can't
therefore rationality also becomes an
epistemic self-contradiction rationality
makes no sense as an ideal if we exclude
aspiration from rationality and thereby
exclude transformation from rationality
we will call all of rationality into
question deeply profoundly that would
undermine science because we recommend
science precisely because we claim it is
a rational way for improving our
capacity to overcome self-deception as
we attempt to improve our beliefs
so Keller I think correctly concludes
that aspiration has to be a kind of
rationality she calls it collective
rationality she calls it collective
rationality it is a non inferential it's
a non inferential rationality it does
not consist of arguments to change
belief we've already rejected that this
proleptic rationality that the fact that
it's non intervention makes sense since
it applies to non propositional knowing
it is not applying to propositional
knowing it is applying to respectable
and participatory knowing which don't
work in terms of the inferential
manipulation of compositions instead
it's going to be due to changes in
attention and changes in our patterns of
attention and our patterns of Co
identification that change consciousness
and change character and thereby change
their self when I'm trying to change our
beliefs we're trying to change our self
blends us into another paradox in
problem this is the paradox of self
creation the color it gets from Strasse
the paradox of self creation what's the
paradox of sub creation will have to do
with the fact that the self is not based
on logical identity notice again how
logic isn't going to work for us here if
I want look I will do things like this I
will pick up a picture of myself as a
five-year-old and say oh there I am
in Dundas and you don't look at me into
what others are that person is so much
smaller than you so much under you and
you are in Toronto and there
how can that be you silly silly John and
notice she wouldn't accept the reverse
there is no atom in my body that I've
had that's been in my body for more than
seven years that means I would you
accept this in a court of law
well I killed her ten years ago no atoms
in my body were present ten years ago I
the identity of the self is not logical
identity it's not logical identity we
the self is identical because of a
continuity of a causal continuity
there's a causal continuity between that
John and this jump that's important for
the paradox
okay so here's current self trying to
create future self yes but its current
self causes future self there's cause of
continuity yes or no yes or no yes if
this for itself causes the futures up
there's continuity so it's the same self
so there's been no news on me there's no
growth so same so ah but what did happen
is something external to the self
actually introduces the needed novelty
but then it's not soft creation at all
it's something other than me has driven
the creation and can't get self and
creation together according to this
problem the self doesn't there's no
creation if there's creation and the
self that's lost
another way of putting this and I think
this is helpful there's no subjective or
objective way to drive self-creation
there's no subjective in itself or
objective from outside of the self way
to drive self creation and if you think
that's exhaustive then there's no such
thing as bro you should pack it all up
and go home okay let's try and take this
in stages the paradox of self creation
so let's let's take a look at
development so mayor Shulman Schultz
actually responded to voters claim that
there can be no qualitative change and
they actually produced an answer what's
the answer they did produce an
inferential process they produced a
neural network and that can alter its
own architecture so they created a
dynamical self-organization that changed
the confidence of the network now what's
interesting is when you move to the idea
of development being inherently
dynamical relying on processes that are
inherently self-organizing notice what's
happening because when a system is
self-organizing there is no deep
distinction between its function and its
development it can't develop without
functioning and it can't function
without development you can't get the
separation between function and
development that photo watts the further
needs because when things are
self-organizing there's simultaneously
functioning and development that's the
essential feature of a self-organizing
system let's also expand the notion of
rationality we have to if we're going to
follow what Calvert is that it will pull
up digression ality let's instead of
thinking about it as just logical
guidance of argumentation let's think of
rationality as a systematic and reliable
practice or set of practices for
reducing self-deception and affording
problem-solving and we can get at what
does rationality more specifically means
if we look for what does self-deception
look like in dynamical development in
development that's based on the idea of
a self-organizing process what does
self-deception look like in there well
this goes to the work of my friend and
colleague who used to be a Boise right
Marc Lewis Mark Lewis and I've seen him
if that's augment been at a conference
where there was like a symposium on this
I can't review all of this evidence here
there's a huge amount of evidence that
our standard medical model of addiction
just as the rock is not well supported
by the data well supported by
governments in terms of funding it's not
well supported by the data so mark has
been arguing for a learning model with
the committee calls reciprocal narrowly
reciprocal narrowing and notice how this
is going to make use of prospective
travel and participatory Noah so here I
am
I'd say some alcohol and that alters my
cognition and finally to solve problems
so I have fewer options in the world the
arena shrinks for me there's fewer
things I can solve through those I can
achieve i internalize that because ages
an arena are always tied enta fide i
internalize that and so I lose some
cognitive flexibility as I lose
cognitive flexibility my ability to
solve problems in the world goes down so
the world starts to shrink the options
available to me shrink my cognitive
flexibility shrinkage do you see what's
happening here you get a reciprocal
narrowing until agency and arena
reciprocally narrow until I can see no
alternatives in the world and I can
there's no I can't be anything other
than this and then they are now in the
compulsive state of an atom reciprocal
going right there and that's the kind of
self-deception you can get in doors with
Marquette lunch my set but more mark if
it can reciprocally narrow down like
that it has to be able to do the office
anyway
Plato talked about this when he talked
about this might put a process he called
an agave this reciprocal opening where
there's transformation to my cognition
that disclosed deeper aspects of the
world that gets internalized and to me
and discloses deeper aspects of me so
that my cognition now becomes more
powerful and that discloses deeper
aspects of the world and goes like this
and you know what that's like because
that's what happens when you fall in
love with somebody because what predicts
falling in love with somebody is
mutually accelerating disclosure and
that's how you go through that
transformation and so you go through
that transformation you see we can get
simultaneously a solution to the paradox
of self creation and the implementation
of collective rationality together let's
put it together
the self functions by developing and it
develops by functioning and the self is
neither purely subjectively active nor
is it just purely objectively passive
instead term I'm trying to get people to
use arguing for elsewhere the self is
transductive lee emergent transductive
means between the subject
and the objective the real dynamic
coupling between that I've been
emphasizing in perspectival and
especially in participatory knowing the
self is friends actively convergent and
that self can pursue that rationally if
it gets that process in reciprocal
opening the opposite of the
self-deceptive self destructive of
reciprocal narrow this is how we can
rationally go through self
transformation self transcendence you
might say we there's still one piece
missing that that bi-directional
ignorance le Paul talked about you don't
know what you're missing you don't know
what you're losing when I thought about
that I thought well what do people
actually do how do people actually do I
know some people just have kids without
thought but we think it's a bad thing
people are considering having a child
and then they'll get a dog and then
things with the dog they'll get family
pictures with the dog and they'll dress
the dogs off and attack the dog in
vacation and they get the dog toys it's
a yeah or what about you considering
entering into a long-term romantic
relationship I've actually been given
this advice go on a long trip with the
person
there's a new form of game and
submerging this Indonesian countries
it's called cheap form so it's
live-action roleplay
but unlike dungeon the Dragons where
you're an elf or a fairy or something
like that what happens in G performing
is you're your real people in a real
situation and instead of a dungeon
master there's a director and the
director will cut scenes give you things
and tell you to use them as props get
you to switch roles and what you're
doing is you're acting I was socially
messy and emotionally charged situations
okay and what are they what are they
trying to get there trying to get a
phenomenon called bleed bleed is when
the difference between the game and real
life blurs and you are no longer telling
if your play-acting in the game or
enacting your actual emotions and
concerns thereafter the lead what are
all these examples of how human beings
tackle this what humans do is they
pursue not propositional they pursue an
active analogy they engage in serious
play they get into the end of this place
where they're their true agenda faced
with in a liminal place they get into
play that allows them to maintain
contact with the identity in the world
they have or are but it gives them a
perspective of participatory taste of
what it would be like to be married to
that person what it would be like to
have a child what it would be like to be
on the other side of this challenging
emotionally fraught situation so they
haven't over committed but they're not
ignorant they seriously play within that
analogy now analogy and propositional
argumentation is considered generally
weak argumentation orders are being
irrational but that standard should not
be applied to perspective on a
participatory knowing enacted analogy is
a very rational thing to be doing very
rational when you are trying to get to a
place where you can judge between two
worlds that's why serious plate is so
important that's what human beings keep
defaulting to it as a strategy for
trying to deal with this bi-directional
thickness you'll notice we can put these
two things together these two rational
processes this process of an acog a
reciprocal opening and this process of
enacted analogy we do that in therapy
with people we try to get them into
reciprocal opening and we do we announce
as therapists we do an active analogy
with them it's a rational thing to do
it's a rational way to bring people
through self transformation I think
that's how we can address and I've even
heard you to solve key conceptual
problems facing us transformation
[Applause]
well it's important to know this
information for example when you
consider any of these transformative
decisions you're trying to make if
you're gonna have a child you want to
maybe engage in an active analogy you
want to try and see if you're getting
into a process of reciprocal opening
rather than reciprocal narrowing
so it's actually intended to be very
practical advice for how you should try
to rationally frame each of these major
decisions that you're going into in your
life so yeah and so I think this is
equivalent to a recommendation in
argumentation you know good you have to
get some skilled practice in
argumentation like that logic before you
apply your arguments evaluate and I
think we what you need therefore is a
lot of skill to practice in an active
analogy in order to make judgments about
this we do reliably make judgments about
this there's a lot of work John Kennedy
Dan Jaffe two colleagues that might have
done showing that human beings actually
have very fine main abilities to judge
how a metaphor is how good it is these
are largely intuitive but they are
reliable and they may explain the
variation in people's performance so we
could learn to explicate
abilities and so people could more
reflectively apply those skills would we
ever get perfection no but we don't get
perfection anyway so you can't have us
up to that standard
can we reliably improve it yeah seems
very plausible to me with that we can I
think therefore people in fact of doing
in G for me that's whether the directors
there the director is actually a
metacognitive prosthesis right
the director is there to get people to
sort of switch roles and reflect on the
perspective of and participatory knowing
and they're playing the games again and
again and again because they're trying
to cultivate the skill and improve it
yes right so don't hold me to that
standard cuz it's unfair so what I want
to say is that a transgender for nomina
is one in which we don't try and talk
about just States in the brain for
states in the world or States in the
mind or States in the environment if you
want to be other biological or
functional instead we talked about
what's actually a premier way of talking
down what's called for a cognitive
science we talked about how the MA how
the mind brain is inherently embedded
embodied enacted right you're talking
about the fact that the mind is in here
it's not in the world it's between you
and the world it's co-created by you and
the world just like the affordances are
they in the world know are the in the
organism know they're in a real
relationship between the organism in the
world that's what I mean by transductive
could you speak more loudly please
[Music]
yeah yeah so that goes towards somebody
else's work and they're both here
Michele Ferrari engine Sun which is
about how we educate for wisdom because
I think part of what we have been
talking about what we're talking about
wisdom as distinct from knowledge is our
perspective all have participatory ways
of grasping the significance and
relevance of what me of what knowledge
you possess I think that's a big role of
what wisdom is and I think what you're
then asking is how can we start
educating for wisdom and you have two of
the experts about that topic in the room
with you so I would direct you to them
excuse me I didn't hear the first word
yeah it's called it's called the virtual
Exodus yes oh yeah oh yeah so I hope I
didn't mislead you I wasn't trying to
suggest that the prep the sense of
presence in virtual reality
should be given any kind of prepper
preference all I was saying is people
seek it and that means it's it's deep
it's in a deep and important value to
the sense of presence really matters to
them now can it be hijacked like virtual
reality yes it can
interesting questions come out I've
given up I gave a talk at you to some
about this because you might ask what is
it in virtual virtual reality that gives
a sense of presence you might think