[Music]
Robert Keegan has been a pioneering
developmental psychologist at Harvard
since the 1970s in the tradition of the
likes of Jean Piaget his major insight
was to show how development went far
beyond adolescence and into adulthood
his models lay out the major processes
of development from impulsive self
interest to socialized mind self
authoring and self transforming mind so
Bob it's a real pleasure to speak with
you it's same David for our audience
we've done a recent couple of films that
were quite popular with Ken Wilber
introducing the concept of developmental
theory and you're you teach
developmental theory at Harvard and
unknown is sort of one of the biggest
one of the most reputed figures in the
field
how would you wires developmental theory
important in a way developmental theory
is just helping us to better understand
our fullest possibilities so you know a
caterpillar is not meant to die as a
caterpillar it has a destiny to grow
wings and fly the developmental theory
is just part of a bigger mission to
encourage the greater realization of
human potential so that fewer and fewer
of our brothers and sisters die as
caterpillars and more of us become
butterflies could you briefly outline
your model and how it differs from other
models I mean people might be familiar
with say Abraham Maslow's hierarchy of
needs where at the bottom we have
sustenance at the top we have
self-actualization I guess that was the
most sort of that was probably the one
that made developmental thinking popular
in the 70s and people might be familiar
with Ken Wilbur's model as well what are
the stages in your model and does it map
on to those at all
well maybe in different ways
my theory is often referred to as a
constructive developmental theory which
means that it kind of brings together
two very powerful ideas the first is
constructivism the notion that reality
doesn't just sort of happen up to us
preformed one of the things we do as
human beings is give shape to raw
experience and make it into something
meaningful for us and that idea of
constructivism runs through many many
different psychological and
philosophical orientations then another
very very big idea is the notion of
developmental ism that is that living
organisms and systems including human
beings don't just grow in the sense of
getting bigger and bigger we evolve
become more complex I mean when a baby
is born when you were born David your
head was 1/3 the size of your body just
like every other infant but as we grow
you know I don't become you know 6 foot
and have a two-foot head all right so
there's a way in which we we grow
through stages that kind of form and and
reform now if you take the idea of
constructivism the notion that we're
making meaning of things and the notion
of developmental ism and put them
together you begin to get this idea that
the very way in which we construct
reality itself transforms across
different stages so there are in other
words different logics that gradually
develop over time if you if you will or
we call them psycho logics because we're
talking about kind of the essence of
psychology and that and that growing in
our meaning-making or even in our wisdom
is not about just knowing more and more
through a given logic but actually
having the underlying logic itself
become more and more common
in a way to borrow a phrase from my
friend ken wilber that transcends but
includes the prior logic so 10 I think
is one of the great synthetic thinkers
on the planet and he brings together a
whole lot of different wisdom traditions
and in Western academia would be more
lines of research and I think one of the
most useful of his heuristics is that
kind of for box model that kind of
underlies the notion of taking a more
integrated or holistic perspective on
any phenomenon and those four boxes
which I'm sure many of those looking at
this are familiar with but just in case
they're not as kind of just think about
the difference between the individual
level and the collective level and then
think about the difference between the
interior and the exterior and that gives
you these four boxes now if you zoom in
on one of those quadrants thinking about
the interior development of the
individual that's the box in which you
know I spent the first part of my
professional life working largely as a
theorist to better understand the
gradual evolutions of interior
individual development standing
initially on the shoulders of of Jean
Piaget the Swiss psychologist who was
the first to kind of elucidate stages of
child development and in particular the
ways the children organized the physical
world and kind of their cognition and my
work has been to widen the aperture from
cognition to the ways in which we
organize all the primary quadrants of
personality how we think yes but also
how we feel how we construct our social
relations with others and how we
construct our interior relationships too
of ourselves and so my theory kind of
opened the aperture beyond just
cognition and then extended the study
beyond children and adolescence which is
kind of where Piaget ended to sort of
consider the question you know is there
life after adolescence and can we
actually continue to grow
psychologically even when we've reached
our full height physically I mean
literally when I started graduate school
at Harvard in the 1970s if you were a
developmental psychologist it meant you
studied infants children or adolescents
end of story
because that was the period the first 20
years of life let's say when we believed
psychological development actually
occurred we'd yoked our notions of
physical development to psychological
development and just as most of us reach
our full physical stature let's say in
our 20s early 20s it was believed that
that was kind of the end state for the
development of the of the brain even and
brain scientists were very adamant you
know what are we talking about 40 years
ago now maybe that there were no further
qualitative transformations and in brain
material after about the first 20 years
of life and our research and my
colleagues and I basically never felt
that seemed very sensible I mean just by
common sense you live among adults and
you see that some people seem to be kind
of making meaning and qualitative
qualitatively perceiving the world and
at a greater depth you know than others
and so we began to kind of explore all
that and and today you know and I have
many friends who are you know quote hard
scientists neuroscientists and you know
today they have recanted that kind of
constricted dogma and all talk now about
the phenomenal neuroplasticity of the
brains kind of one of the few instances
in which the
scientist psychologists were actually
maybe a bit out ahead of the hard
scientists that's Norman Doidge for
example the brain that changes itself
and the idea of neuroplasticity yeah
yeah thinking fast thinking slow Connor
men I mean I think that all of
Neurosciences were canted the notion
that you know the brain is basically
done in terms of its development I mean
even then of course people probably
would grant this notion that some people
seem to be wiser than others but they
they attributed that largely to the fact
that some people were getting more out
of the same equipment than other people
and that experience of course matters
and so some people are wiser not because
they're actually kind of making sense of
the world with an upgraded system but
rather that they're just learning how to
get more out of the same system and I
think what what what we've come to show
is no the the system itself which we
have long understood those through
qualitative transformations in childhood
and adolescence Contini has the
potential to continue transforming on
into our 30s and 40s and 50s and 60s and
Beyond and could you outline what the
the basic distinctions are in the model
I'm aware of some of the terms you talk
about the socialized mind and the self
authoring mind for example could you
outline what those are and what those
mean sure so I'll give you a concrete
example since these things are often
like pictures worth a thousand words I
was talking with a social worker the
other day who works with adolescents who
have come out of the court system and
who've committed you know crimes and so
on and she was talking about a young man
you know maybe 16 17 years old who had a
record of auto theft and she'd been
working you know with them and
she told me about a session she had with
him where he he came to her and said you
know you'd be proud of me because I do
still I know I shouldn't but I still do
hang out with a number of rough friends
who could easily get me in trouble
and you know just this weekend I was
hanging out with them and they wanted
they wanted to wanted me to join them in
stealing a car and ordinarily you know I
might have just gone along with that and
because of our work together you know I
didn't I'm really glad to hear about
that you know so tell me a little bit
more he said well you know they wanted
me to steal this car and I i I was going
to and I stopped and I thought to myself
if I steal this car there's a very good
chance we're gonna get caught if I get
caught because I'm on probation unlike
these other friends you know they're
gonna get let off I'm gonna go back to
jail and she said that she said and well
you know I'm really I'm really glad
burned that you you know didn't steal
the car but I have to be honest and say
that I wished the reason you chosen not
to steal the car was not just that if
you did you might go to jail but because
you gave some thought to kind of how
that person would feel and the fact that
his car's not your car and then he would
naturally feel bad and she said he just
looked right at me and he said yes but
I'm not there yet and she she sat back
and she thought you know that was a
beautiful answer that she was and he was
being absolutely truthful and that her
hope for him was a little further ahead
of kind of where he was and you know she
was kind of telling a story on herself
kind of saying how you know you can
learn from your clients even from your
16 year old clients now when he said I'm
not quite there yet from a
developmentalist point of view we would
also feel like he was telling a very
important truth what are you saying was
just give me credit for the fact I
didn't steal the car by but my
underlying logic is still about what's
my best interest and the reason I didn't
steal it was because I had at least
enough foresight to consider that I
could get caught I could get sent to
jail that is itself a given stage of
development it is the stage that comes
before the socialized mind which she was
hoping for was a qualitatively different
stage where people live not only to
pursue their own interests and kind of
look at others as sort of opportunities
to get their own needs met or obstacles
to getting their needs met but where you
actually begin to internalize something
of the the values and beliefs of others
around you it starts with your your
society as that make it conveyed through
your immediate family or your faith
community others beyond it and
eventually there's the possibility that
I start relating to others family
members friends society not just in
terms of you know getting my own needs
met but where I actually become more a
part of society because society has
become more a part of me I begin to
internalize the values beliefs and
expectations of important people around
me we call that the socialized mind
because you begin to develop the
internal psychology that permits
socialization that permits you to become
a member of a tribe that permits you to
become a part of a community of interest
larger than what larger than your own
self-interest where you will be able to
actually subordinate some of your maybe
short-term interests on behalf of
enhancing the relationship and when that
stage evolves typically in adolescence
it is a cause for relief and celebration
on the part of parents and and the
community at large who live with this
adolescent it enables employers of
fast-food businesses who want to hire
teenagers to feel they can hire a person
who's begun to make that transition
because they become trustworthy you can
kind of count on them they may be able
to keep their agreements not just
because they'll get into
they don't but because they want you to
continue to trust them and to respect
them and so on and in very traditional
societies which for the most part don't
exist anymore on our planet where there
you know you could live with it your
whole life within a relatively contained
kind of ecological niche and where there
was a single definition of how one
should live and how what it means to be
an elder or what it means to be a man or
a woman in this tribe the socialized
mind might have been completely adequate
to the rest of one's life but in a
modern increasingly postmodern world
where we have so many different
definitions of how one should live and
who what one should be where there are
increasing demands from all quarters for
us to resolve complex problems where
there's not a single unified set of
expectations for us to align ourselves
with the socialized mind becomes
inadequate to the task what does it take
what does it take to not just
accommodate yourself to what is expected
and to let be shaped by kind of the
environment but to begin to create an
internal Authority an internal compass
an internal way it becomes a filter
through which you evaluate the many
claims on your attention and on your
values where you look at the
expectations as they come in from your
society from your employer from your
intimate partner and you say I I you
hopefully say I respect that that that's
your expectation but I
I also entitle myself to make a certain
judgment as to whether I want to meet
that expectation exactly like that all
of that the ability to do those things
which is increasingly required almost of
any of
now in this complex world in adulthood
requires a qualitatively different stage
than the socialized mind as valuable as
that evolution was in adolescence it
requires the ability not just to be
written upon by your surround by your
culture to be authored to by your
culture but to sort of pick up that
psychological pen yourself and to author
your own identity your own set of
beliefs and that authoring makes you
then more of a personal authority and
that's what we call that the self
authoring stage and that transformation
the gradual transformation from the
socialized mind where you are a good
member of the tribe so to speak to the
self authoring mind where you remain
obviously a member of your community but
you're able to almost interrogate a bit
its own rules and expectations and maybe
act on them and that is your way
actually through your own development of
enhancing the culture and the surround
in which you live instead of just
imbibing it and sort of taking it in you
you now have the ability to step back a
bit from these expectations and sort of
make judgments about them this is a
tremendously empowering and inspiring
move as you come into your own voice but
before you confidently move into the
self authoring stage as with any
transition there is often a lot of
terror and anticipated loss and if I
object to the existing social and
interpersonal arrangements that I've
long been kind of contracting to what
will be the results will you still love
me will I be put out of my society these
are all the questions that come up at
the beginning kind of of this transition
this gradual transformation which
typically doesn't begin until the 20s
and
may not begin for someone until their
forties or may not ever occur for them
is the most dynamic and gradual
transformation in adult development the
move from the socialized to the self
authoring mind but and I'll try to say
this quickly because I know I'm going on
for a long time it's not the final stage
of development to put together your own
internal Authority there can come a time
in your own evolution where you come to
recognize that as powerful as your own
inner compass enables you to be that
inevitably your system for making
meaning with which you've become
identified has limitations has
blindsides leave something out
privileges something and disadvantages
something else and as you come to see
those limits you have the potential now
to again step away from something you
have been completely embedded in that is
the gradual move of development that you
move from being subject to a way of
making meaning to be able to step back
from it and turn that into object so you
cannot look at it be in some
relationship to it and you begin to
construct a new subjectivity one which
in the wilber in phrase transcends but
includes the prior way of knowing and
that in in the present instance that
we're discussing this ability actually
step back from your own inner system
begins a new voyage a new transitional
journey that can lead to a quality yet a
qualitatively more encompassing system
what we call the self transforming mind
so instead of being just identified with
the particular form you have created you
can now kind of see yourself as a self
that
creates forms that can move from one
form to another that can hold multiple
forms together it enables you to not
just be a faithful of a buyer of the law
and someone who stands within this this
impressive system of law that guarantees
rights to given individuals even if I
don't know you and I'm not related to
you by blood and so on which is what the
fourth order is able to do starts
constructing these institutions that are
sort of outward reflections of the
internal institution that you have
constructed but in this next transition
you can actually step back and say it's
great that we have this legal system but
just like my own internal system that
legal system is always imperfect we
might discover one day oh my goodness
why don't we let women vote you know and
we kind of see that you know up until
now we've kind of you know excluded a
certain group then we have the
opportunity to act upon that system and
reconstruct it so you have meta
structures like within the u.s. system
pardon the parochialism we have like a
Supreme Court you know many democracies
have that Supreme Court actually is a
expression of the ability to say that
it's it's important to sustain a system
but it's also important to have a
position to reflect on that system and
see when it has limitations so you
actually have to reconstruct those laws
well that I'm just using that is almost
an analogy on the political front is
what is happening psychologically where
you you you you you can still honor your
form but you have a certain humility
that recognizes it has limitations so
those are the three qualitatively
different stages of development in
adulthood the socialized mind being a
good member of the tribe to the self
authoring mind where you begin to
construct some of the terms by which you
are going to be you know a member of a
tribe or of a relationship it's not like
relationships are not important to you
anymore but instead of being
really shaped by them you begin to bring
certain criteria to them about how you
want your relationships to be self on
three-month and then the possibility of
actually being able to interrogate now
not just the expectations and rules of
the society but to interrogate your own
internal system which brings into being
this third qualitative way of knowing or
filter on the world that we call the
self transforming mind that's a quick
summary of thirty years of research and
obviously Ken's model four people are
familiar with it takes these user stages
of development but then applies them to
society at large that's right is your
model useful for understanding the
tensions in society at large I think
it's very useful for understanding
tensions in society at large but not
necessarily in the way that Ken does it
which tends to say look there are
probably evolutionary patterns of
development that can be brought to the
collective level I'm not saying that
isn't an interesting idea but it is not
the only way to think at the at the
level of society and so on from this
kind of developmental perspective I
think you can make a claim that this
gradual move from the socialized mind to
the self authoring mind which is the the
biggest I mean numerically the most
populous kind of place in the transition
that where we see people are at that you
can you can see that enacting itself at
global levels as well so you know we're
living in an age where almost in any
direction you would look on the planet
where we see both at once the the
inspiring empowerment and liberation
from the socialized mind where various
kinds of groups enable that
transformation that's kind of
the the happiest side of that of that
big evolution where you start feeling
empowered and find your voice and kind
of move more to the self authoring side
as those trends become more and more
influential across the world they become
also more and more threatening to people
who are more firmly embedded in the
socialized mind and to feel that your
interrogation of our social arrangements
are an ultimate threat to my identity to
my you know fundamentalism and those
threats essentially constitute a trigger
so the the emancipatory aspects of a
general support a wider support
worldwide for people's self authorship
will inevitably have a shadowy kind of
backlash a dimension to it where you
don't just have that 16-year old
juvenile delinquents saying I'm not
there yet but you have a whole community
of people who are triggered who feel
violated by your declaration that it
would be okay for people of the same sex
to form a union BnB sexual partners or
that it would be okay to reinterpret the
literal nature of my holy book to even
claim knowing you are still a Jew or you
are still a participant of the Islamic
faith but you have a different
construction of what that faith might be
so you what you also have happening in
the world is you know people saying in
their own way I'm not there yet
but instead of saying it in this way
that you know that young man did they
may say it in a way that leads them to
kill other people they may feel like
they
- you know strike out even at the risk
of blowing themselves up in terrorist
activities because they're essentially
triggered by the ultimate threats to
their own way of making meaning that
these same emancipatory processes are
enabling other people to come into a
fuller fuller realization of their
voices so let's just show you a little
bit the way you can take develop
individual developmental theory and use
it to speak to you know what's going on
in the bigger world and one of the
things that can set an interview with
with us that he did was that because
developmental theory implicitly involves
kind of hierarchies of cognition or
hierarchies of development there was a
real move against it in the 1960s and I
think I think what he said was the
developmentalist circled the wagons at
Harvard and he mentioned your name and a
few other people is that is that true
and has that changed in any way or is
there still a kind of taboo around this
idea of hierarchies well first I think
the the the trigger or the alert that
goes up when anyone is faced with a
hierarchy is something that ought to be
respected because anytime somebody seems
to be suggesting that something is
better than something else
it's a smart question to say on what
basis you know are you making this claim
and underneath that question is probably
I'm not totally unfounded suspicions
that whoever's making that claim is
going to benefit from the hierarchy
they've created then whoever's making
that claim feels like they're somewhere
near the top of that hierarchy so you
know I teach the stuff over and over
again to students who may be coming to
it for the first time and you ask you
know is this is this kind of response
you know diminishing no I mean it it's
it's it it comes up every single time
I'll teach this class and it comes up
because you know my students are off
who moved to a place of a kind of
greater respect for difference and who
have come maybe to recognize their own
tendency towards judgmentalism and who
are privileged around of progressive or
more liberal spirit that you know we
shouldn't be saying that one thing's
better than another and I very much
enjoy welcoming in the forms of
discomfort and provocation that a
hierarchal presents to people and I
encourage them to ask themselves you
know on what basis is this hierarchy
constructed and is it privilege and
advantaging somebody like if it's
constructed by a white guy from the
Western world who's not poor you know is
it basically advantaging that but the
best way that we get at this is by
showing the people that they hold a
hierarchic theory themselves the
hierarchy theory doesn't come from me
it doesn't come from kin and it doesn't
come from developmental theory I can
show people a piece of film of somebody
talking and you begin to get a sense of
how they're constructing the world and I
can ask them you know if this person
were to undergo a transformative process
if they were to have a valuable therapy
experience or life itself or to be a
great teacher for them can you imagine
some other way that they might construct
experience that you would consider is
not just a different way but you would
actually say you think that that way of
construct things is actually more
adequate that it has a better grasp on
reality that it would make them a better
parent in relationship to their child
for them to have made that kind of move
I never get any resistance to that
question people could say oh yes I think
if she were less concerned with what
other people thought about her all the
time she would actually be happier
herself she'd probably be a better
mother as well right now she's being led
around the you know
by her own daughter because she fears
her daughter's disapproval of her she
feels like if she doesn't answer certain
questions she's being impermissibly
secretive instead of being appropriately
private and having a notion of
boundaries and that there's some things
you just don't tell your kid people
become very very eloquent in expressing
what they think would be a better way of
handling the given dilemma that they can
see in that piece of film and after
they've done that I tell them wow you're
pretty judgmental people as it turns out
you think that this other way is not
just different but actually better they
say yes they think it says okay which
one of us has a hierarchy the reality is
that you know no adult feels at all
provoked by the notion that a
ten-year-old who realizes they're never
gonna get older than their older brother
that they're not going to change gender
that when they move in one direction
someone else moves in the other
direction
you know the moon can't follow us both
these are all things that four-year-olds
believe there's nobody who feels that
the ten-year-old you know doesn't have a
clear grasp of reality when they begin
to distinguish between fantasy and
reality as every child does between the
ages of four intent people are
completely at ease with hierarchic
notions of how we construct reality when
they're talking about children but when
you start introducing the same ideas - -
into the realm of adulthood it is
understandably you know provocative but
it's important for people to see and
especially in academia um yeah why why
was there such a resistance against it
in academia I don't think it's an
academia loan I mean I think it's it's
an you know any any you know community
of reflection and all that these are
toxic these are ideas and things that
got started and that could be Mia so
they get most explored there because
where else do you have the privilege of
actually putting these big ideas on a
table
and having people spend 12 weeks and a
semester thinking about them but you
know if I were to go into I spend a lot
of my life outside of academia I spend
it in organizations that are trying to
you know meet their goals whether their
businesses or governmental agencies or
you know in the social sector or
whatever and they they have they know
that they can do better and they want
help and I could go in there and say you
know part of the difficulties here that
you know basically you know what you
really need are more and more self
authoring employees that's really what
you're asking for people step up
exercise responsibility not just be
looking around all the time for someone
to give them orders what you really want
is more self authorship and I could lay
out these developmental theories and
there would be the same forms of
discomfort that wait a minute you're
grading us now I'm fine with the
myers-briggs that somebody's an
introvert somebody is an extrovert
nobody's saying the extroverts better
than the introvert they're just saying
their differences I'm fine with that you
want to bring that kind of psychology
into my organization fine I'm fine with
the inia Graham I'm fine knowing this
guy's more of a peacemaker this person's
you know more of a something else
because no one's saying the peacemaker
is any better than anybody else but what
you're saying is that actually it would
be better to do this okay so I would if
I brought all that in explicitly you
know into organizations as a way that I
would begin to work in organization I
would run into the same forms of
discomfort because you know there's a
lot of moral relativism that is strongly
you know possessed by lots of people who
basically are uncomfortable with the
notion that some things are actually
better than others and in these sort of
developmental communities there's often
this kind of tendency to it become a
kind of development developmental
one-upmanship kind of thing I'm more
developed than you are well I'm more
integral than you or whatever how do we
avoid that I mean it's tiring if you
spend any time around it yeah and and
that's the problem is people what's
happening is a given developmental
position is sort of cannibalizing or
taking over the developmental
perspective you know if you're in this
kind of
like achievement-oriented things show me
a ladder and I'm gonna climb to the
highest rung as quickly as I possibly
can then you know any kind of model you
know is quickly gonna turn into a new
commodity instead of I want to be rich I
want to be famous no I want to be at a
high stage of development okay it's
basically the same kind of thing so you
know I talked to you know Zen masters
and the Roshi's and you know people who
have spent their lives and you know
monasteries you know and then they run
into the same thing and I get Westerners
who they want to be enlightened or even
you know it becomes a new commodity how
fast will it take and how much will it
cost or okay I don't even need to be
enlightened
I just want to practice these wisdom
traditions so that I have less stress
and I'm a more effective executive and
they have to deal with the same thing
like you're turning what I'm offering
you into a means to some other end which
actually does violence to you know what
the whole framework is about we're we
started studying development because of
the extraordinary joy and Wonder of
engaging the miracle of being alive and
the difference between being a human
being and the chair that you're sitting
on is that you have the potential
whether you want to call it you know the
underlying spirit like Hegel did that
the Spirit is never at rest it's always
working to give itself a new form that
you have this this spirit of you know
within you and and I do too and
collectively we do that gives us the
possibility like the caterpillar and the
butterfly to actually transform and the
whole intention of developmental theory
was not to create a new ladder that one
wants to climb to the top of as quickly
as they can in turn the development into
his joyless a ride as the the ride of
trying to acquire the whoever as the
most things wins the whole idea was to
actually consider the reality
that we don't all of us come to
experience the fullest possibility of
being alive if we're dying as
caterpillars there's a whole dimension
of life experience that is possible for
us that we're not having the chance to
realize and that turns us then I mean to
me one of the greatest glories of my
mission in life one of my greatest
satisfaction is to invite people who
have leadership responsibilities and
opportunities whether within the small
context of some team they lead with a
few direct reports or the leaders of a
hundred thousand person organization for
them to conceive that their
opportunities as leaders includes the
opportunity to help their people develop
for their own benefit and for the
benefit of the organization and to kind
of convert leadership into a form of
developmental facilitation how can you
how can you make the water better you
know for people to grow that to me is
kind of the highest use of developmental
fear it helped me better understand you
where you are right now but not assume
that this is where you will always be
and for me to think about what are the
moves I can make that could make an
environment one that will make it more
likely you have the opportunity to
realize your your fullest destiny that
to me is very inspiring when we start
turning it into some kind of a grading
system and putting people in boxes you
know we've turned it into something else
but this is I mean one of the humility
is I'm in my 70s now I've been doing
this for a long long time and one of the
things you realize this you put ideas
out into the world you do not have
control you know it's not like you can
sue for the misuse of intellectual
property that the reality is you don't
have control over how how that material
will be used and you just you can't go
around hoping it'll never be used for
ill it is
going to be you just have to hope that
it's much more often used for the
inspiring purposes that you intended and
you mentioned jean piaget yes at the
beginning he he's become kind of quite
well-known through Jordan Peterson
Jordan Peterson quotes him as a as a key
influence on his thinking what do you
make of have you been following the
Jordan Peterson phenomenon what do you
make of no to teach me well one thing
that he says is in particular what
Piaget was that PJ's ultimate aim he
talked about he looked at kind of how
children develop and the development of
morality among children but his ultimate
aim was about trying to tie together
science and religion and find an
explanation for an emergent
understanding of morality and tie
together the the worlds of science and
religion do you resonate with that as an
explanation for what Piaget was doing
and how does that relate to your work
well first of all it sounds like
something interesting I should try to
learn more about and I'm not entirely
sure that the most fruitful way of
exploring this is just what psays
intentions were but the Piaget was a
twelve-year-old prodigy who you know at
the age of 12 published something in a
scientific journal that had to do with
his fascination of molluscs and the ways
in which they evolved and he started
getting letters from scholars who
thought he was an adult who wanted to
visit him because they were gonna be in
his a village or something and he had to
figure out ways to not meet with them so
they wouldn't discover that he was 12
years old
I guarantee you at 12 years old piya had
no notions about bringing science and
religion together the initial passion
and curiosity was with the ways in which
living organisms transform and that went
from mollusks to children and basically
spend a lot of time asking children
about their conceptions of the physical
world and coming
see that these enduring you know
features around space-time causality and
objects in the world is not something
that's just given that you know
recognizing the if-then relationship is
something that takes six or seven years
of living before you have a mental
system that's complex enough to be able
to connect two points in time or space
that was the main work that Piaget did
now it's true that in the latter part of
his career he started looking not just
at the way children constructed the
physical world but the way in which they
constructed the social world and he
began a field which we now call moral
development I think the greatest
contributor to that particular field and
when it was much more grounded in
philosophy and the relationship between
philosophy and science and the whole
relationship between the is and the art
which is a lively conversation in
philosophy was not Piaget it was
Lawrence Kohlberg Lawrence Kohlberg
American psychologist who ultimately
ended up at Harvard is really to my mind
the true father of bringing this
particular paradigm to the study of
moral development and himself extending
it beyond just the development of
children into adolescents and adults and
I would say the Jordan would be better
off kind of looking at Cole Briggs work
than Piaget if he's interested in these
efforts to kind of bridge gaps between
science and religion and last question
that and this is the kind of 64 million
dollar question okay we've talked about
stages of development we've talked about
how we talked about development per se
how do we develop how do we move up
these spaced stages of development if we
could live infinitely we would all
develop we will all develop instructions
because although we've run into all
kinds of experiences which we're not
supportive to our development
we would eventually run into the happy
accident of the convergence of those
features that are most conducive to
development and so essentially what
education is about from a developmental
perspective is whether it's formal
education or any kind of intention to
educate to train to develop whatever you
want to call it it's about essentially
creating bringing together as many of
those conditions as you can for someone
so that you create a very very fertile
space that wouldn't just spontaneously
you know create itself so what does that
fertile space look like first of all
it's psychologically safe enough that I
can withstand some of the discomforts
that will inevitably be a part of an
invitation to leave my comfort zone
leave my familiar way of making sense so
I need sufficient forms of support to
kind of help me with what is actually
going to be a very difficult thing which
is to ultimately consider that the
problem I'm running into is not about
the world it's about me it's some way I
need to grow I'm somehow running up
against my own limitations this is the
extent to which learning which is so
widely and superficially celebrated in
the world is not fully enough honored
for the true difficulty of its nature a
person who was willing to put themselves
in a learning mode is someone who's
willing to say something which is to go
back to your earlier question kind of
the fundament of kind of the religious
experience Martin Luther you know
there's there's something you know
limited about me as I now stand I need
something more so learning is putting
yourself in a position where you're
acknowledging it's some level I'm
inadequate I'm not fully done okay and
there can be something extraordinarily
empowering inspiring uplifting about
getting fuller becoming more adequate
but initially it has just do with
acknowledging I'm not as enough as I
want to be that's very difficult kind of
thing
requires a form of support but the other
dimension is kind of what is it that
what is it that curates these
experiences that I need to learn I need
to grow so you need forms of challenge
you need experiences that run you into
the limitations of your current way of
making sense you need good problems you
don't seek to solve too quickly because
when you solve a problem quickly you're
the same person coming out of it as you
were going into it you need problems
that you can build a relationship to so
that you are using these problems to
solve you more than you trying to solve
these problems
so you need good problems to grow on the
challenges that will provoke you that
will create the desires in you to
actually become a bigger version of
yourself and you know you then you need
the supports then enable you to
withstand the discomfort after all of
this the part of you that wants to say
I'm going to just pull back and just
kind of stay back here in my comfort
zone those are the fundamental kind of
conditions
that's the sixty-four million dollar
question the 128 million dollar question
is why are humans developing why are we
doing this and I want to just give you a
quick glimpse of this here before we
conclude because that it's important for
people to recognize that we are the only
species on the planet living as long as
we are beyond the years of fertility and
reproduction most organisms finish their
fundamental job of replacing themselves
and then they perish whereas we're
living a whole generation now beyond the
years of fertility and this is something
which humans have only recently come to
do we are today living you know most
people died through most of human
history in their 30s and 40s and 50s and
today we're living a whole additional
generation and that provokes the
question why is this happening and the
glib answer is advances in medical
science and reductions in poverty are
helping us fight the things that tend to
truncate our lives and so that's why we
live longer but that's a kind of a thin
technical
answer to a much bigger question which
is not what are the means by which it's
happening but why is it happening and in
the Western world where we have all this
valorizing of individual autonomy if you
feel satisfied by an answer that says
this is this the species wide
manifestation is just the consequence of
a bunch of individual random choices
I'll leave you to that explanation but I
want to suggest a different one which is
when a whole species is collectively
doing something you should pay attention
to it and generally why does any species
do anything collectively but then to
survive to to succeed kind of
evolutionarily to maintain itself and we
are a species that is conscious of
itself and we are living in a world
which any person with their eyes open
we'd have to say yes it's a race to the
top there are all kinds of extraordinary
expressions of human spirit and
imagination and generosity but we are
also living in a race to the bottom and
there are all kinds of threats that are
hanging over us that could you know wipe
us out and we know from developmental
theory that the higher state of
development the self transforming mind
this ability to actually stand back even
you know from our own internal systems
is a potential way of handling the most
lethal features of being a human being
these sovereignty is of mind and state
so what if the fundamental reason that
we're developing and staying alive so
much longer than we ever did before is
to create more of that order of
consciousness that will enable us to
save ourselves
what if collectively we are living
longer in order
to solve the biggest problem of our
survival that we face today wonderful
place to end Robert thank you
my pleasure Dave
[Music]
you
[Music]