silly is the power of the people's vote
and I think the people should use it to
vote for so in the last video I talked
about how our complicated systems of
organization and governance are
fundamentally incapable of handling the
complexity of the real world and that in
attempting to do so they dumped
pollution into the real world which
causes harm in in this video I want to
talk specifically about the political
system and how the pollution that it
generates and dumps into the cultural
economic physical and intellectual
environments has led to the situation
where the spirit of the political system
ie a forum in which we can discuss and
decide what we're going to do together
as a society has been completely lost
and it's become completely corrupt and
is no longer even remotely
representative of the will or the
interests of the people and so we have
absolutely nothing to lose and
potentially everything to gain by
rejecting it in its entirety through a
none of the above vote there's a rich
treasure trove of up to
enjoy here and we need to look no
further than the last US presidential
election so out of 231 million eligible
voters 63 million of them voted for
Trump which represents twenty seven
point three percent of the eligible
voters and so Trump was elected barely a
quarter of the population put him into
power that election costs over a billion
dollars in campaign contributions that
were spent was over a billion dollars
and where did that billion dollars come
from and how was it spend and so you
know it was spent primarily on
mudslinging at the opposition and so
again this is one of the forms of
pollution right and so in the culture
now you have these two camps you
absolutely cannot talk to each other if
you're a Democrat you think that Trump
supporters are a bunch of racist redneck
morons and if you're a trump supporter
you think that Democrats are a bunch of
soft wet lefty pinko liberal baby
killers you know and and there is no
possible way that the
you can have a conversation with each
other as to where the billion dollars
came from in the u.s. it's not as bad in
the UK but the u.s. is essentially
legitimized corruption in its politicans
political system there are two court
decisions over the last few decades
Buckley versus Valeo and Citizens United
which respectively defined corporations
as people and money as speech and so
corporations can now spend as much money
as they want on political campaigning
also in that election Hillary actually
polled more of the votes than Trump did
she got 66 million proximately Tom got
63 million so well despite the fact she
got three million more votes she loses
the election but you know she's no saint
either because in the Democratic
primaries Bernie should have been the
candidate I mean he polled far more of
the districts than she did and yet state
after state after state because of
manipulation of the super delegate
system came back in favor of Hillary so
the whole thing was a joke in terms of
representation of the people and you
know like a clean fair election the
whole thing was a joke but even deeper
than that the whole concepts of voting
our continent where I heard this but
it's a really interesting idea and a
really important one that if you're
forced to vote that means that the
attempt of the society to reach
agreement to reach consensus has failed
and so you are forced then to vote and
this creates camps divisions within the
society and this is one of the most
insidious and pervasive forms of
pollution that our political system has
created for us we have a very similar
situation in the UK where 60 65 percent
something like that turnouts in
elections and polling forty percent also
of that 60 65 percent is sufficient to
get you a majority in parliament and so
once again 25 to 30 percent of the
electorate is putting a party into power
and once they are in power then that
very small group of people gets to make
the decision
everybody must follow and remember 25 30
percent of the people actually put them
there so you know it is fundamentally
inequitable the way we do that and then
when it comes to election time how are
our votes canvassed you know that in
order for a party to attract people
towards it it needs to have a distinct
identity from the other parties and
generate loyalty in that way and so it
inevitably creates
the cereal camps rival Rus adversarial
camps and therefore reaching broad
agreement in the society is virtually
impossible because for any policy that
the government comes up with the
opposition's job is to oppose that
policy and so you have a win-lose
situation constantly created rather than
a compromised situation building a
consensus reach and compromise you have
a win-lose situation where this is our
idea we're against that idea let's have
a vote one camp wins the other camp
loses and so this creates a general
mindset a general modality of enemy and
of them and us seeking out an enemy and
every problem that we have in our
society you know climate change we found
an enemy carbon dioxide is the enemy and
we're going to bring everything to a
bear to attack that enemy and this
mindset of them and us other finding an
enemy and seeking to attack it is
another one of the insidious nasty forms
of pollution that our political system
generates and then you have to consider
who are these people that stand for
Parliament or that run for Congress or
Senate or whatever where do they come
from how are they selected them and I
don't know a huge amount about the
process in the u.s. I actually believe
it's a bit more democratic than where
anybody can stand if they get sufficient
numbers of signatures to register but in
the UK you have really no chance of
winning a seat in parliament unless you
are standing for one of the parties and
the candidates are selected by a
relatively small number of local party
activists sometimes a dozen people
decide who the candidate is going to be
for that constituency and so the degree
to which we do not participate in the
decision who makes the decisions that
affects us all is really quite
extraordinary also on the theme of who
are these people you know when
was the last time a teacher was in
charge of the Education Department when
was the last time an environmentalist
was in charge of the environmental
departments last time a farmer was in
charge of the Agriculture Department the
people that could have put into these
positions are lawyers economists
accountants political graduates this
kind of thing you know career
politicians who have no real expertise
or anything other than elbowing and
maneuvering in order to gain political
power and political influence so you
know I would mind very much less
following instructions handed down from
on high if those instructions were being
handed down by people who actually knew
they were doing you know experts in
their field experts in educational
psychology experts and environmental
science experts in medicine experts in
research methodologies experts in the
social sciences you know these were the
people who are making the decisions and
passing down saying this is this is the
best way to do things well fair enough
right but this is not how it is but it's
even worse than that I mean not only do
you have people with no training or
experience or qualifications or
expertise for the job but they need to
look as though they do and so if the
Education Minister for example promises
to raise standards whatever the
that even means then he or she will find
a way to make it look as though they
have raised standards and so tests might
get easier or gray boundaries might get
lower or whatever but the appearance
that standards have been raised will be
created even those standards probably
haven't been raised at all and the final
point I want to make here is something
that Russell Brand pointed to I think he
makes a really really good point to
reused to resume as example I think
she's an excellent example I actually
felt kind of sorry for her if I'm honest
you know I think she's a good
intentioned person I really do and
wanted to do good but found herself in a
situation partly because it breaks it
but even without bricks it found herself
in a situation and inheriting an
apparatus that made it impossible for
her to do that which she wanted to do
when she first came to power when she
took over from David Cameron the speech
he gave outside number 10 was along the
lines of you know I understand that
there are millions and millions and
millions of people in this country who
are only just scraping by and I am
sympathetic to their plight and it will
be the first priority of my government
to make sure that we make life a little
bit easier for those people and then
whatever it was two years later
something like that she left her post in
tears saying that it was basically felt
she was unable to be of proper service
to the country that she loved and you
know in both of those cases I certainly
got the impression and Russell Brand
made the same point that she was you
know sincere she was a human being she
was a real Mensch in both of those
situations but in the intervening couple
of years she was like a robot she was an
automaton I mean I don't think any of us
will forget that time she was asked you
know what was something you did when you
were a child that was naughty and she
came up this ridiculous thing of running
through the farmer's wheat fields it's
the naughtiest thing you ever do
it oh goodness me and well I suppose the
gosh do you know I'm not quite sure and
my slope in a moment nobody is nobody's
ever perfectly okay are they I mean you
know I have to confess when me and my
friends sort of used to run through the
fields of wheat the farmers weren't too
pleased about that
and you could see while she was coming
up to the answer while she was coming up
with that art so you could see the
wheels turning in her head you know what
can I say Who am I going to upset what
vested interests am I gonna get on the
wrong side of if I say whatever and and
so our system demands of its
representatives our political system
demands of its representatives if they
give up their humanity when they assume
office yeah that they become this
functioning automaton kind of thing we
can't actually just say what they think
it is impossible for senior politicians
to go on TV with all of their party
affiliations and all of their corporate
affiliations and all their backers and
all of the people that they owe favors
to and so on and so on and so on to just
say what they think because they're
gonna piss people off who are
influential and even with the best will
in the world politicians can't just make
decisions in the best interest of their
people they're at the mercy of huge
moneyed interests you know if if a big
car company says you know give us a tax
break or we're not going to build a
factory in your country and you won't
get the jobs and you won't get the tax
revenue then you know concessions will
be made and so you know they're not even
real agents of choice in the countries
that they are supposed to be governing
and while our system runs on these kinds
of things it has absolutely no hope of
coming up with anything sensible I mean
you need only look at the three years or
whatever that the UK government has been
an absolute paralysis because David
Cameron abdicated his responsibilities
in disciplining his own backbenchers
left the door open to a brexit vote
there was no plan whatsoever I mean the
unbelievable crass irresponsibility of
having no plan in place should the
electorate come back with a brexit vote
so you know that I could go on and on
and on and on but I don't I don't want
to make these videos too long the idea
is to keep these sort of fairly short
and punchy and so the overall point I'm
trying to make here is that
system is fundamentally broken it is no
longer even if it ever was it is no
longer fit for purpose it no longer even
pretends to have the best interests of
his people as primacy you know what I
mean that as its primary goal and so it
really is high time that we wake up to
the fact that this institution of
politics that we wait around for and
keep voting new people in because we
think they're going to make things
better is fundamentally incapable of
doing so it's corrupt it's broken it
needs to be got out of the way so that
we can come up with something better so
back to where we started
folk none of the above next time you go
to the polls thank you for listening
actually is the power of the people's
vote and I think the people should use
it to vote for
[Applause]
[Music]
[Applause]