to set up maybe a an archive all right
it is being recorded good
no I don't know Brett I don't know Brett
so I I met Brett a long time ago like 11
12 years ago and at the time he was a
self-proclaimed very marginal professor
at Evergreen which is yeah we pretty see
out there but you know called
experimental College yeah who had some
good stuff like you know I spent time
with him in his program was that the
time was also very marginal so the hedge
fund trader who was working on physics
and it as a hobby very and then of
course as things have happened as it
turns out the fact that Eric and Brett
have good stuff has become more and more
obvious and so more and more people have
heard of them when you mentioned a book
you were writing I had a flash of like
oh this is actually going to be a very
successful book thank you it's good
that's good we'll start getting you like
you knew the the Jordan Peterson Kuchar
transformation and if you've noticed I
can you go back and watch his earlier
videos he looks like a professor of
psychology and then when you see him in
the more recent shots he has like a
$5,000 suits I really hope that elbow
patches and so the religion that's not a
religion yeah so I mean I've put a lot
of work into that as you as you know are
no doubt aware and I'm continue to do
that especially in connection with the
book I just mentioned I made I may take
physical notes for a second we just grab
my notebook sure all right
so the main they're the main inspiration
for this idea right is but the symbolic
inspiration is I was nici's madman in
the marketplace right and when he's
arguing with the atheists that they
don't know what they've done when
they've killed God and the idea behind
that which is which was I read Nietzsche
a long time ago and my undergraduate
years not really something to me very
deeply is that Nietzsche have understood
the deep functionality of religion for
bringing about a fundamental
transformation etc all the things that
what you and I and others are talking
about so the there the religion it's not
a religion it's one of the things gonna
require is a very clear and I mean
really clear and scientifically
articulated and argued and evidence
explanation of that functionality so as
opposed to political pseudo religious
ideologies that just propose a vision of
the promised land and hope that somehow
the functionality will accrue as we
commit ourselves to to that utopia I
want to do this in Reverse that's what
I'm proposing that we get the function
now we know let's really really really
understand the functionality and then
reverse-engineer the practices that we
can that activate it and exact it so as
to bring about the transformations we
need to achieve individual wisdom and
collective coherence so I as I put those
two now together as you know in my
thinking I have them in it in a dialogue
with each other all the time the
medicine the technology that realizes
coherence and the meta heuristic that
realizes wisdom and they're together in
what I'm calling dialectic so that's so
for me that's that for me that's I guess
to take a stand there that's
non-negotiable for me that this is the
this is
this has got to be you know how you said
this before and this is something I like
your insistence on this you know they're
the the the rate of complexification is
a difference in degree there's now a
difference in kind and we've got to
fundamentally do things differently this
is one of my ways of responding to that
desiderata that you have articulated so
passionately and consistently it's like
one of the ways in which we can really
really try to do this differently than
it's been done before
alright is no no instead of leaping into
the narrative instead of leaping into
the vision of the promised land instead
of this is also a bit of their sort of
the warm hearted of argument I'm having
with Alexander right now right about you
know the phallic vision and all that yes
but you know what's what we need to do
differently this time is let's really
understand the functionality first yeah
maybe at some point yes we will need the
artists we need to do that I understand
that I agree with that
but my point well is you you know to go
back to a point I'm making problem
solving good problem formulation is most
of the heavy work like get the problem
formulated really well and then an
essential feature of that I think is to
really understand the functionality very
deeply yeah and then and only then right
try to engineer the appropriate sacred
technology now of course like I I'm not
trying to be imperialistic I understand
because of the way human creativity work
and theorizing works and because of the
urgency of the situation we're sort of
doing both of those things on the fly
right now a bunch of us right we're
trying to get at the functionality we're
trying to you know reverse engineer the
needed psycho tech I understand
but in terms of the ideal epistemic
framing like what we're talking about
right now the design features that would
be I think for me a crucial design
feature that would make a qualitative
difference from what's going on before
and so that way I are trying to see it
as a way of you know playing game B as
opposed to gave me what we're trying to
change right that
the something fundamental here on how
we're doing this so it seems like
there's something about there as part of
the design criteria and isometry between
the how and the what yes yes yes sir
there's something on the lines of a a
plane of a collective individuals
committed to embodying wisdom and a
collaborative exploration of the Medicus
--tx yes
and using collective coherence in a
collaborative exploration of the meta
psycho technologies keep going this is
beautiful
to clarify and reify the meta heuristic
and the meta cycler technology and then
express the narrative yes yes so the
narrative we can almost almost use a
like a checksum to the degree to which
the narrative was produced by something
other than what I was just describing we
should hold it as being almost certainly
I'm gonna actually say wrong but we
should we should hold it at a distance
as almost a yeah there's a problem yeah
there's a higher probability that it's
gonna be dysfunctional in addressing the
problems we want to address that's how I
would put it yeah yeah and there there
may be useful things there of course of
course I want to look at it as pastiche
we want to be able to say okay that's
neat that's nice there's a lot of good
stuff there oh that's funny I just
flashed it flashed my mind if you see
those beautiful works of art I saw one
recently there was a an image of Nikola
Tesla but constructed entirely out of
perspective so that if you look at it at
a very specific angle it looks exactly
it is the image but if you actually move
your eye a little bit you see like for
example it's just a collection of trash
I haven't see those that's amazing to
you so I had that feeling it's like okay
so this a narrative that is constructed
in a how other than what we are
described
will in fact have a bunch it's like a
tool toolkit I have a whole bunch of
stuff but we should be very careful
about that words again and so then at a
heuristic level hmm trying to actually
get these things appropriate line um the
stack like the ordering of the stack
from relevance realization up the stack
in the right order
yes a bottom-up yeah very much very much
that would be for me also another I
think design feature as you've just
articulated it although I think it's
implied by the the the notion of wisdom
at least the one I've been trying to
argue for is that there's going to be
the as you put at the alignment of the
stack from elements realization up
through the four kinds of knowing both
again individually and collectively I
think there's you know individually
collectively and then dialectically
between the individual and the
collective and so so I think that would
be another important feature so when I
wonder than when we're saying
functionality here we have to be
comprehensive like you said it has to be
the functionality that goes all the way
up and down the stack and can explain
and afford its optimization in alignment
something like that mmm-hmm do you want
me to just keep all right sort of
continuing there was stuff I've already
sort of put in put some thought into or
do you want to make this more back and
forth what would you like hold on sure
it's so funny I almost never take notes
my entire academic career I think I have
like one page of notes well you're
obviously extremely high in G yeah so
that explains why I'm wondering like as
I'm doing this the degree to which this
is really more just a way for me to
clarify my own thinking will I ever flip
back to these pages and look at these
notes okay please continue
yeah it doesn't matter I often take
notes for exactly the reason you just
articulated so for me I mean the the
this the reverse engineering is to
reverse what we need an or
to awaken from the meeting crisis and
then hopefully that will also provide us
with the state from which we can wrestle
with the meta crisis
I mean so so I define that you know the
religion that religion has the t loss if
you want to put it that way of fording
awakening for the meaning crisis and
then as you know as I argue in this here
is I think there's two parts to that one
is it has to give us an ecology of
psycho technology that addresses the
perennial problems and then the other is
it has to it has to work out the kind of
symbolic mythos that religions do that
aligns with the scientific worldview you
know and is aligned with the best
cognitive science the best neuroscience
the best machine learning the best the
best right the very very best so that
the ecology of practices sits within a
world of you that legitimates it and
authorizes it and I would actually push
it one level harder which is that by an
align what I would say is to think like
Claire applies so it's in alliance with
and therefore clarify so the work that
I've see you do a lot of is actually
taking concepts that in many ways have
been sort of pulled rough-hewn and
littered with nonsense into any
discipline cognitive science means
whether you're focusing on and then
taking a very careful look at them and
clarifying them so that the discipline
itself is actually disciplined in it oh
yeah right right right right that's very
well said yeah that's very good I like
that that's that's a very important
that's good I'm glad we were recording
this I expect they'll be more insights
like that okay so check this okay
Forrest Landry you've mentioned him
before so he's done a lot of very
powerful work and the interesting things
Athena just blew my mind was the way at
the path that he took his work he's a
polymath
with the deep history actually in this
remain so in Yankee would crafting like
his father was a an actual guild master
woodworker and for school up but his
background is fundamentally is in his
computer science like theoretical
computer science and sentiment and his
area of practice was was it is semantic
computing and so one of the things that
he did he was working in really
sophisticated cemented computing back
back back when the internet was just
coming online this is back when very
little noise and a decently large amount
of signal was actually being generated
in terms of semantically processed
computer readable content like saying
every scientific journal and you know in
the first archive of books digital books
was actually put online I camber where
it was it was like a huge archive of all
the non copyrighted books which is a
huge motivator so he began running
semantic processing on this treasure
trove and then began tuning his semantic
processing using this treasure trove and
then so doing a lot of this work so take
a concept like transcendence right and
actually see you know given the so the
use of transcendence in many disciplines
as you can grab as many locations what's
the actual semantic location of this
concept what is it what does the word
mean in a fundamentally deep sense
because you just said the best of
computer science mm-hmm and what I would
what I would say is that we can really
do this from the point of view of
participatory knowing meaning it should
not be participating with the best of
the theory of computer science usually
actually participating with the best of
the practice of computer science if
we're asking the question the religion
there's not a religion of computer
science what would computer science say
they compute event and say oh well why
don't we let the computer help why don't
we take this variation of a the problem
of getting clarity in the semantic space
and automate that a computer argue that
all right good oh this - can it can
simplify dramatic yes
yeah whoo he did that work already
that's been done well I should we should
definitely think I'd like to know how to
make use of that that sounds like a very
powerful thing integrating that with
sort of you know dialogic exploration of
concepts like you see in the Platonic
dialogues would be a very powerful thing
to do
yeah you know where the computer might
be one of the participants in the
dialogic process itself yeah yeah yeah
exactly and it's we can get there you
can get a well you can get a lot you
think it's very touching stuff that's
just popped into my head so I'll have to
no I don't believe so no but that's
great and the more we can see how to
well use this word exact the cyber
technology so it you know integrates
with the psycho technology the better
the more we need to do that I agree so
here's an example this is a great one so
one of the things that the religions
tend to fall into is the semantic
complexity right and so you get a lot of
oftentimes unintentional often times in
tension but a lot of fun unintentional
equivocation yes as the semantic
distance leads people to lose this
coherence at the level of Arkham entity
for rational coherence right across
there the domain that they're inquiring
into so I might struggle really really
hard to have a high degree of rigor and
coherence in the conceptual frameworks
that I'm using but as I'm ingesting more
and more conceptual frameworks the way
that my mind is able to hold them begins
a process of sort of partitioning them
into shards so I might have lots of like
say transcendence and I might bury
myself be holding it equivocal into the
three or distinct meanings because I've
got the Nietzschean lineage over here
and I've got sort of a very early for
the logic lineage and those are
connected but not exactly the same and
you fill in the blank and of course as
soon as you add more people into the
conversation the level of equivocation
and the amount of complexity goes up so
high
that by definition that's kind of the
point no human mind can actually hold
the semantic space but a computer can
and so you can run into a situation
where it's actually a there's
equivocation happening here something in
the in the conversational space there's
a meaning cross you're crossing terms
and could help reify the conversation
something like that that's that's
brilliant if we could engineer that that
would be a bead like that would be a
powerful step up yeah yeah are you
familiar with some bonito Roy's stuff a
little bit there she introduced me to
very simple from a very simple
psychological notion of the mapping
error which is so helpful when people
are in a moving up the stack it's just a
basically many ways it's a reverse
getting people back into the right order
on the stack yeah right if you're saying
transcendence and I'm saying
transcendence so what you're saying
confuses and maybe angers me as a first
move is it a mapping your issue you're
pointing to something down stack you're
supporting something the level of say
yeah it's effective and I'm you know I
need to slow down and actually take that
step all right sorry I wonder too far
afield there no no you didn't I think
that's good no no I think that's good I
think that idea well first of all the
idea of entry level equivocation I think
is important I think that shows up in
cognitive science a lot information is a
term that's often used equivocally
across the levels are very much so if we
could pick up if if we could if we could
co-opt some of this existing cyber
technology to help us enhance our you
know our reflective capacity to avoid
things like equivocation in the process
if we can make that happen I think
that's that's also that's one of those
qualitative changes that could make a
real difference
if imagine imagine if there was sort of
a cyborg rationality in which the human
capacities for relevance realization and
insight were wedded to this kind of
semantic processing that could
check right and like you know and do
something you know almost like you're
not on an internet search and say well
here's possible equivocations they're
making you so and then the human being
sort of talk about it and oh yeah we are
equivocating here no that's irrelevant
that's right and then but to think about
how much time wait how much wasted time
would be avoided doing that I think it's
a very good idea yeah yeah I'm noticing
a attention in myself part of me wants
to continue exploring down this road
heard me is worried that it's a bit of a
weed but maybe there's something about
yeah okay if I open the context and say
perhaps the thing that feels like it's
going into the weeds can be held as an
example of a more general thing I was
gonna about to say exactly that I think
the more general thing is and with that
that's an example a clear example that
it gives teeth to the idea of one of the
design features of the religion that's
not a religion is exactly this that it
is going to find the best way to not
only exact you know biological cognitive
processing right but also cyborg
information processing into into how
it's trying to exact the functionality
so the functionality that's being
accepted is no longer and this is
another qualitative difference just our
functionality we're trying to exact the
functionality of these emergent machines
yep so we're broadening we're probably
you can we can ground it say as an
example are you familiar with the thing
that happened or at least was reported
to have happened in Google Translate
about a year ago No
so this is destroyed that I understand
so what I'm conveying is not necessarily
real but it is a my understanding of
reality in the interpretation of his
wouldn't forensic give a Google
Translate moved to being to using
machine learning meaning that it was
engaging in a self editing self under
auto authoring process and what it ended
up doing
was finding discovering on its own that
the best way for it to deal with the
translation from say French to English
was actually to construct a meta
language that only Google Translate had
ever perceived so it created its own
meta language hmm
because it was dealing now with hundreds
of languages reifying the Grammatik and
semantic structures that it was
perceiving among all languages into a
meta language and then if it translated
from French to the meta language and
from the meta language to English the
error rate between French and English
went way down so it's sort of sort of
reversed engineered Chomsky's Universal
grammar yeah exactly
so that's cool this is I'd use that as
yeah yeah but yeah but that's a powerful
analogy though that's a powerful analogy
okay yeah that's very good so okay I I
think that's I think that's very good so
the the idea yeah that these machines
can do that kind of thing and help if
you do so they can do one thing that
sorry they can do two things in
integrative fashion one thing they can
do is they can explicate how the
machinery we're using might be you know
internally self-deceptive like your
example of equivocation and they can
also afford giving us you know quicker
and more comprehensive access to the
meta space we might need to make use of
exactly exactly quicker and more complex
if you access to the meta space yes
perfect okay so okay that's interesting
and so kind of sliding to the right and
this feels like it's a bucket that will
have to be dealt with at some point and
we can kind of name it the the pet tag
Peggy ow Peggy Peggy a bucket
hey Jo hi Jo right we leave to the
degree to which we're endeavoring to
create a religion that is not a religion
how do we do with the religions in our
religion and the Pantheon and I'm
wondering I mean I'm curious about the
degree to which we could actually find
that there is a meta structure that
would actually
yeah our conversation to occur look just
thinking it's a translation now this is
actually put interesting if I'm having a
if I were a Sufi Muslim having a
conversation with the presbyterian in
english we're under a very significant
illusion that we're actually having a
conversation about the same things
because you're using a language English
yeah and I can translate my rear
elephants realization and body
sensibilities into English convey it
semantically across you to English
whereupon you can reverse decompose that
into something that seems relevant to
you and get very confused there
very much sure but if your applicator
will say no no we can do a Google
Translate we can actually identify is
there a meta structure that is actually
the meta not expressed in any given
language or at least reified into a
computational construct that has access
to the meta then do the up and sideways
we may actually find that a very large
number of doctrinal disagreement is in
fact simple confusion at the level of
semantics that's that's I think that's
very good that aligns with something
I've been playing with which is the the
alternative to Huxley's perennialism
right so you know how you know how in
deep learning you cycle through sort of
compression you compress you try to
extract what's invariant across and then
and then you then you vary and send it
back up to the variations that interact
with the environment and come back and I
was thinking well instead of trying to
do what Huxley did was just find you
know the commonalities what if we did
something like machine learning on the
various religions where they cycle
through compression right getting like
you say abstracting this sort of the the
meta there may be the core meta language
or the grammar right cognitive grammar
but then they allow themselves to verify
out sorry two very out and then interact
with the in with the environment in the
particular context and then come back in
and so what did it actually cycles
instead of saying you know instead of
saying either perennialism all the
religions have always said the same
thing or relativism no there are
completely different world there's no no
what we can do is we can exact this yeah
as a deep learning cycle which we cycle
between compression and particular
ization so that the whole thing right
right the whole process
getting better yeah that's really
interesting because I think if you did
that and I think we can do that by the
way I think technically that is
available you might notice for example a
natural topology in the evolutionary
landscape of religion space yes exactly
I think you're me and I could be like
say three saddle nodes and there are
three the variations on that like
Buddhism might be sitting over here and
yeah yeah
Islam is sitting over here and Judaism
is sitting over here and there's a real
distinction between them but we can now
actually talk about what those new
distinctions are like what they're
really are it's a okay cool
now now that we have that that's that's
very powerful and interesting I'm not
sure well no it seems very doable so as
long as we're just doing the design
there seems to be something that would
be ah so as a design criteria for the
religion religion in fact actually be
used yes yes yes that's for sure and
ideally has to actually be used in the
way that you described it meaning it
provides us with the the basis from
which we can collectively address the
meta-crisis so I've noticed that trying
to articulate my relationship to the
existing religions is sort of best
explained in what I just said to you I'm
not claiming to have the computational
power we would need to do this
comprehensively but I'm saying in terms
of my own individual practice because
this is how I sort of try to understand
how I was alternative to both you know
cats and to Huxley it was like no no
what I do is I I do things where I do
that I get sort of the compressive stuff
and then and then I see how the
variations go out to apply to more
context-sensitive and I cycle that way
and what I was noticing is but I know
how accurate this is but it seemed to me
that what was happening is rather than
getting you know your conviction in any
particular order religion my overall
capacities for relevance realization
were being enhanced
mmm-hmm which is part of the meta both
the mini heuristic and the meta psycho
psycho tech exactly exactly exactly
exactly so I have another design feature
that I think is very relevant and it's
been brought up I think both by Jonathan
and most clearly I think by Paul which
is the scalability issue and you and I
have as also talked about that at times
because part of the functionality of
religions as opposed to other things and
an interesting thing historically is you
can sort of compare Christianity to
stoicism on this and you can see ways in
which they succeeded and failed to win
the Roman Empire we want to put it that
way so Paul's idea is you know for a
religion to bring about the kind of
transformation that we seek from it
which is I assume what we are we are
seeking it has to be scalable both
between levels of socio economic socio
political organization and that has to
be scalable across developmental stages
so from bullying from adult to child
right because if you don't have if you
don't have the societal integration if
you don't have the developmental
integration you do not you do not have
access to the deep functionality that
we're talking about here I think that's
a I think that's a very very good point
I take that criticism that Paul has made
of my work very seriously I think that's
a very good point I think that I think
it's I think we I think we can address
that I met Zack yes yes we might say
that his life's work has been there
really deeply grasping the whole notion
of development right and if you think
about the essence of what we're talking
about we can actually actually invert
the challenge and turn it into a leader
okay one of the things we'd like to do
for example is to actually in body
through through the use of the medic
eristic s-- increase
visual wisdom mmm well if I just sort of
flipped my head around and say well that
just sounds like good parenting and
education I'm starting with you probably
18 months before birth and ending well I
don't know how where you end exactly
because lineage becomes a very
challenging thing cats getting Apple
it's just ended it shortly after death
the specifics the specificity of the
instantiation of the meadow heuristics
of the meta psycho technology is bound
to prospective for the particularity of
the developmental arc yes into the
severity of the individual right so this
is a second-order but this is
nonetheless a very strong because the
design criteria which is the religion
that's not a religion is bound to the
specificity of the developmental art and
to the singularity of the individual
that's well said I like that I like that
that's very good there's a when you do
scalability the the third criteria is
something along the lines of it's funny
I'm actually popping into the into the
computational and even technological
domain for the word scalability I said
yeah scale of there was a technical
sense means that I must be able to add
increasing service arbitrarily without
decreasing the functionality of the
service to be scalable yeah that's good
I like that
that's a that's an excellent way of
defining that let's don't know I think
that's very useful then I can fishing
Metcalfe's law which is Metcalfe's law
is to say so make make Hess law is a
very powerful observation which appears
to actually not be grounded in some
fundamental reality which is that as you
add a node to a communications graph
like say a telephone network the value
as measured in the possibility space of
the communications network expands the
word is a mathematical term that I just
lost just flew in my head it's trippy
Oh a novela okay many people sort of
just call it exponential it's not quite
exponential but nonetheless it's a it's
a nice curve though
so what Metcalfe's law does is it drives
the rapid explosion something like say
Facebook very rare if you think about
social media I think about Facebook and
Facebook t 0 is just Mark Zuckerberg
right just hit the value of Facebook is
very look and in fact if I have Mark
Zuckerberg in his roommate still very
low but as you start getting two three
four five six seven people that value
actually expands at some number larger
than the end right right well that's met
a scalable right to degree which I can
craft a techno tech nickel layer so that
people can conjoin I can scale the
number of people who are participating
without decreasing the availability of
the service it does not slow down every
person who gets added it just continues
to have the same self response time and
also every person who is added actually
increases both the value of the thing
and therefore also the attractions you
get OODA loop this is how you if I
design a religion that's not a religion
that's scaled what in that sense meta
scaleable then you would expect to see
something on the on the order of an
exponential growth group which is how we
actually resolve the practicality
problem but actually needs no it needs
to be adopted it needs to be adopted and
adopted in a way that actually helps us
resolve the meta-crisis
that know that makes that makes
excellent sense that's very good I like
that it's very very helpful notice I
like that
so with that so that this is an open
question right would that mean a that
the way things I'm thinking of the
scientists working with the rover on
Mars and they they do not adopt a
hierarchical structure when they're
trying to move into this new environment
they socially organize the distributed
cognition much more like a dynamically
reconfiguring small world network that's
constantly be structuring itself rather
than an Iron Age hierarchy so be good
because what was it occurring to me as
you said that is I thought well how did
the religion in the past deal with this
well they used Iron Age hierarchy that
was their way of trying
to manage what you're talking about but
it seems to me that if we have the
science and and the technology and
especially the cyber technology we don't
have to address that problem manage it
with an Iron Age hierarchy right well
that's a that's a reasonable implication
to draw there's a very reasonable
implication but I would say you probably
go to more steps and discover that it is
actually going to be how do I say this
right there's a series of steps that
lead you to conclude that it is almost
certainly a necessity a necessity in
terms of network design it's almost like
a network design necessity if you want
to do the thing that we're talking about
in terms of the design criteria you
begin to prune all the different network
designs that you might use there and you
begin to realize that this network
design is the only network design that
actually satisfies the design criteria
right very good and I'm really
interested right now I'm actually
holding this flip back and forth into
metastasis what's happening there okay
so let me see if I can just narrate the
story that's playing out in my head and
see if there's something about please
yeah I guess I was synthesizing a couple
of different conversations that we had
so I had a population of humans
partitioned into at least two distinct
kinds of groups one kind of group was
partitioned around language so French
speakers and English speakers and the
other kind of was partitioned around
existing cuido I suppose and then what I
was and then I guess the third variable
was a differential allocation of meta
processing capacity oh ok say more about
that please there were some people who
were naturally skillful in operating in
meta space the capacity to perceive meta
structures and then to be able to move
from the meta to the concrete was at a
higher level higher copper where and
what I was noticing is that the ability
to engage there's a distinct there's
like a network tamal topology they seem
to be emerging out of this this comes
from this these three distinct
characteristics which was a something
like a collaboration happening between
an among and among the more meta
individuals which I guess we might even
flag a shaman just as kind of yeah and
very importantly there was like that
conversation and collaboration between
and among the meta individuals the
shaman and then there was a a
conversation and collaboration between
and among the the distinct populations
of in which the shaman are embedded so
there's like a a meta religion or a work
happening at the meta level and then
there's work happening at the embodied
level right right there's a network
topology that actually has the it's like
a what's that word called she's not a
space filling algorithm it's like you
it's an Optima it's a it's an
evolutionary optimization function right
right right right okay for the network
conforms to the actual optimal flow in
the reality that defines itself it's
really where the bones the bones with
the bones of all right they're an
evolutionary search algorithm looking
for a bunch of different criteria like
right strong and flexible and healable
you know I'll just carry erect eristic
finds it yeah yeah yeah that's good
running that yeah it's interesting
because when you said that it triggered
in me the the or two of the dimensions
of dialectic because you did you did the
horizontal thing like well the way the
shamans are embedded and there's that
horizontal and then you did the vertical
they moved to the matter which is again
at that ontological shifting that's
going on in politic so there's there's
there's there's a connection there
I was just wondering like what would
have become of us if Socrates in Lao Tzu
that had been able to hang out yeah that
would have been really cool would have
been really cool
it would have been really cool if
Platonists had made it to India and
studied with what was going on there
that was his actual intent but of course
man the emperor lost in battle and that
also led to nothing well now those sorts
of things can happen with a click of a
button yeah which is why again we're in
a different place
so dude what you all said was very
helpful um and like like I said I feel
there's resonance with the dimensions
that I elected which we'll need to
explore I also like it's like the right
well I like it but I think there's also
an appoint separate of my preferences
because I think this is another way in
which the religion that's not a religion
difference from religions because it's
trying to get out of Iron Age hierarchy
as its fundamental grammar for its
mythos right so in addition to having to
break that there's a deep relationship
between these two which Jonathan has
continually argued for the axial age to
world mythology which I argue is
breaking down and Iron Age bureaucracy
mutually reinforce each other because
you the hierarchy right for for dealing
with the problems we were talking about
also seems to be like the ladder that
goes between the two worlds and so they
to this idea of a hierarchy that bridges
between the worlds is also sort of a
fundamental thing that is sewn through a
lot of the existing at least Axial Age
religions and what's interesting I mean
are there's important exceptions to it
Taoism tries to subvert the hierarchy in
some important ways that you just
alluded to but nevertheless I think that
one of the things I think needs to be
undermined
is that complicit mutual support between
hierarchical social organization iron
age bureaucracies and the two worlds
mythology and if what we're describing
is correct then we have something that
simultaneously takes that to apart
and then reconfigures something new in
its place and I think that's very
important
yeah so I don't know try this on see if
this lands the thing that just popped
into my head is the distinction between
a photograph and a hologram hmm yeah
does that land I think so keep going
yeah so other words under the impression
that perhaps at some point this may be
watched by people other than us
distinction that I'm making is in
principle superficially I may have an
image of a particular object and I can
take a photograph of it I can make a
holograph of it in the context of a
photograph what I have the the
photograph has a characteristic where if
I cut the photograph in half and I throw
away the right half and keep the left
half then I have 100% of the left half
and 0% of the right half I'll get to the
point second I think yeah I think I know
where this is going yeah keep going with
the holograph if I take the whole graph
and cut it in half I have 100% and I
threw the right half in the left half I
have a hundred percent of the whole but
at lower resolution right okay that's a
completely different almost like a
Fourier transform in fact Mia Fourier
transform you can get it approaches to
how your encoding reality now the
photograph to me topologically feels
very similar to what you were just
describing and has a certain Iron Age
perspectivism to it yes yes yes there's
a very distinct mapping of location and
information each picker is a what it is
yeah yes yes yes where's the holograph
has something different so for example
let me tell this in the human story i
mean ii mean see if you can years ago
know this feels like it's going in a
good direction keep going so in the
context of a religion there's not a
religion but it's held hollow
graphically the opposition would in fact
be that every every member every human
or every sentient that is a participant
would be holding the whole story
intrinsically and it is in the
relationships
between and among them that the fidelity
of the story becomes more clear
that's excellent this is a very very
different analogy for meaning than in
the context where there is for sure a
perfect copy that is somewhere and the
question is are you putting it in the
right order right right that's wonderful
that makes me think of Michael
Anderson's point about the brain's
exaltation right that the brain isn't
organized with a stable topography
hierarchically like we always try to
think it was right instead each area
gets multiplied eggs acted in different
into different functionalities right you
know the constant circuitry use and so
this area if it's connected with these
things gives me speech but I've expected
with this thing it controls my right
hand if it's connected with in other
ways it makes possible other new
emergent functionality and so there
isn't a hierarchical organization
because there like you said a thing
doesn't have like you said that well you
said information is tied to its location
which is exactly how people still make
these friggin pictures of the brain yeah
and the cartography right the here is
where this happens here is where this
happens here is where this happens when
they're knowing that's not how the brain
works and and the brain is neither
completely holistic and neither
completely localized it's doing this
constant you know dynamic a circuitry
use and react septation of itself
continually and when you were just
describing the holding the the story
holographically that was saying well
that seems to comport really well with
how the brain wants to actually function
yeah yeah so and so we can we can make a
small like a very small concrete scaling
move okay we give it we have good reason
to believe this is out the brain inside
this body engine so if we're gonna be
doing distributed cognition we should do
that that way as well yes exactly exact
on tenuity up and down levels of scale
exactly exactly that's exactly whatever
that's
exactly I will propose it given what you
just said a few minutes ago exactly and
the implications are actually really
powerful in terms of the kinds of things
we may like to see in terms of what Paul
was saying it scalability yes because so
I'm doing something with brain and when
I'm doing something to brains I'm trying
to move from speaking to say having my
hand move there's something like the the
the constellation or the configuration
of the subcomponents and their relation
ality that gives rise to the
transformation of capacity yes very much
very much this just happen in terms of
Methos space I'm sitting there trying to
get a handle on a particular inquiry in
Methos space and the answer is well I
actually have to get the right
constellation and it may see that it's
actually a seven-year-old kid in Bangkok
right now she's the one who's resonant
frequency and the overall hologram is
actually enables the spontaneous
transformation of this particular thing
and clarity in the location in mythos if
there were an inquiry that's really
wonderful that's very good
I like that perfect symmetry across all
possible participants in the
conversation instead of instead of doing
the scale in terms of power you're doing
it in terms of capacity to participate
which i think is a which is a
fundamental difference and I'm wondering
if there's actually as you're saying
that oh yeah I almost felt like there's
a key constantly moving back to this
notion of scalability in the
technological sense which you said the
anti rival of scalability there's
something very very close right there
there's something about the degree to
which you make that movement from power
to capacity to participate there is an
intrinsic motivation on the part of all
participants to support the up gradient
of the capacity to participate yes yes
yes yeah yes excellent
excellent yes yeah if you think about it
there's like there's a shared map
there's a shared map there's a shared
orienting basis that everybody who
increases their capacity to participate
increases the richness and fidelity
therefore the value of the orienting
basis yes
this thing that's being held at the
metal level like it's something he'll
develop over the possibility or at the
level of the holograph that we're
talking about not yet actualize but it
is possibility the actualization comes
afterwards you get the clarity then you
get the reality in the actuality and so
it's in my best interest at all times
under every possible circumstance to
support everyone in becoming more
capable because the thing that they're
contributing to is an unassailable
commons which is this yes yes this
method that's that's that is that is a
very that's very powerful that's I mean
in a sense of a very powerful vision the
way you are just articulated though I
think was beautiful like really
beautiful I mean there's an aesthetic
not only is there intelligibility to it
there's an aesthetic to it that I find
attractive yeah it feels like we're
definitely hahaha
yeah we're jamming like it definitely
there's a song that is wanting to be
played here that it's starting to come
together
whoo ah ha whoa okay that's killer hmm
yeah I'm gonna have to send you this
document this woman sent me yesterday
Hannah I think your name is or Heather
step to the nature it's actually
astounding to be perfectly frank yeah
I'd be really actually any other kind oh
he's got oh hey what I will send this to
you and I will be amazed and intrigued
to see what you say about it because I
just realized that I'm largely saying
what I think she was actually saying and
me actually said I could just call up a
just read to you like one paragraph
please see somebody who's I've
encountered in the context of the game
be Facebook group mmm she says this is
language
that's what she calls an accidental game
be shamanism that sounds great ah there
we go to the extent that the theories
put forth in the first half of this
document are found to be meaningful they
might be taken as early proof of concept
for themselves this document is not the
result of conscious propositional
inquiry by its writer to say that its
contents have surprised this writer is
an understatement with a background in
the arts and humanities this documents
writer possesses only a rudimentary
propositional understanding of systems
thinking complexity science which it's
abattoir annoying and shamanism
she didn't even propositional II
understand the term meta psycho
technology until halfway through the
writing of the document she realized she
might be describing one all right so two
weeks ago with the loose idea of
creating a post for the game be Facebook
group the writer set out to type up some
nascent thoughts are on the trans
contextual application of artistic
capacity she's an artist and the
possibility of arts funding as a capital
source became V projects to a
disorienting flux of writing editing
intuitive feeling default mode Network
thinking interactions in online game B
space and uncharacteristic but
manageable levels of sleeplessness the
letter has instead witnessed this
documents in a probable birth the
unfolding
has for the writer bin in one sense
profoundly confusing but in another and
in the context of the theory so far
presented it may in fact be easily
explainable
that's quite wonderful yeah Lisa please
send that to me yeah it's very good
that's pretty good yeah cuz I want to
create the context I specifically want
to create the context so that the
perspective or the perspective that you
have when you go into the beginning of
it is landing on the notion of you're
dealing with somebody for whom almost
all of the words that you will see so
artfully assembled from a propositional
perspective are in many ways even
unknown like if you were to actually
double click on something is they could
you now give me a dictionary definition
with this
is she may not be able to but the thing
hangs together that's interesting I very
much want to see that done stupid that's
cool all right great so so I get the
feeling was oddly enough almost using a
little bit of the methodology that she
was just describing I've been waiting
for the working group on the new to need
to happen
pregnancy moving into the into the
braxton-hicks contractions moving beyond
Braxton Hicks and I can feel the Braxton
Hicks contractions I'm even just this
conversation like wow I think there's a
lot really quick I do too I do too I
know that you and Zack mentioned that
you are part of a thing that he's
putting together around when he calls
meta psychology and there's something
there that I think is quite good useful
this weekend I'm actually engaging in a
collaboration that I think will help
inform my perspective on the new
religion project but I get the feeling
that in the order of at the current pace
that's what I'm reminded of Nietzsche's
commentary about elephants which he said
that I've discovered that I am an
elephant it takes 18 months for idea to
just it inside me that that will be
moving into a more sort of embodied or
more concrete phase involving like neat
gatherings at fun places with people
probably just as winter like in the dead
of winter like yeah anyways everywhere
is my Center and of course we can choose
places that aren't necessarily
negatively impacted by the dead of
winter how we look right now just is
just FYI like in terms of my own like
process I'm feeling that happening it's
getting it's getting more and more
obviously alive so well because I'm back
I'm off sabbatical the Reading Week in
February would be the optimist time for
me that's kind of like spring break or
something yes exactly
okay great that might work perfectly
because I I'm reasonably sure
in fact my my ex-wife has my older kids
for that period of time so that would
actually create space that I would have
as well assuming they align which they
may not but a possibility all right man
well so uh do we want to keep this
private for now do we want to share it I
mean I you know do we want to make it
public or do we want to share it with
you know some select others are the UM
it feels to me like sharing it is
actually what it wants if it wants to be
sure okay so I'm not you like I feel
they're almost like confused by the
question but maybe there's some people
that we could we can identify that we
could share it with who made themselves
somehow have some ideas on the sharing
up sure sure sure sure
in any event let me stop yeah I gotta go
soon yeah