howdy this is Jim rut and this is the
Jim rut show listeners have asked us to
provide pointers some of the resources
we talked about on the show we now have
links to books and articles referenced
in recent podcasts that are available on
our website
we also offer full transcripts go to Jim
rut show.com that's Jim ruts show com
this is Jim rut I just want to let folks
know that my voice quality in this
episode isn't up to our usual high
standards a technical glitch
it's definitely listenable but just want
to let you know today's guest Zach Stein
writer educator and futurist working to
bring a greater sense of sanity and
justice to education and skin' to me
here Jim hey good to have you back you
know Zach was on the show just a couple
of weeks ago but as he and I discussed
before we started the episode there's
just so much content in his book that
we're going to be digging into that we
at that time decided it made a heck of a
lot more sense to schedule a second
interview and this is where we are
basically halfway through my notes from
the first show as we dig into his book
education at a time between worlds as
usual links to that book and other
resources we discuss will be available
on Zach's episode page at Jim Racha Dom
a little bit of review of Zach's
background he's studying philosophy and
religion at Hampshire College and as I
pointed out last time he's the third
Hampshire college grad we've had on her
show something interesting going on here
then he studied educational neuroscience
human development and the philosophy of
education at Harvard University he's the
co-founder of electic a-- a
not-for-profit dedicated to
research-based justice oriented reform
of large-scale standardized testing in
k-12 higher education and business and
he's consulted with advise various
not-for-profits and for-profits business
so before we get in like we did last
time we're going to do a little bit of
definition and a little bit of framing
and then we'll hop into some of the
details so first serve a framing
from your book early on I don't think we
talked about it explicitly last time I
think it's a good play start this time
is your idea that this is a quote the
idea that oppressive and unjust
educational systems can undermine the
very possibility of humanity's continued
existence is urgent could you expand on
that yeah I mean this is actually what
brought me to the study of civilization
of collapse existential risks
catastrophic risk and you know the what
kind of I was part of my friendship with
Daniel Schumacher Berger and Jordan Hall
was basically I independently even
really known there was a field of
existential risk research started to
realize that well back up you remember I
mentioned last time that
intergenerational transmission teaching
and learning teach early Authority are a
species specific trait which are
arguably like via Michael Tomasello the
thing that is really what distinguishes
a human from the animal and gets the
human up into this domain of cultural
evolution and even into a position where
it could destroy all life on the planet
so that means that there's something
about the necessity of continuity of
intergenerational transmission for
civilization to keep going and when a
civilization has breakdown meaning
existential or catastrophic catastrophe
and what that means it's just like
massive loss of life if not loss of all
life which is to say self inflicted
species level extinction of the human
and so I realized I had this insight
that oh geez like education is actually
very serious in the way that worrying
about nuclear reactors is serious or
worrying about existential risks of
exponential technology that it's in that
same class of concerns that if we really
mess it up we could end up kind of
initiating a cascade of downstream
effects that are actually almost
unimaginably bad and I talked about
the intergenerational warfare last time
but there are other things which are
simpler to get which are tied up in the
capabilities crisis by creating nuclear
reactors and creating nuclear waste
we've also created roles and
responsibilities within our civilization
that require a certain extremely high
level of education to just simply do and
so like and these are roles and
responsibilities that actually humans
are gonna need to man for thousands of
years right because of the half-life of
nuclear wastes and the difficulty of
kind of managing these massively complex
scientific infrastructures and so what
that means is that like if civilization
gets so disrupted economically or
through pandemic or etc that we can
actually execute at a very high level
graduating PhD level begat basically
beyond PhD level nuclear physicists then
we all a sudden got ourself a situation
where when a couple people die no one
knows how to man the nuclear reactor and
then you can just expand that way of
thinking about the intergenerational
transmission necessary to reproduce
social roles and responsibilities just
across the board I'm gonna jump back in
with a little bit of a slightly
obnoxious question which is you say that
oppressive and unjust educational
systems can undermine suppose it turned
out that oppressive and unjust systems
were the right way to maintain stability
and what makes you think that they're
not this gets into just theory of
learning how do people learn how do you
know we talked about the limits of
growth of an extractive civilization in
the biosphere right that there's only so
much you can do to quote-unquote nature
before you're a self terminating process
this is also true of quote-unquote human
nature that there are limits of the
human mind brain in terms of its ability
to actually build capacity motivation
earnest sense making a whole bunch of
other factors are actually necessary
do some of these jobs I'm describing
which although you could maybe simulate
doing it for a little while with a
totalitarian completely oppressive and
unjust educational system in the long
run you would undermine at the level of
individual motivation and identity
formation the capacity for that kind of
complex skill development and so you
just have to look at the research on how
learning works in kids who are growing
up in traumatic environments to see that
this is true so yeah so this is
basically what I talked about as the
inefficiency of injustice in my book
great phrase
yeah if you if you so it's like in the
pursuit of efficiency we actually create
in justices which then make the whole
thing in the long run way less efficient
than it would have been if we just had a
little bit of mind on what's fair and
what's not traumatizing at a very simple
level for the human which incapacitates
them is what I'm arguing and a few other
things so it's also the case that when
you start to roll out efficiency
infrastructures and I'm looking at this
specifically in terms of standardized
testing infrastructures in the school
and the efficiency oriented testing you
also start to have to roll out
surveillance apparatus ease and a whole
bunch of other things that become
expensive and inefficient and also then
double down on the destruction of the
morale and motivation so you had the
general perception that the situation
you're in is fair and for learning a
particular in childhood this is very
important you know I studied John Rawls
as I mentioned last time I also studied
Lawrence Kohlberg who were to the great
kind of moral philosophers of you know
post-war America and it's interesting
that fairness right is of course the
Aldean principle that governs adjust
society but fairness is also a concept
that's discussed on the playground with
little kids amongst themselves
and so it's a you know it's a it's a
concept that is you know basically all
the way up and all the way down in human
culture you find this this notion and
for educational system to work
the combination of meritocracy with
democracy and the Galit Arianism needs
to be accomplished and we've been a
situation for a while where there's been
a simulation of a meritocracy and that
again you can do that for a little while
yeah but you can't sustain that
indefinitely because we need demand the
nuclear reactors
so that means physics department so we
actually need do need to get something
that looks like legitimate teacherly
Authority and accurate meritocratic
award of capacity and effort and so it's
interesting like my first book was about
justice and standardized testing and I
talked about testing a lot in my second
book and similar terms but I'm not I was
you know electical was building
standardized assessments I'm not opposed
to assessment I actually think it's a
it's one of the things that makes social
systems work is a sense that we can
accurately tell the qualities of
people's capacities and be able to
distribute rewards in a reasonable way
instead of in a at best unreasonable at
worst literally contrived to indicate
ibly distribute based on a variety of
factors like who your parents are or the
color of your skin is or things of that
nature so I'm glad you pull that bit out
because what you see is that if we
if we continue down the line that we've
been going with the forms of testing and
the nature of the human capital driven
conceptions of Education we could end up
and I'm arguing maybe we already have
put ourselves in a situation that's
actually dangerous from the perspective
of the capabilities crisis and the
legitimacy crisis and the meeting crisis
and etc but the meta crisis the meta
crisis as we talked about just briefly
just for reset for the audience
currently one of the ones I'm most
interested in is that is our systems as
a society become more and more complex
the stack of dependencies for instance
to get power to all these houses and to
create computer chips to control the
great etc the level of complexity has
risen considerably more rapidly than the
capability of humans who are let's say
voters right and so this gap between
capability and emergent complexity is
what to my mind is perhaps the biggest
driver of the meta crisis having every
aspect of everything we've talked about
can come back to this complexity versus
capability curves I need to see them in
my mind right ones going up linearly
one's going up exponentially we're
fucked and that's why we need a new form
of Education back to fairness I'd point
people to the works of Sam Bowles and
herb Guinness and others but I happen to
know those two guys and they've done a
lot of work on the idea of fairness
using simple games all around the world
across many cultures and while they find
fairness to be absolutely foundational
everywhere and ideas of at least four
mulleted for tat style reciprocity to be
universal it's interesting that
definitions of fairness vary quite a bit
by culture in some cultures the idea of
altruism seems to be utterly repugnant
particularly hunter-gatherers seems to
be more of an accounting type fairness
now reciprocal altruism for sure so but
anyway so it's interesting to note when
it's true of Tolbert yes and this is the
whole point of Kohlberg's work after I
should dig in that I did read Rawls and
I found it interesting and I did
actually put myself through the
experiment of the veil of ignorance to
see what world I would select which was
kind of a fun exercise
but anyway so let's move on to the next
definition you frame your work to a
degree at least as social justice now
that's a word that can mean a whole lot
of things you know Ann and Randy Ann
might say you know social justice is
where the makers get the rewards and the
takers don't right I kind of doubt
that's what you have in mind when you
say social justice so when you think of
your work in education as being based on
social justice
what does that mean to you that's funny
because when I wrote the dissertation
the term social justice hadn't quite yet
become a pejorative so and if I were to
reframe it I would just say justice
because what I'm talking about it's
actually very philosophically robust
tradition of thinking about moral
problems as having cognitive dimensions
which is to say that there are rights
and wrongs and reasoning about social
problems that are comparable to the
rights and wrongs and thinking about a
science problem or a problem in you know
physics or a problem with the material
or causal world and so I'm taking a
cognitivist view of social justice like
papa mas does like Rawls does rewind a
little bit you get someone like Immanuel
Kant and incidentally utilitarianism is
is a cognitivist view also which is the
same thing yet we can figure out what's
right and wrong in the social world it's
not a matter of as some philosophical
positions would maintain emotional or
aesthetic preference that the ethical
and moral is irrational and it's only
the scientific and material that is
rational cognitive so that's the first
bit when I talk about social justice I'm
actually talking about justice I'm
actually talking about a very strict
form of conversation about what's like
for example the framing of a
constitution of a civilization or
society that's a task that is not about
protest it is also not about identity
politics and it's not about a whole
bunch of
things that get tied up in the social
justice pejorative a social justice
warrior kind of way of dismissing this
and it's interesting to me like a whole
social analysis of why it is the case
that the social justice term became
basically used as a as a pejorative by a
variety of groups you know many groups
mostly I often agree with what's being
said sometimes in the critique of the
kind of alt left let's call it but what
I'm coming from is actually something
quite different and so you know Rawls is
where I would rooted in the original
position is probably the best way in
which is you know when you're thinking
about let's say the framing of a
constitution of a society or the
building of an organization let's say
like a school system and you're thinking
about the standardized testing
infrastructure within the school system
whether that infrastructure is kind of
just or in just is a matter of making a
kind of thought experiment or decision
procedure where you say basically if I
didn't know who I would be what
capacities I would have how I would
navigate the system which is to say I
wouldn't know which position in that
school system with that standardized
testing infrastructure I don't know if
I'd be hit learning disabled kid if I'd
be a poor kid growing up without parents
to help them I don't know if I'd be a
rich kid I don't know if I'd be smart
right you know who you're gonna be could
you agree to that infrastructure right
this is what Kohlberg called
playing moral musical chairs this is a
very complex form of cognitive
perspective taken and so your notion
about fairness showing up in different
cultures differently true it also shows
up in one's life span and one's
cognitive development the level
differently you know the kids on the
playground talk about fairness basically
math like how many M&Ms and the equal
split perfectly equal split of M&Ms is
maybe fair it's very much in a counting
procedure and often with a kind of
structural ego centrism
but the moral musical chairs I'm
describing is actually a radically
decentered view to use a piagetian term
the the center of the decision
not one's own identity you're actually
trying to take the perspective of
everyone within the system and imagine
all the possible routes through the
system and then think okay but I really
wouldn't like for example if you're
framing the constitution of a society
and you have a position where people are
slaves could you really sign off on that
Constitution not knowing whether or not
you'd be a slave right so the decision
procedure constrains the cognitive
operation of thinking about the basic
structure of a society and if something
within the society can pass that kind of
thought experiment then there's a good
reason to think that it's pretty fair
right like so for example the SAT
correlates with socioeconomic status
period and very clearly shows that if
you have the money to take a test prep
course you will do better on the SAT so
like I couldn't set up a standardized
testing infrastructure where if I was
poor I would be systemically
disadvantaged in getting access to the
meritocratic doors that open from the
high standardized tests that's another
issue of outright cheating it's also
facilitated by money as we've seen with
Scotch admissions scandal but the point
is that you couldn't in good conscience
agree to such an infrastructure from the
high behind the veil of ignorance you
could say you would make up some stuff
to try to kind of like back out of the
fact that it is actually unjust but as
Rawls would argue if we take just the
tools of analytical philosophy logic
game theory you run game theory from
behind the original position and then
you have to think actually it is
irrational to agree to that because I
don't know where I'll be yes and no I
actually did a little analysis of Rawls
theory of justice and what he doesn't
quite grapple with is that people's risk
reward preferences can vary right so for
instance if one had a higher utility for
being a slave driver than disutility for
being a slave then oddly enough
utilitarian you know analytical logic
could say yeah I ought to be in favor of
slavery and he missed that at least in
theory of justice he didn't describe it
in any
at least that I could find yeah we could
argue that because that's not entirely
true then you're not doing the veil of
ignorance experiment correctly well you
could be you could have a different
perspective on your own preferences
right that you say Oh Rai you're not
supposed to bring your individual
preferences behind the veil of ignorance
nor believe that you will have those
preferences when the ignorance is lifted
which is to say it's not Zak with all
Zak's proclivities and capabilities that
gets put somewhere like in a slave
position I don't know what my
proclivities will be I don't know if
I'll be a tough guy yeah turn up turn up
to do the reasoning properly even behind
the veil one needs to relieve oneself of
one's personal biases and preferences as
much as possible and take the position
of basically the generalized epistemic
subject and so that's very important
part of the procedure so if you model
the procedure differently then yeah it
can be rendered nonsensical but it's
actually quite rigorous well that's a
good good time have to go back and
reread that I would spent days reading
it and writing a series of notes and
unfortunately I lost my notes but I have
this very nice rebuttal but anyway we'll
leave that for another day your response
is actually good now again early on in
your book I read something that caused a
very strong negative knee-jerk I
realized that later on you know you
aren't actually saying it in the way I
initially thought but I'll read the
quote anyway and explain where my
knee-jerk was and then we'll pivot to I
think a very interesting topic
here's your language it was very clear
that the creation of a new kind of
society would require the creation of a
new kind of human ah buzzer I have long
postulated what I call the no new man
rule after 1994 I probably started
calling it the no new person rule and
then you look at history some of the
worst you know heinous crimes of the
human race have been couched in terms
we're gonna create a new man right from
the the excesses of the French
Revolution which was kind of a mixed bag
too you know darker things like Marxist
Leninist ISM and
perhaps the most extreme form I'm aware
of the Khmer Rouge who believe we're
gonna create a new man by brute force
and if we have to kill the third of them
so be it and yet of course as one reads
much more deeply in your book you know
it's vastly more nuanced than that you
know the way I tend to frame this is
it's kind of thinking about personal
change called the new man a new person
whatever that means and institutions and
the signals and institutions emanate and
interact with the person's have to
essentially go evolve together and at
least I took away the sense that you
would not disagree with that framing no
I mean that's that's right and yet it's
not I'm actually it's interesting that
phrase now I prefer to say a new kind of
person rather than a new kind of human
it was John Verve a key who kind of like
suggested that and so yeah to create a
new kind of civilization we do need to
create a new kind of person or to
rethink the nature of personhood and and
in a sense where we would just be taking
responsibility for something that's
happening anytime anyway whenever we
build something fundamentally new like a
new infrastructure you know like the
electrical grid has made us into new
kinds of people as had like people who
don't know how to start fire or harvest
wild edibles from the woods and so
there's this sense of well yeah if we if
we're really thinking seriously about
something like game B or something like
you know non-rival rest's kind of
civilization one that psychologically
sustainable and let's say economically
equitable and fair to do that we'd have
to remake the basic assumptions of
personhood just as they were remade when
we exited the pre-modern world and
entered the modern world it's that kind
of transformation of the whole notion of
what it means to be a person or a human
right and this is again back to the
species specific traits that
characterize the human cultural
transmission and actually cultural
creation is tied up in that dynamic of
intergenerational transmission so in
fact the human has always been that self
transforming species and so we're in a
big moment of self transformation again
which is to the notion of time between
worlds you know the French Revolution is
an example of the kind of climax of a
prior time between worlds you know
basically this route from the
Renaissance to the Enlightenment is one
of these periods I've just studied a lot
in part because of the great educational
phosphor John Amos Comenius but also
because it has these structural
similarities to our own time when
there's just a radical world system
transformation underway and along with
it a radical transformation of the basic
frameworks and stories and cultural kind
of deep code so yes that's kind of what
I mean by a new person and it's
interesting that the attempts to use
modern biomedical technology to create a
new kind of person is actually a way to
encode the modern in the personhood
forever you see so there's a strange
paradox here where what I'm talking
about is an educational revolution not a
biomedical transhumanist revolution
because that would actually get you what
you just said which is no new human we'd
have the modern human forever and
probably again there'd be massive
disruption of its of intergenerational
transmission as a result of deep level
biomedical intervention into the
conditions of capability and personality
developments I think we touched on this
last time so yeah although there's you
know if you took that chord out of
context and we're trying to really stick
it to me yeah there's these eugenics
overtones and the Stalinist overtones
and all of that stuff but in fact it's
my position is anathema to too precisely
that way of thinking about the problem
so yeah I'm glad that you kept reading
even though you have to knee-jerk
reaction goddamn Stalinist fuck that guy
right now I had had enough you know
pretty good signal about your work to
say oh yeah I'm sure he must not exactly
mean that interpretation I will push
back a little bit about the fret not
push back but frame the French
Revolution his the French Revolution you
know as you say was in some sense the
capstone of the Enlightenment but
unfortunately while it had some good
effects it also ended up rebounding and
reinforcing authoritarianism I like to
look at the two prior revolutions that
ended up pretty much solidly to the good
which was first the Glorious Revolution
in Britain was at 1688 are there abouts
that ended absolute monarchy right Wow
that was a pretty damn big punctuation
mark and then of course our own American
Revolution which formally and in law and
people don't realize this formally in
law it's in the Constitution
ended feudalism right feudalism had been
a system in operation for thousand years
more or less in high form for five
hundred and we formally ended it we no
longer doffed our hats when the toffs
came down the street etc and we did that
by institutional change actually even
before the people changed that I'm sure
the same was true in England the other
was kind of a abrupt disconnect that for
elitist reasons actually the Glorious
Revolution occurred and absolute
monarchy was abolished and that no doubt
had to have had some downstream effects
on humans but of course in the American
Revolution case the humans have been
reforming themselves right on the
frontier a long way away from manner and
Lourdes in most cases and so the two
kind of worked together the human change
on the frontier and you know as
freeholders and yeoman and small
craftsmen independent of anybody but
that it was kind of punctuated and tied
together informal institutions in the
form of the US Constitution so I look to
those two as better examples perhaps
than the French Revolution of the kind
of thing we should be thinking about
here going forward
I agree of course yeah you mentioned it
but yeah there's a whole string of them
and they're tied
of course the founding of the Royal
Academy of Sciences I think that was
like 1660 or something in England and
you start to get the independence of
sense-making from the church apparatus
as well which is a huge kind of part of
the revolutions of modernity and then
also the standardization of
international weights and measures you
know the French Revolution also brought
the metric system which is interesting
to think about because this is about the
movement out of a medieval feudalistic
measurement regime into a modern
basically capitalistic measurement
scheme capitalistic and scientific
measurement scheme and that's again part
of what we're in now my there's a
chapter in the book measurement which is
I think it's my favorite chapter and
it's pointed at this too that were you
know as Benjamin Bratton speaks of you
know we are at the beginnings of a
massive lead distributed planetary
computational stack which includes a
measurement infrastructure that's
completely unprecedented in its scope
and kind of regulatory capacity so it's
similar that like you know the feudal
system was a ragtag system of weights
and measures completely corrupted by the
feudal lords where you'd go to one
market in the measures would be this way
in another market it'd be another way
and then of course with modernity and
you get the metric system and you get
the lack of divine right Fiat to set new
measures and the building of
international scientific consensus
around measurement and with the move out
of modernity into what's next let's say
something like a meta modern you end up
getting this planetary measurement
infrastructure of incredible scope and
also incredible invasiveness and
regulatory capacity when you look at the
biomechanical metrics and
so all of that is just to say that yeah
there's there's something afoot which
puts us in a similar position to the
Americans before the American Revolution
but it's it's even strange to say that
because it's not the founding of Nations
that we're talking about here it's
something else it's what comes next this
I like to say right we don't quite yet
know what comes next but it's not a
recapitulation of the eighteenth-century
nation-state I think we're pretty sure
about that right I mean I think it's an
educational revolution and this is why
my interest Khomeini's like many people
have never heard of communis but he was
a he was a massively important figure in
exactly those days leading up to the
American and French Revolutions seeing
us through that treacherous 30 Years War
this time between the Renaissance and
the Enlightenment convenience was one of
the key nodes of intellectual influence
I could speak a lot about that but he
inspired so much of what came and he
argued that it was essentially the
transformation of personhood through the
transformation of educational systems so
along with the French Revolution and
American Revolution you get changes in
mass public school very quickly and that
was also one of the things that would
have just made the feudal order the
lords Heather brains come out of their
ears like it was unthinkable to want to
educate so many people of so many walks
of life in so many diverse topics in a
systematic way
like funded by the state like come on
before then as convenience was like at
pains to point out it was a small number
of people who are educated almost
entirely in authoritarian religious
contexts with brutal physical
punishments and learning obscure latin
like that was what school was everything
else happened in the guild system and
around the home and in the community of
what was necessary
so there's moving to this this to
stinked institution of the school let
alone the large state public school that
was also part of what those revolutions
brought us which means that we're also
looking at the other side of this at a
fundamentally different kind of
educational configuration at the core of
what's driving the intergenerational
transmission of the civilization and so
that that's kind of what I'm trying to
point to which is what convenience was
pointing to now this camellias I've
never heard of them so you'll have to
send me a pointer to him so we can
include it on the episode page and I'll
go read them myself totally and to give
you a sense like he you know take heart
Rene Descartes wrote his meditations at
Khomeini's his suggestion and Rene
Descartes has a large manuscript about
kamini is's pants avec vision pants off
a meaning universal wisdom so Descartes
v Descartes he's inspired by community's
vision writing this whole book on it
which remains
I think unpublished but available in the
archive somewhere you know convenience
was a direct inspiration for the
founding of the Royal Academy of
Sciences which I'd already mentioned
which is the kind of institution that we
most associated with like boom the
Enlightenment happened when that first
scientific organizations found it you
know they were inspired by communist
vision of a core kind of like center of
knowledge creation and knowledge
dissemination which would feed out into
a system of public schools basically and
so there's of course a lot more to say
there about community and his
involvement with the Rosicrucian order
his work with the Bohemian Brethren as a
religious figure very complex character
and again to signal another change like
many people working in that time were
you know trying to associate with noble
Lords feudal lords to get support like
Descartes for example but kamini has
actually ended up in Amsterdam and he
dedicates his most famous book the great
didactic
to the Dutch East Indian company right
and now the Dutch East India Company was
one of those first it kind of like seeds
of the true capitalist world order that
was emerging and in a way the education
system convenience was recommending like
this public schooling this pan Suffolk
University this thing that we eventually
turned into something like a modern
nation state school system that is
that's different from a feudal education
system as the Dutch East Indian
companies modus operandi was from the
futile istic economic markets and
commodity kind of like trade reps and
stuff so he was well aware where the
shifting of the power was going in terms
of you know new world view new economic
order new measurement meta structure new
educational configurations quite a
visionary character and he was from what
the region we now call Czechoslovakia
here so that that's a kind of a rabbit
hole there and I've got some work going
on with think-tank perspectiva although
it's not truly a think-tank it's
something much more complex and kind of
beautiful my work with Jonathan Rossum
in the UK has me working on the from the
communis historical research
sounds very interesting and you say at
least similar at the turning point to
where we are today so well worth digging
into let's move all along a little bit
one of the things that we didn't talk a
tremendous amount about last time other
than my little discursive talk about how
I found the educational department at an
elite research university rejecting
modern cognitive science let's turn to
your thinking about modern cognitive
science modern cognitive neuroscience
and what relevance are what lessons does
it have for us as we're thinking about
the new education
hmm yeah I mean this brings me back to
my graduate work in the field of mind
brain education and I mean there's a few
things I like that I can say basically
Kurt Fisher who was my advisor found a
way to integrate a lot of the emerging
cognitive science into a broader
developmental framework so you know when
I look at cognitive science and
cognitive neuroscience mostly my concern
is with its inadequacy to inform
pedagogy because of its lacking a
developmental perspective now this isn't
universally true but generally you're
getting cognitive science that's done
and especially neuroscience we using
scanners where you know the majority of
that work is done on sophomores who are
in college because there are available
experimental subjects you know when
you're looking for informing learning
theory you need to be noting very
carefully that the brain of a
two-year-old is different from the brain
of a five year olds different from the
brain of a ten year old different from
the brain of an 18 year old different
brain in 425 are like big important
qualitatively distinct neurological
identity and cognitive structures but
most cognitive science talks about how
the mind works period you can't get a
theory of learning off the ground with
that now you can talk about learning of
a specific skill right or at a specific
age of a specific complexity but that is
learning at the kind of microscopic
level if you're looking at learning over
the spans of weeks and months and years
then you can have a broader way of
thinking about human development and so
Fisher skill theory which incidentally
has as a backbone the levels that have
been codified by Michael Commons as the
model of hierarchical complexity and
then I think you know in a sense more
importantly dawson's work with
delectable assessment system who she was
my mentor for
time and there you actually have a
sophisticated theory of learning that
goes across the lifespan that can
actually be turned into an assessment
system and used in educational contexts
so yeah so that's my first reflection is
that the work I'm attracted to to inform
educational systems is work that's
reflectively developmental and looking
across the lifespan lifespan development
work and there's important stuff you can
get at the level of like principles from
neuroscience so for example we know that
Allah I Antonio Damasio and one of my
colleagues Mary Helena more Dena yang
that emotion is inseparable from what we
think of as rationality which is to say
that the classic and back to Descartes
the classic modern split but you can
find a nature of course philosophy too
with certain forms of stoicism you know
that you need to get the emotion out of
the way in order to think clearly this
is not the case and learning for example
without emotion is not nearly as
powerful and sticky as learning in an
emotionally rich context which is to say
if you really care about something you
will learn it and it will stick if you
are trying to learn to cram for tests
for extrinsic motivation you will maybe
some of it will stick but most of you
won't and so this is important to
understand it that's a very high-level
principle I'm taking from neuroscience
it's not about like where that happens
in the brain right it's not like neo
phrenology induced by access to fancy
fMRI scanners which is also what a lot
of a neuroscience looks like yeah I
could I criticized that a lot right all
right yeah I just think yeah where is
man like show me what it's doing right
what it's doing and then they also use
functional differentiations in the brain
to drive theorizing about cognitive
process but that's ass backwards so
anyway there's a whole bunch of complex
things there but that question was about
learning
and so yeah the the emotional components
what I take away from the neuroscience
primarily but also that learning takes a
while which is to say that you know
because of the emotional processing
necessary to actually do for example
moral reasoning this is Mary Helen do or
do you know Yang's work that if you're
forced to reason about a moral problem
in a very short amount of time you don't
actually have a chance to do the kind of
emotional processing necessary to
actually move through the kind of data
of the different kind of considerations
which in part are emotional and so
that's another thing to take I think
also from the neuroscience beginning at
the level of principle not even at the
level of like finding that the trend of
the findings is showing us that learning
is emotionally Laden and the emotion
cannot be ignored in learning so that's
that's one tip there but in general I
orient to the cognitive developmental
work Dorian my learning theory and you
know you spoke with Hansie Frye not come
and I assume you spoke about the levels
of hierarchical complexity that he works
with we did but yet part of organizing
in a coherent future for education is
basing it on the kind of science that's
up that's appropriate for understanding
how teaching and learning works so yeah
I appreciate the question yeah let me
point to a book I just finished reading
actually started reading it before I
read your book I finished reading it
after that's called how we learn by
Stanislas Dehaene II I think you
pronounce it's a French very eminent
cognitive neuroscientist and he does all
the things that you say that the
neuroscientists don't do right he
focuses tremendously all the way back to
prenatal and between he and his wife
they they worked with lots of babies and
scanners and things of that ilk and in
addition to emotion which again I agree
is very important and Damacio is one of
my central thinkers about the science of
consciousness and then they were always
point to his book the feeling of what
happens well worth reading for anyone
who really wants to understand who
what we are but the Hany really comes
down strongly I've got it very
convincing that we're not paying
anywhere near enough attention in
education to attention we're not paying
attention to attention I think he
actually says that and particularly goes
in quite depth on one of the things that
makes humans different than other
animals then believe you may have
mentioned this on our call is so called
shared attention exactly something that
even apes aren't so good at and he then
generalizes that to something quite
similar to what I would call your
teacher Lee authority call it the
pedagogical stance which is a kind of
relationship most of us focusing is on
very young children you 2 years old or
under and how the young Homo sapiens
seems to have built in the ability to go
into a pedagogical relationship with
someone who is in the pedagogical stance
usually a parent or caregiver and
imitate them in certain ways follow
their gaze make some surprisingly
powerful scientific style Bayesian
inferences about what's real by
analyzing how the pedagogical person is
responding etc and so I found that very
interesting and of course you had some
practical things like ones that just
strike me as common sense get those
fucking cellphones out of the classroom
what the hell is anybody thinking
allowing someone to bring a cell phone
into the classroom and he talked quite a
bit about the need for my great teachers
are able to capture and hold the
students attention right then so anyway
I would point to that book is doing many
of the things that you rightfully
critique some neuroscience for skipping
till then yeah I don't think that's a I
don't think that's a coincidence I mean
Dehaene was involved with the founding
of the mind brain education society as
was I at Harvard when I was there with
Kurt Fisher Howard Gardner and other
folks and so there's an emphasis in
those initial conversations about the
field of educational neuroscience
specifically Curt Fisher's kind of
guidance to that emerging field having
to do with not making the mistakes I
just kind of rattled off for just do
lifespan work like get kids at different
ages
and consider intersubjectivity right
which are calling joint attention or
shared attention consider that you know
so there's a lot of focus on the student
brain the learning brain but there's
also something happening in teachers
Antonio bot ro studied the teaching
brain and so the joint attentional
situation it's two distinct roles you
know and they are neurologically
distinct but then the two brains are
actually in a kind of resonance
essentially so and that's kind of like
work that has been emerging for maybe
the past five to eight years in terms of
like people thinking in a more complexed
and developmental way about both the
developing brain and cognitive
capacities and the fact that that
developing brain and cognitive
capacities those are held in a social
context and so I'm glad to see Dehaene
also focusing on the what Tomasello
noted which is what I noted that yeah
this joint attentional situation is
truly unique in the animal world and
that's the core it's like the primordial
core of the possibility of teacherly
authority resides and in that and it
severe in the child and in the parent as
long as the parent hasn't been confused
by social media and self-help books
about how to be present with children
there is an instinctual awareness
incidentally there's an instinctive
awareness of the levels of development
that I was discussing you know attentive
adults speak differently to teenagers
than they do to you know 10 year olds
than they do to 2 year olds you just
moderate the complexity of your language
so there is inside already pre-existing
in the life world as to the kinds of
social relationships that make for good
educational relationships yet
Stanislas Dehaene x' work on numeracy in
the brain is actually really deep and
fascinating
I think it's books called the number
sense and you see there that there's
basically mathematics does not reside
in the world or in your brain
mathematics resides in the relationship
between your brain and the world and
your brain basically has been evolved to
distill extremely abstract principles of
mathematics from the regularities of the
physical world but there's also
something internal to the state of the
nervous system that's involved it's not
just the world imprinting mathematics on
the brain it's the brain constructing
and distilling mathematics from the
world of the laws of mathematics and so
I asked a Haina ones basically like is
there something similar in the moral
right which is to say because I remember
I said moral questions or cognitive
questions there's right or wrong is it
the case that the invariance of the
moral world the invariance of the life
world that's relevant to fairness
justice authenticity self-actualization
a whole bunch of factors just like we
extract the invariants of the physical
world through our number sense is it the
case that we actually can extract the
invariant Universal features of the
moral world the social world in a
similar way and Dane said he didn't know
but he thought probably it was true and
I'm pretty sure he's done work and I
haven't explored his work in a long time
I'm excited to be talking about it
actually I'm gonna look into it but I
think he did do some experiments that
has did Mary Helena mode you know yang
on the affective or emotional
neuroscience of moral judgment and
complex kind of ethical and identity
considerations so I look into that as
well because it kind of backs up this
idea that the rauzein conception of
fairness and let's say we we tweak it
out and we fix it up and make it make an
even more in solid thought experiment to
address your concerns but that's
something like that there's a structure
that is as real as the things we know
about mathematical structure
and so that means that just like if we
get the math wrong shits gonna break if
we get if we get those dimensions of the
social world wrong in our design it's
also going to break and this is back to
the could we build a totalitarian
education system and actually reproduce
the civilization in perpetuity no we
couldn't because we we basically cooked
in the wrong mathema moral mathematics
to the you know the moral universals to
the to the basic design of the thing so
it'll break just like if we make a
nuclear reactor and don't do the right
computer code so that's a little bit
more on Dehaene his work as as
fascinating and I also mentioned Mary
Ellen amor Dino yang who's also she
works closely with Damacio kind of
bringing his work down into the
educational spaces really interesting
stuff and one more thing to pull out
which is this notion of imitation which
you mentioned which is a ubiquitous part
of the joint attentional situation that
we're kind of discussing here and it's
very interesting to note that the
mechanism of imitation also arguably at
the level we do at species specific
trait was identified very early as the
kind of core of psychological
development and learning by James mark
Baldwin before him there were others who
had toyed with it but he brought it
forward in the you know the eighteen I
think 70s or 80s but what I want to know
here is that that Baldwyn Ian notion
James and Republicans most well know for
the Baldwin effect in biology but he was
actually a brilliant psychologist and
inspiration to John Piaget and others
but the Baldwin Ian notion of imitation
was taken up both by Lacan and by Girard
Rene Girard right so there's actually
this way to bring these notions of joint
attention and imitation up into very
deep conversations in the
psychoanalytical and the mythological
and cultural as with Girard
mimetic desire and a few other things
that he works with in his kind of
beautiful system are actually rooted in
this Baldwin Ian notion of imitation
Pierre janae I think also the famous
French psychologist who was an
inspiration to Baldwin so there's
something again deep about the nature of
personhood that we're talking about here
where we are the teaching and learning
species and we are that species which
kind of makes its living in the space
between the elder and the youth right
absolutely that the joint attentional
situation with you kind of like
accoutrements of imitation wedded to
these levels of development give us the
potential to be extremely kind of
organically malleable and interrelated
with one another in our in our cultures
so there's something kind of how do I
almost wanted to say like tender at the
core of the human even though as your
eye points out it kind of ricochets up
into violence that takes a while to get
going like it begins actually with you
and your mom and you and your siblings
and other places where you actually kind
of learn what it means to be a person
and so one of the concerns I have again
back to the educational meta-crisis is
that screen culture runs interference on
a lot of those processes and the
breakdown and teacherly Authority we
discussed some last time also is
contributing to the kind of desert off'
ocation of our kind of cultural
resources which is to say that that kind
of joint attention that de Haines
described Dehaene is describing is
becoming a scarce resource you know just
like we're gonna run out of oil or
something
we're gonna run out of a you know water
in some places we're also running out of
teacherly Authority and we're running
out of the the kinds of containers in
which we can actually safely imitate and
safely teach so yeah I'm kind of keep
circling back to that notion of the
medical yes huge hugely important I'm a
taking a I had I think it was stimulated
by both you and Dehaene and it was all
about shared attention or joint
attention and that was mmm educational
technology maybe we're going down
absolutely the wrong path with screens
and maybe we should be thinking about
robots right because a robot you look at
the work on kismet at the MIT Media labs
is there's no doubt that we can build
robots that actually are more extreme in
their ability to do gesturing and eye
tracking and raised eyebrows and use of
the hands etc to capture human attention
and probably require a lot better
software than kismet had but could
perhaps at some point get in this joint
attentional stance and use all these
probably deep cognitive neural Hawks to
help particularly for early childhood
education establishing that pedagogical
stance or that teach early authority
between the technology and the subject
in a way that is much more rooted in our
human nature and I've actually gonna
pass an idea along some friends of mine
who have a robotics and AI company and
see what they might do with it please
don't because it's like why the hell
would you want a robot teaching little
kids when you could help people do it
because you can scale it that would be
the argument but why would you any why
would you want to simulate joint
attentional experience instead of
actually having joint attentional
experience alright how we could go with
all what we are going to long philosophy
about AI there and if one believes in
strong it but I don't think it needs to
be long it's just as long as the kid
knows it to robot then it's not a joint
attentional situation the kids quickly
stop thinking it's a robot and think
it's
alive right if it's got any good
reactions at all and you look at the
work on kismet it's amazing how closely
the people became emotionally engaged
with this robot that was specifically
designed for emotional engagement so I
don't know I mean I'm not saying that
you couldn't make a very powerful
attention capture education replacement
like we could but why do that like
people are becoming absolutely a
manufacturing jobs because of robots
it's that was it exactly the people who
should be teaching their kids so it's
just one of these things are it's like
just because we could do that doesn't
mean we should do that and plus it's you
know if the robots doing a job of
teaching the kid it would eventually
teach the kid that it's a robot and so
it would it would be leading the kid up
into the most reasonable objective view
of his situation in that situation is
that you're being taught by a Roomba and
the robot was programmed by someone and
it's not making choices or sharing in
the moral universe urine if you
destroyed the robot then you probably
owe somebody some money but you probably
wouldn't go to jail for murder and so I
just think these kinds of ways of thing
about it technology are mostly not good
like the way I propose that educational
technology be used is to clarify time
and skill sharing networks and
facilitate pop up classrooms in which
humans are actually together doing
things the machines can house massive
inventories of resources that can be
rapidly searched and brought to bear in
a pop-up classroom you can use things
like zoom to have synchronous
conversations across the world but then
you can also use things like zoom to
have groups of people meeting or five
people in a room and that is oome Cox
and other five people so my goal with
educational technologies is actually to
use them to scaffold better in person
examples of teacher Lee Authority
not to use educational technology to run
interference and complicate our ability
to actually be together in space and
time exercising true teacherly Authority
and then replacing actual teacherly
authority of person to humans usually
Authority replacing that with a
simulation of teach really Authority so
that we understand education is
basically sitting in front of screen all
day which is what's happening now
basically and that's the notion of what
it should be
whereas I'm suggesting something quite
different that the screen itself is not
the main event that the main event in
education remains other people that the
screen needs to be the thing that
facilitates the coming together of
people and the orchestrating of the
informational resources and you know all
kinds of amazing things that can be done
where we share joint attention around
something like for example the screen as
opposed to me being alone sharing joint
attention with a computer which actually
doesn't have attention so that's me
alone with a computer so that's that
notion of it's not the me and the
machine it's me and the teacher with
something possibly a screen but most
likely something that the screen put us
in touch with like a particular part of
our city or a particular researcher at a
university or master carpenter or
something right at the complex time and
skill sharing networks along with you
know developmentally curated inventories
of curricula and a whole bunch of other
dynamics which requires a digital which
couldn't have happened before the
digital this is what the technology
should be for but I think for variety of
reasons market forces cultural
confusions and other things were
thinking about educational technology
mostly as fancier things we can do when
people are alone in front of their
computers and whole charter schools are
set up where kids work in cubicles at
computers all day I hate that
yes am i and this is maybe I'm a Luddite
you
maybe I'm a light but I think it's it's
based in the psychological research you
know like as I said this is something
about the way the the nervous system and
biology and identity of the human as
we've known it has worked this is how
teaching and learning has taken place so
the idea that we could figure out how
that works and then build a robot that
can simulate it really well like why I
do that except to get attention from a
scientific community or to make money
like if you really care about children
you would be trying to find ways to get
children to be with you know really
responsible intelligence careful adults
maybe there's not enough of them that
would be the are I mean again
it's funny a lot of the you know your
arguments I buy about screens don't
necessarily apply about you know a
high-end robot with you know serious
pushing the edge of human capability a
high for instance attention I've
actually created a robotic deer that
runs around in a virtual world and
actually has attention and has sort of a
rudimentary consciousness it turned out
it wasn't even hard and so one could
take what we know about you know how the
brain works how consciousness actually
works as a cerulean mechanism and
actually develop something like that
and to your point yeah it's probably not
as good as the best teachers in the
world but I mean let's be realistic you
know skill is on some sort of
statistical distribution and you know
perhaps in terms of the actual quality
of the joint attentional experience for
many kids it would be better with the
best possible robot you know available
in the year 2030 or something like that
so let ask it open your mind up at least
a little bit about the robot as a
possible way to achieve what you're
talking about but it would require you
know deep work and you know at both
pedagogy and neuroscience and of course
probably advances and software at which
we don't yet have
yeah I mean I know probably will happen
but yeah it's odd it strikes me as odd
so next we're gonna talk about something
you go into and it's I just found it
very interesting was a view you ended up
presenting as a four quadrant model but
you started off by looking at Harbor
mosses worldview of the subjective world
the inter subjective world and the
objective world that then led you
I believe you repurposed this from other
thinkers into a four part space and your
point which I thought was very
interesting was that when considering an
educational system in particular but
perhaps more broadly into cultural
challenges as well you needed to process
through the four quadrants in parallel
could you unpack that quite a bit
totally yeah the four quadrant model
comes directly from Ken Wilbur's work
and he was synthesizing thinkers like
Hamas and others on the edges of the
complexity science is actually who were
grappling with basically the
multidimensionality of complex human
systems and so we'd already been
touching on this when I was talking
about the brain science work and you
know the essential inside of the four
quadrants is that when you're looking at
any social phenomenon you need to look
at it you know not from one let's say
disciplinary perspective or one basic
perspective such as neuroscience so like
if a kid has problems paying attention
in school I could simply look at it from
what's called the upper right quadrant
which would just be his brain it's the
it's called the exterior of the
individual right the lower right
quadrant is the exterior of the
collective so I could say well okay it's
his brain and it's the infrastructures
that surround the school the exterior of
the collective are the buildings the
food systems the air pollution the bus
routes things of that nature so now I'm
saying oh the brain is being poisoned or
something by the air pollution and
air-quality in the school and so now
I've got a scientific third-person view
of a causal system that's causing this
kid not their attention but that's just
the right-hand quadrants you also have
the interior of the individual in the
interior of the collective which is to
say the personality and consciousness of
the child and the culture norms of the
school so you could also say okay in
combination with some neurological thing
that's complicated by the infrastructure
you also have an identity which has a
self understanding right what's the
kid's academic self concept do they
think they're a learner
have they been traumatized and/or are
there good reasons they're not paying
attention are they actually interested
in something else you'll never know
unless you talk to them you can't talk
to their brain you have to talk to them
and then of course there's the culture
of the school maybe it's the case that
in fact the teachers are systematically
more or less checked out and don't care
about the kids and the kids themselves
are so busy with you know their phones
and other things due to lack of cultural
norms at the school around phone use
that no one's paying attention and it's
not this kids problem it's the culture
of the school but actually all four of
those are the case right and they're all
interrelated they're all actually inter
included which is to say that the
identity formation is not separate from
the infrastructure which compromises the
capacity of the nervous system to act
right and if all the kids are in that
same milieu then of course you're gonna
have problems putting the norms in place
at the school to get the culture and
then with as the culture degrades and
then the identity degrades and then then
so you get this very complex system but
it's more than a causal system it's not
merely a causal system it is also a
system of intentionality choice and
intersubjectivity and so that's the key
thing to get is that a lot of complexity
science
work focuses on the right-hand quadrants
it looks at complex dynamical systems as
complex causal systems and that's a huge
advance over looking at the external
world as a complicated
causal system right so using that
distinction with the complicated the
complex that we do want to move from
modeling things in a complicated way to
a complex way but then we also need to
move and modeling them in terms of the
left-hand quadrants as the integralists
a which is to say not just the causal
systems but also the systems of
intentionality choice and again interest
subjectivity or
joint attention and this is part of the
issue with the robot right that the
robots a causal system doesn't make
choices doesn't have intentionality
can't share joint attention right to
causal system now it can simulate a
choice based system but it's not it's a
causal system if it's working correctly
it's almost perfectly determined causal
system and so that's kind of important
to note that one of the
misunderstandings with the notion of
artificial intelligence itself is
missing this distinction between
causality and choice and I know you
talked to force Landry and so I'll defer
to his authority here that the
distinction between causality and choice
is actually a primordial one and in
education is extremely important back to
the designing versus raising children
which was raised last time you can
actually approach education itself as if
it's a causal problem you can medicalize
academic under performance and you can
you know so strictly routinize
curriculum delivery that you get a
school running like a complicated
machine right rigorous objective
standardized testing you know what I
call the sausage factory
in fact that's become the term of art
and game B is we say we are not going to
send our kids to the sausage factory
right and now you throw in biomedical
infrastructure right and so you get this
massively complex way of modeling a very
complicated causal system and I'm saying
that's exactly half of what's actually
there there's also the choice making and
identity structures of the children and
all of the conditions and qualities of
the shared attention and
intersubjectivity that arises between
them and that's a whole space all its
own now there are fields that look at
that stuff we mentioned Kohlberg
developmental psychology anthropology
gets stuff at the lower-left cultural
sciences hermeneutics things of that
nature you know we talked about last
time I'm gonna toss this back I don't
really know much about the wool Berrien
analysis but when you talk about
intersubjectivity
that brings to mind you know my comment
from last time I frankly think I learned
more in recess that I did in the
classroom right cuz there I was you know
learning how to deal with other people
how to lead how to follow you know how
to execute strategies or ate all kinds
of things that are meaningless except in
conjunction with other people totally
and this is to remember I'm with Dehaene
I said you know is there a way that the
brain has actually evolved to extract
invariance from the social world and
eventually bring that all the way up and
do a complex understanding of how
basically ethics work and that's what
the playground provides the rudiments
for it's an unstructured
social environment in which the
interactions of the children allow for
the kind of like over time the
generalization of oh here's how people
work here's what feels fair here's what
emotion looks like here's what conflict
looks like right here's what gives the
generator function of conflict here's
what love looks like here's the
generator functions of love you start to
see and the brain we can trust the
nervous system in a healthy cultural
context to begin to move towards those
generalizations that are net beneficial
to everyone involved and this is the
kind of trajectory or Telos of cognitive
and ethical development as mapped by
Piaget and
Kolber you know just like you can trust
a kid to walk right like you don't have
to send your kid to his state trained
specialist with you know Education
Department approved curricula to walk
right walking it just happens because of
the joint attentional space and the
processes of imitation and the
affordances of the the nervous system a
lot of learning has that quality of
where you just need to put the nervous
system and identity structure in the
right environment such as trying to
organize a kickball game at recess and
it will learn it's built to learn right
it evolved learned and and so again this
is a yeah part of what the sometimes
called the interior science as the ones
that study the left hand quadrants
right subjectivity interest subjectivity
you know that is some of the most
important stuff that needs to be
considered in education whereas the
sharp end of the stick in education
reform tends to be the right hand
quadrant or into standardized tests and
now the medicalization procedures which
reduce the culture and the subjectivity
to the brain and the kind of like
learning outcomes which are objective
you know measure of systemic efficiency
so so yeah the four quadrants are
extremely useful heuristic and I was
applying them there to education which I
do in the book but they can be used to
analyze many number of social phenomenon
climate change as all those dimensions
pandemics have all these dimensions so
it's a it's a general heuristic to
basically counteract the tendency is
towards reducing all questions to the
right-hand quadrants which is to say
reducing all questions to two questions
about material causal systems and it's
not that there aren't material causal
systems they're absolutely fucking are
and we need to figure out exactly how
they work but then we also need to
figure out how people work how identity
formations work how the structure of
choice the integrity of
and then also in culture we need to
figure out what are the no mimetic and
symbolic and mythical agreements that
actually are the water were swimming in
which kind of quote unquote supervene on
all of these infrastructures and
computational matrices and nervous
systems so it's it's really kind of like
taking the complexity science view and
trying to deepen it to include a much
more articulate kind of hearing from the
sciences of consciousness and psychology
and the sign through Paula G cultural
studies and things of that of that
nature for a you know an omni
considerate or integral or comprehensive
view as opposed to just a you know
basically complexity science reductive
view you subtle reductionism and it's
not reduction to the Newtonian billiard
ball complicated universe it's an actual
increase above that right so it's not
reductionism in that simple sense but
it's still a subtle reductionism
because it's not grappling with the
reality of the interiors though I let me
be fair here to complexity science push
back for my team that one of the main
tools it's used in complex systems
research called agent-based modeling and
I to go to a scientific meeting on the
topic some of the very best people in
the world in January right before the
virus hit and the cutting edge is to put
more and more emulation at least of
things like state of mind perception
emotions communications even sometimes
the agents could have languages or they
can even evolve languages so I would say
that complexity science is well aware
that you know the simplistic late 80s
early 90s
complexity that arose from deterministic
chaos which was essentially the bridge
from the Newtonian world to the complex
world is by no means the last word on
the topic and that many probably most
modern complexity thinkers are thinking
about social systems at least are
thinking about your left side and
they're looking for
to probe on that ya know and I'm of
course I'm aware of this work and and it
is - it's a massive improvement it's a
massive improvement but you know then
one must ask what basically I would call
what you know what are the meta
psychologies that orient the assumptions
behind the agent-based modeling right
and so you then you get into how much
are we in a sophisticated way modeling
the psyche or have we actually reduced
it to something that looks a lot more
like a complex causal system no so this
is about grappling with the true
indeterminacy of choice and again back
to the developmental view there's
actually not one psyche this is the big
kind of concern with for example using
game theory to think about the the way
the human mind works that kids don't run
game theory like you have to be a formal
operational thinker to do the matching
nations of game theory which doesn't
come until basically you're an
adolescent if you're lucky so there's
also this kind of like poly vocality of
the human psyche which adds to the
anthro complexity of the modeling
efforts in the agent-based modeling and
so I know people are moving towards
solving those problems but I'm kind of
like the others of there's a tendency
towards making problems that shouldn't
be solved using mathematical models to
want to use mathematical models to solve
them yeah
that certainly is a bad attractor I
think the people in the field are aware
of it and what's quite interesting is
now in the most recent based agent-based
modeling work there's a lot of
heterogeneity of models it used to be
are all the agents are the same well we
know that all kids are at the same or
all people are at the same or even all
sociopaths are at the same so let there
be differences and maybe even
evolutionary differences but let's move
on to another important topic I think
this was very a very good probe and that
is you say are the actual words
education is also in primarily an
ethical and cultural challenge
concerning the meaning making of
individuals and
groups I would not disagree with that
but I would then ask the question who
decides and how I will throw a little
personal history and here is I did a
little bit more in the first episode but
I'll do a little bit here when I was a
kid in you know primary education in the
first half the 1960s you know we still
were required say the Lord's Prayer
every day and us allegedly good
Catholics knew not to say that the
goddamn Protestant final verse of it you
know it was quite a little thing right
we also had to say the Pledge of
Allegiance and I would say that our
civics was very conventional status quo
anti-communist right you know this was a
whole series of decisions somebody made
who decided somebody decided to make a
say the Lord's Prayer president or
allegiance and to worship militant
anti-communism and I was at least lucky
I didn't have Bible study go another 50
miles south and Bible study would have
been part not I mean I liked the Bible
actually a militant atheist I maybe but
I find both the Old Testament in the New
Testament wonderful literature but they
didn't teach it as literature
unfortunately so let's take as a given
ethical and cultural nature of meaning
making in individuals in groups of
something education has to be but who
decides on the content I mean this is
probably one of the deepest questions in
educational philosophy right so there's
so many questions about you know how to
equitably distribute educational
resources how to make large school
systems function well I don't deal with
you know gap between us technics s to
technology and you doesn't have
technology debates about standardized
testing you like to be it's about
standards there's all these things but
that's all basically like content
delivery system the question of what is
the content and the quality of the
content that's this problem with the
heart of curriculum studies so people
like Michael Apple who does great work
in like critical sociology of curriculum
studies and and at the end of the day at
least now it boils down to
of large interests around textbooks
publishing
like that's one of the places where this
has been asked out because at the end of
the day you're looking at education
being about at least as we've known it
modern nationalistic kind of like
large-scale education you know it's been
about the creation of official knowledge
right and this is the root of the issue
around teacher Li Authority is how the
who like who gets to decide what the
official knowledge is and so one way to
get at this question you're asking is
that what we need to change not the
nature of the content that we provide
but change the way we make decisions
about which content we provide so I
wouldn't say that there is one group of
people that decides but I would say that
we need to formulate new processes to
even think about what counts as it's
kind of like the core of an educational
system you know and it's worth noting
that you know the American school system
has always actually been more
differentiated almost to the point of
fragmentation in terms of what's taught
so like if you go to France and of
course places like China the the state
curriculum is extremely clear and kind
of issued from the capital the United
States we've always had kind of a states
rights thing with regard to education
and even at the level of a Township
you're getting variation and what's
taught and so you know most of my
thinking around this has to do with
maintaining the virtue of having local
decisions made about the quality and
content of what's taught but having
these local decisions be kind of like
conducted in such a way that the process
assures a certain kind of number of
let's say baseline requirements and so
it's another way of handling the problem
of standards but talking about standards
as a kind of like a discursive lis
deemed community practice as opposed to
a centralized authoritarian mandate but
of course this requires things like my
social miracles and other aspects that
would allow communities to actually have
the time and teachers in particular and
other folks that there would be much
more professional and collaborative
community orientation around just what
are we teaching our kids about the world
like what what do we do like it's it's a
deep question because as I've been
saying repeatedly like the educational
function of the society is like the
autopoietic function of the society so
if a society is self terminating which
is to say if the society knows that it's
not working well then it should actually
really question exactly what you're
saying right what do we teach the next
generation obviously what we've been
doing hasn't worked so we actually it's
hard for us to imagine like that we know
what the kids need to know to fix this
mess that we've created so it becomes as
complicated negotiation about what of
the existing culture is actually worthy
of being preserved right like I do a
thought experiment I book that I call
the new Ozark to talk about the Old
Testament right not Noah's Ark but the
new Ozark I know us and this is a
educational thought experiment where
you're basically trying to distill down
just how deep this question is in
curricular studies and I something like
this you know if we were facing
catastrophic civilizational collapse and
we were tasked with basically creating a
seed bank of ideas right so now not a
seed bank well we'll need that - we'll
need a seed bank to actually plant crops
on the other side of this thing but what
if we needed to create a seed bank that
would allow us to reboot civilization on
the other side of this all right so
that's actually the question you're
asking
you're asking about curricular studies
you're actually asking what is the
knowledge that is requisite to recreate
the person right to recreate the
civilization how do we think about it at
that deeper level and it's interesting
because it can stranger thinking a lot
because you obviously if as I mentioned
were in a failing civilization then we
precisely can't hand on a lot of the
things that we take for granted that we
would need to boil down to the most
essential those things which could be
kind of like but at the center of
intergenerational transmission so so
back from the thought experiment to the
concrete situations today so my sense is
that as the digital continues to reform
education and I don't mean reform in
like policies on some means literally
the new forms like in a McLuhan Desk
sense we're getting a new way of
information exchange and scaffolding of
educational experience and
teacher-student interaction as the
digital continues to do that there must
emerge some innovation at the level of
educational content curation and so this
gets back to how could you have
community level decisions about what
gets taught that's meaningful and kind
of like world world making sense making
identity making stuff at the heart of
the schooling how could we have that be
a local decision but also be carried out
via a process that is universal and that
shares a certain quality and so this is
what I mean by in the context of the
kind of digital explosion of Education
and the re localization that's already
occurring as a result of the pandemic
kind of shutting of the schools and
booting up a classroom in every living
room you know there's this question
about yeah deep innovations in the
curation of educational content and
getting that to be part of collective
sense making as opposed to
part of an authoritarian apparatus and
the authoritarian state based kind of a
centralized curriculum that's exactly
the stuff that's that that ended up
backfiring and undermining all teacherly
authority like it's exactly your
experience with like who the hell
decided I have to say this shit every
morning it's exactly to that experience
and maybe that your generation had which
led to a profound question of all
sources of teacherly authority so this
question of who decides what gets taught
that's the exactly the question that
catalyzes the renegotiation of
educational Authority and the innovation
and the curation of educational content
and you know it's it's I think a deeper
more imminent more pressing problem than
most people realize because they hold
schools is somehow sacrosanct as if the
signal sent by the school could
overwhelm in the mind of the adolescent
the signal being sent by their screens
in the palm of their hand right so like
when you're looking at the conversations
about let's say pandemic conspiracies
and then you're looking at kids who are
supposed to be in biology class learning
about biology right you're you're
looking at Cuban on and kids in history
class right like 15 16 17 year old boys
and so there ends up being this question
of like mm-hmm
Jesus you know the situation of teacher
really Authority is quite acute and
until we get some reasonable discourse
taking place within public view and
especially of within view of the
children about why they're learning such
and such and why such and such is
actually valid knowledge and what valid
knowledge actually means it's like
you know there's no way out I think of
the kind of downward spiral that seems
to be unfolding in the current
historical moment there's no way out
without renegotiating teach really
Authority and then the concern is that
and this is why many on the left and the
right fear across the aisle that either
side would lock down into some new
authoritarianism and that fear comes
because of the discomfort of the
experience of the absence of teachers
Authority and in that absence you will
basically as soon as one appears that
could potentially kind of like close
that loop and step into the vacuum of
teacher Lee authority that you'll take
the first thing that's even even
seemingly viable just to stop the
discomfort and chaos of not having
someone who knows what to do and so
that's that's kind of like the risk of
not resolving the teacher Lee Authority
crisis in a reasonable way is that we
will resolve the crisis of teacher Lee
authority in an unreasonable and you
know and it could go left or right like
you know the blue church loves
preemptively resolving teacher Lee
Authority crises around a lot of things
in the biomedical space and of course
the right revels in kind of undermining
teacher Lee authority systematically and
you know kind of in sometimes like
replacing education with a kind of a
spectacle or entertainment so yeah so
that's that's some again the potency of
this question of the absence of teacher
Lee authority is in part because it's
uncomfortable which means that we're
looking for a way to resolve it and
whether that means that Google all of a
sudden fact-checker becomes the official
new way to run inquisitions or whether
it becomes the continual kind of locking
of commitments to a view based on
aesthetic and emotional preferences
which is the right kind of like fascist
model where it's actually the emotional
an aesthetic attraction to the idea that
is why you hold it as opposed to with
the appeal to some like omniscient
centralized Blu Church authority like
Google so it's complicated and then this
question of who decides is exactly right
and my answer is everybody has to decide
but that's a yeah but I got their
problem right because as we know you
know if we said today who decides and
absolutely no sense of attempting to
constrain that you know in West Texas
they would definitely say climate change
is a hoax you know you know in Wellesley
Massachusetts they say there's no such
thing as gender right it's if nonsense
would pull a freight at least in our
current environment and we were to get
to this on the next episode we're gonna
not do it this episode we're going to
talk about the thirteen miracles that
maybe get us to a point where we can
make sense of the world but today we
don't seem to have anything like good
sense making at the local level
absolutely correct and that's why in the
sense my ideas seem utopian and their
concrete utopians what I call them
because they're reasonable things to
think about well most white could be
possible in the future but yet right now
if we were to radically distribute teach
earliest well basically we're looking at
what happens when you're athlete
distribute teach early Authority without
some sense of a kind of hidden Universal
and that's really the key which is to
say that you know it is possible in
educational relationships and
educational contexts to build structures
of interaction and reflection that
wouldn't get us stuck in these
cul-de-sacs
of reactive basically belief formation
and you know so the idea that people in
West Texas would reject evolution is
absolutely true and the root of that is
of course the meta-crisis the
educational crisis like that that we
don't know how to consider scientific
that's an incapacity that's a socially
induced incapacity on the part of those
people and similarly with the folks in
Wellesley right and so it's not so much
about changing education to change what
people think the goal here is to change
how people think and that means
basically how people speak and interact
in serious contexts so the hope would be
that you know yeah
collective sense making would need to be
spread through educationally intensive
process I don't know exactly what it
looks like but I do know that it's not a
synchronous text-based exchanges in a
place like Facebook that it needs to be
as I've been emphasizing actually
embodied joint attention all experience
and so yeah there's a there's a need to
like disentangle in a sense the
dysfunctions that have arisen in the
past ten years as a result of the kind
of digital interference and capture of
communication channels from those things
that are actually deep ideological
centers rooted in personality and
particulate preference right and that
would go a long way to thinking about
what does the actual situation you know
if if we turned off Facebook tomorrow
and we shut down Twitter for six months
and we organized the whole bunch of town
hall facilitated small group
conversations and just force people to
speak to be reasonable with one another
and again here I'm being utopian that
this could even happen but I think you'd
find that you know there's a lot of
contrived polarization and there's a lot
of attention capture that is actually
distracting people from what they
already know which is that in fact we're
stuck in this together
and we're either gonna scapegoat one
another or we're gonna have to cooperate
right now we're obviously prefer
scapegoating and I think until we start
to get changes in the way the digital is
used as far as communication and things
of that nature we may stay there
Facebook was built on Girardi and
principles right built to propagate
mimetic desire in mimetic violence and
the outcome of those are scapegoating
processes so there's something that
needs to be rethought at the level of
the basic structures our our society
with regards to communication and
collective choice collective choice
making so yeah so now I'm kind of
rambling in this direction of just what
the kind of basic practices and rituals
of a future civilization that could
actually exist in perpetuity would be so
that's what let's hold that one off for
our next episode I'll point out Ezra
Klein has written a very interesting
book called why we are polarized which
basically takes a complex systems
perspective on how this polarization
that's tearing us apart is really
emergent and while there has certainly
been people who've intentionally
throwing gasoline on the fire a lot of
it is structural for example here we did
a blind experiment starting in 2010 of
giving everybody a super computer in
their pocket with a high res screen
connected to the internet and give
many-to-many communication tools to talk
to anybody on the planet anytime they
want and guess what one of the emergent
phenomena that is to accelerate
polarization so there's no doubt about
it that there are sort of many many
serious systems issues that aren't
probably not even consciously designed
but are you know driven by the
attractors of our current system such as
my old favorite short-term money on
money return or you can look through the
magnifying glass of what is motivating
short-term money on money return in the
behavior or Facebook and that is to sell
more advertising which means hijacking
more attention for longer periods of
time and that then says well select more
extreme content to put in front of
people because they pay more attention
to extreme content and we're just fucked
right and so we have to go quite far
down the
rabbit-hole to fix things so you know
unfortunately you know listening to you
talk about how to decide who decides I
came away saying classic chicken and the
egg problem we need better education to
figure out how to decide who decides
about what goes into education so this
is not going to be easy no not at all
and the chicken and the egg problem with
educational reform has always existed
because in a democracy in a place where
the collective needs to have some input
on what happens then you need to
actually you know change the educational
system enough to get people to be
sophisticated voters to change the
education system even more to get like
so there's this you can't how you
bootstrap the reform of an educational
system if it's truly failed then the
very people trying to bootstrap it would
be already incapacitated by the failure
of that educational system and so that's
why there's this like kind of death
spiral that you get into when the
education system starts to kind of
decompose and is subject to the
institutional decay you get into a death
spiral and so this is one of the things
we're stuck in when you damage teacher
the authority then it gets harder to
reestablish it then you become basically
being capacitated by the absence of it
and then it gets you know so you said
it's it's self propelling and this is
one of the reasons frankly why the
United States public education system
has been the the hobbyhorse of wealthy
industrial anthropocentric for the
educational system so yeah we are in a
difficult situation now what you said
about the the computer in everyone's
pocket and that breeding polarization
yeah again I'm it's the digital came
fast and furious with very specific and
I think limited near-term motivations as
you were saying money on money make it
profit
so I don't think we actually know what
the true affordances of the digital are
I think this is one of the like the key
learning processes were in during this
historical epic for a variety of reasons
we've gone the way we've gone with the
potentialities of the digital but as I
was trying to note with the digital
back-end of the educational hub network
that I talked about in my book the
digital could actually be used it's a
completely up level to nature our social
life without capturing aren't attention
it could actually focus our attention in
collaboration with others better right
so yeah in a sense I think one of the
solutions here is actually really
seriously rethinking the the way digital
technology is integrated into
civilizational design and basically kind
of making an argument that we've kind of
taken the wrong path with a lot of the
ways we've been bringing the digital
into our culture I've mentioned the
screens in particular but there's also
the emphasis as as you mentioned on
oversaturation of advertisement and
asymmetric capacity to influence choice
making which is to say like you know I'm
Jose ACK I don't have a whole team of
you know AI
programmers working for me but Facebook
does and so I sit alone in front of my
screen without really thinking that on
the back end there is you know kind of
millions maybe billions of dollars going
into basically manipulating me and so
that that's not what the digital is
that's what we've done with the digital
so yeah so part of this like problem of
the
who figures out what to teach and how do
we do collective choice making and these
things it really the onus is on us to
start thinking about this technology in
a different way and it may be that we've
made systematic mistakes right if you
think about like Tesla and Edison yeah
it's like we could have done electricity
very differently than we did it right
you think about buckminster fuller's
that interesting map of the world that
he made and he showed that you could
have an electrical a planetary
electrical grid you know like and so
again when we lay down basic
infrastructures back to Rawls when you
do the thought experiment of what should
this basic infrastructure look like this
new civilization enabling infrastructure
what should it look like you to think
about that you don't just roll it out in
the way that's gonna make you the most
money as quickly as possible but this is
what we've done and so we have to build
up from a lot of layers which we'll talk
about next time so I think on that point
we will wrap it up here and as we have
decided that we have so much interesting
stuff to cover that we're gonna have
Zach back for part three where we're
gonna we're gonna look at the chapter on
religion and religious teacher Lee
Authority and we're gonna then go deep
on we've mentioned a couple times in
passing
Zach's ideas about the thirteen social
miracles that together with reforming
education essentially frankly who
evolving with education maybe we can
solve the meta crisis so with that Zach
thanks for coming back a second time I
look forward to talking to you a third
time yeah me too this is a lot of fun
man I appreciate it
[Music]
production services and audio editing by
jerod Jane's consulting music by Tom
Muller at modern space