good morning and welcome to meditating
with John Bertie I'm a cognitive
psychologist I'm a cognitive scientist
at the University of Toronto I
scientifically and academically studying
mindfulness and related phenomena like
Insight flow mystical experiences
transformative experiences cultivation
of wisdom I've also practiced for
passing on meditation at a contemplation
and Tai Chi Chuan de and she come for
over twenty nine years and I've been
teaching them professionally for almost
twenty years
welcome this is a progressive course if
you're joining us for the first time and
you should know that this have been a
series of lessons each one building on
the previous lesson and what you can do
is you can go into the description of
this video and find links to those
lessons and then you can catch up what
we normally do is Monday's is Dharma day
we have a lesson I do an exercise
teacher a principal and then we sit and
then we do Q&A Tuesday through Friday we
meet we sit together and then there is a
Q&A so please remember to set your
phones on do not disturb I won't go into
any review today because I reviewed
yesterday that way well I'll try and
leave up a little bit more time towards
the end for answering any Q&A so please
start to get yourself ready remember to
find your core for find your Center find
your root find your flow find your focus
all right then perhaps you're going to
just go into the pasta if you're
choosing to do method today first do
maybe you know three or four minutes of
the pasta and then go into meta will
begin when I say begin
begin
you
you
you
slowly begin to come out of your
practice trying as best you can to
integrate with your cultivating in your
practice with your everyday
consciousness and cognition so the first
question is from Dan or most Ramos for
those of us who want to start a moving
practice do you recommend a specific
style Tai Chi
what about yoga yes it's a really good
style it's called the Beijing style same
name as the capital of China Beijing
style of you can find some online videos
for the Beijing style especially you can
find the short form long form takes a
long time to learn that would be good
feeling that there's the yang form is
really good and there's typically lots
of videos on the game for them out there
again so you can find a short form first
rather than the long form the long forms
like I donate moves it takes a long time
but I don't mean if you have that
dedication of the time it's good but for
the purposes of supplementing this
practice I recommend trying to find the
yang form I would avoid some of the
pounding and jumping forms like the chat
forum so go for Beijing go for a yang if
you can find those other two excellent
if you want to take up a yoga practice I
remember I commend one that has some
flow elements to it like if you're doing
sign salutations or things like that I
think those are excellent ways to
integrate moving mindfulness practice
with your sitted mindfulness practice
Sergei maca maca ken asks please forgive
me about mispronounced your names
take comfort the fact that people
regularly and reliably mispronounced my
last name how do I know that I'm doing
focus and flow meditation right in a
sense that I'm moving towards overcoming
the delusions rather than of feeding
myself delusions and self-deception
it's a good question overall but let's
be careful about it practically if you
sort of try and look for and try to
identify things as delusions and
self-deceptions that's kind of the wrong
way of doing it you're framing it as
sort of an introspectively
simple thing or direct thing to do and
that's actually not something you can
simply and directly introspectively do
and so that you can get yourself caught
into like a double bind so whatever
might come in does the following try to
notice in your day when you've gotten
into the flow State maybe when you're
you know playing you play jazz or you're
doing something athletic write something
that way you pick up on when you're in
the flow state and try to remember what
that's like or when you've noticed that
you have you've had that self rolling
kind of attention maybe you're really
reading some texts that find yourself
absorbed into write and so you try and
remember that try to note that and then
what you're going to do is see write try
to remember it see if it's what you're
finding in your practice is similar to
those external moments of flow and
photos if you don't stop there you know
it's not there you saw also look for the
reverse when you start into sense that
oh I'm getting the flow and the focus
here does that translate out into the
world so that you start to find yourself
in flow and in proper focus in the world
you're looking for this self-correcting
loop and getting a dynamic equilibrium
between them and then third and most
importantly when people other than you
can start this is more long-term but
also ultimately more important when
people other than you start to notice
differences in your performances and
your balance pressure more graceful you
get more focused etc so with that loop
is actually our best way of trying to
sense that were moving forward see
briyani
has asked a question I find it hard to
focus for more than five minutes I
should be okay with but keep trying to
increase the duration correct
yes yes so but the that's right but be
careful don't think that just because
like you are mind wandering that your
meditation has ended
remember meditation is not when your
mind is open and blank every time you
catch every time you catch yourself and
come back that's mindfulness know what
what you're referring to is sitting any
longer and you know you have to open
your eyes right so that I start talking
about that how to deal with things like
that next Monday the next drama game but
what you suggested is exactly right for
now like if you if you absolutely can't
keep going right note how long you can
go and then try adding a minute each set
just a little one minute longer one
minute longer one minute longer
Keira Krueger
I noticed that tons of experience
sensations that are bit overwhelming and
it's difficult to stay in my body I've
been going back to centering and rooting
is this the right way to handle this yes
it is keep doing that and then as I say
the next to Dharma days will be on how
to deal with such powerful distraction
and also hindrances to the practice as a
whole but what you're suggesting is
exactly the right thing to do Nick
Kennedy hi Nick should Mehta mantris be
following our breath if not how you
disentangle them seem to be going fast
I try to after I've done their bit of a
past nut I try to bring my focus fully
to the mantra and just let my breathing
be uncoupled from the mantra uncoupled
from the mantra it's it's it's very much
that my breath might still fall on my
breath but it's very much in the
background it's almost like a shape
around me that tends to tame the monkey
mind so it doesn't distract me and I can
thereby focus on the mantra but try to
bring your map near your focus and not
just on the mantra but on and if most
especially through the mantra remember
we're trying to look through our glasses
into the world jet-black Dear John I've
been experiencing difficulty maintaining
good posture without becoming tense and
inhibiting right relaxation in a recent
dialogue you mentioned Tara from Tai Chi
Chuan palm
yeah so pump is really important first
of all if if you need to but I have to
because of my many years it's not really
calming down that much you might need to
get into this entering into right and
then just lean a little bit but to take
that stress so you can thereby
concentrate not on relaxing your whole
body see it's just a little a slight
little leaned up against the wall will
allow you to think more deeply relax
your abdomen muscles
now what pong is is prong is this state
where you're not to tense when we tell
you about it routing but you're also not
live you're trying to get that space as
if water you know with quite a bit of
force but still giving you flexibility
is flowing through you so you have this
sort of rootedness this sensitivity the
stability and it sort of naturally is
clicking into place that's pump so try
to find Pung I like trying to get that
belt where they sort of rooting
re-routing your body but as I say if you
need to you might need to get some
support from a wall initially for a
while so and don't try and relax
everything just and don't try and relax
it like sort of by taking deep beat you
dress just what I mean is just let your
stomach go just let it all out right and
just see how much you can relax your
abdomen muscles and if once that starts
to take for you and try more deeply
relaxing your chest muscles etc
Roseanna Ram Kissin sometimes I feel as
though there's a lump in my chest I
think it's because I'm slightly
struggling with my baby breath any
advice on how I can improve yes so as I
said with the baby breaths don't try and
force it down if there's a lump in your
chest maybe and you can feel your
breathing in the LUP instead of having
the lump as your enemy that you're
trying to overcome the friend it okay
well this is where where my breath sort
of wants to stay right now I'm going to
try and keep slow and even breast
without forcing it right but I'm gonna
make my following my breath there where
the lump is and my intent is not to make
the lump disappear by forcing it away my
[Music]
yes I'm going to more deeply listening
make that the locus of my meditation and
so i befriend it and it then helps me I
can actually track my breath you're
always trying to do this kind of
inversion in order to incorporate things
into your practice because that will
authority to do the the obverse it'll
afford you to incorporate obstacles in
the world into your mindfulness
Alexander Saxton what do you recommend
for people with OCD who find it hard to
focus on their breathing without
hyperventilating losing the ability to
breathe naturally okay so if you can't
follow your breath and I deeply
understand OCD then whatever mind
recommend is the following do all find
the core for right as best you can so I
find that the first three of your core
four find your Center find a route find
your flow and then when you are ready to
try instead of trying to follow your
breath try and focus on the contact
point where you feel that centered point
where your center and the route is going
into the into the ground that that point
of connection and groundedness and try
to make that now you won't get the
expansion so this is why it's not as
good as falling you won't get the
expansion that made it tends to take
your attention away from the breath
Nicholas Nick Walker who I still owes
some communication to please remain
forgiving that glisters of a really
intense time in my work schedule because
I'm trying to do everything to complete
my courses it's all online and all
virtual so he this is safety he's gonna
say something very lucky he's I don't
really like finally just like many
people so the third person I think about
doing meta is always the whole Trump
however I find it difficult to wish him
health and happiness recommendations for
someone else so you don't have to
dislike the person and it's more
important this so you can find a friend
or loved one that you feel that you're
in some kind of conflict with or you may
even find a situation in the world that
is acting as a
Stickle or conflict towards you then you
direct meta towards that person or that
situation here Kroger is asking another
question even after adjusting posture it
felt like I could get a full breath its
I couldn't get a full breath without
lifting my shoulders starting to feel a
bit lightheaded why is that what can I
do about it it means you have deeply
habituated to chest breathing as many of
us as I have because we leave very
distracting and stressful lives so as I
said earlier right if try not to get
such a deep breath and you it's a good
idea to perhaps do a bit of leg exercise
especially moving mindfulness practice
before you're set to get more oxygen in
your in your in your blood if you find
that you're you're finding it difficult
to breathe try doing the flow exercise
again and also find where your breath
seems to be stopping and catching
insufficiently in your in your chest if
I'm understanding you correctly let your
meditative focus go there and then say
these four things to yourself trying to
try okay you're gonna soften you're
going to soften not just the feeling
there you're going to soften your
attitude in your mind alright and then
what you're going to do is you're gonna
try and smooth you're gonna try and just
let your breath become more smooth don't
worry about it initially being a little
too shallow and you're also gonna let
your mind be smoother and how it's
reacting to your breath you smooth it up
then again suffuse try and notice all
you know feel all just pick up on all
the sensations there and then as much as
you can try and sink into it just sink
into it in both senses of the word sort
of sinking like when we're getting our
root but also the sense of trying to get
in sync with it you're trying to
befriend it and couple it and use it so
in and try to get off the intention of
getting more oxygen
try to get into the the framing of this
is going to help me is going to help me
track my breathing you know soften and
smooth how my mind is moving around
something that's
to another one from Nick Kennedy should
the madam atra being entangled with our
breathing cycle seems to get really
quick no your mantra shouldn't because
what tends to happen is people start to
hyperventilate if you can do it and
follow your breath naturally that should
be okay
I recommend the opposite of trying to
keep you're following your breath in the
background as I mentioned almost like a
room a holding room around you and focus
on and through the mantra and then try
to slow it down try to make the de
mettre a recitation as if you were
trying to give it as slowly to somebody
who barely understands English Rainer
livid I have been reading finding flow
by met pay Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi which
you have referenced and was wondering
why you separate flow and focus in your
practice I separated although they
overlap especially the way I teach you I
select separate flow and slopes or flow
and focus because if I just go in to do
one or other the other I think people
lose the stereoscopic when you can
people just flow they tend to not do as
much explicit training of attention and
when you teach people just attention
they tend to get into just the
introspective space and they lose the
effective introspective space so they
both interpenetrate as you're as you're
alluding to point correctly but flow
tends to that tip flow tends to
emphasize the interceptive pull and
focus the introspective poll and I want
to get those two together like the way
my left and right perspectives fuse into
depth perception all right because we're
excellent QA they're very very good and
I hope you're finding my answer is
helpful I will always be here at the end
to answer your Q&A I want to thank you
for joining I want to as always thank
the techno mage amar
my good friend and Jason my beloved son
please subscribe to the video to be
notified of the next video also you will
notice on my channel there is a lot of
videos about things like flow about
attention about insight about the
cultivation of wisdom and perhaps more
importantly for us right now awakening
for the meeting crisis which is very
very important to really deepen our
cultivation of wisdom and give us an
existential resiliency and an
adaptiveness in the face of this very
transformative challenge that we're
facing please invite others to this
practice this course I want to help as
many people as I can so I'm asking for
your help to help me help others so
please point other people to this point
them to the fact that there's a separate
playlist with all the lessons so that
they can catch up and remind them that
you know if there's lots of catch-up
time because we only do one during a day
per week we will always meet here
weekdays 9:30
Mondays the dharma days tuesday to
friday this earth day every day has a
Q&A always 9:30 EST thank you very much
take care everyone
you