[Music]
this time on the show I'm joined by
David fuller David fuller is the
co-founder of rebel was a media company
that if you're familiar with emerge I'm
sure you've seen some of their content
they interview people like Jordan
Greenhalgh Jamie wheel Jordan Peterson
all of the people that have factored in
to the conversations that we've been
having on the podcast and have been
playing such an important role in our
culture right now is the various
sense-making institutions as Jordan
greenhalgh would say began to
deteriorate and so David is joining me
for a kind of conversation about rebel
wisdom has just passed fifty thousand
subscribers congratulations David
you know about what inspired him to
begin this project why he thinks it's
hit such a nerve with people what
they're all subscribing and where this
conversation you know sometimes
associated with the intellectual dark
web is going and why it's so important
so David welcome to emerge Thank You
Daniel looking forward to it yeah and so
to get it started you know it's I know
from personal experience it's it's one
thing to be on the interviewee or
interviewer side of the equation it's
another thing to be interviewed and so I
find myself curious um what for you was
the inspiration to move out of your work
with the BBC and in media and create
what is a pretty radical departure this
whole rebel wisdom media project what
was behind that for you yeah I have to
say I prefer asking the questions rather
than answering them but yeah it's been
very spontaneous for quite a long time
when I was working I work for Channel
four News for many years I left to do
documentaries for Channel four and for
the BBC channel for news for people who
aren't sort of familiar with the UK is
is generally regard that is probably one
of the two
most high-quality news programs and I
was working for the foreign unit so I
was in Libya during the the fall of
Gaddafi I was in Tahrir Square when
Mubarak resigned which was an amazing
opportunity and something that I'll
never forget like I was really at the
center of some fairly amazing moments
but at the same time when I look back
there was something that was kind of
missing in terms of my feeling of where
I was meant to be and what I was meant
to be doing and I think that goes back
to I studied philosophy and I'd always
been doing a lot of personal growth work
and been very interested in spirituality
and very interested in what you might
call the kind of paradigm shift and
feeling very keenly that there is the
need for this paradigm shift especially
out of out of sort of the naive
materialism of the culture that we're in
at the moment and realizing that that
kind of perspective was not very easy to
bring into the mainstream media yeah
most of the gatekeepers in the
mainstream media are sort of under the
sway of the sort of very Dawkins aiight
scientific realism so those kind of
programs that looked at kind of the
reality of spiritual experience or
religion or the sort of the full
360-degree picture of what it means to
be human we're not being commissioned
and also I just had this sense that yeah
there was there were perspectives that
were not being brought forward into the
media I didn't really know what to do
about that at the time and I don't think
the technolog technology existed to be
able to do anything about it at the time
either and it sort of been this
technological revolution and then rebel
wisdom happened very spontaneous you
could even say synchronistically because
I saw Jordan Peterson emerge probably
about 18 months ago and my immediate
reaction I dive I'd go very deeply into
the Bible lectures I was immediately
struck by here was someone talking about
young it was someone talking about the
deep mythopoetic structure of the world
and I was completely gripped by the
message and I just had this very strong
sense this is exactly what our culture
is missing right now this is effectively
what we've forgotten and he and so I I
went to go over to Toronto actually to a
Bible lecture I thought well some people
pay I know a few hundred pounds to go
and see their favorite sports team and
might as well go and see him give a
lecture
it wasn't until I'd actually booked to
go for the Bible lecture I thought well
I am a journalist I could ask him in for
an interview and so I did and he granted
me an interview the day after the
lecture which I was very pleased by and
then we did the interview and it wasn't
until I'd actually done the interview
that I thought well no one's actually
made a documentary about him yet this
was October 2017 I think yeah and this
is well before most people had ever
heard of him as well you know so I then
thought okay I'm gonna turn it into a
documentary which I did over the next
couple of months and that became truth
in the time of chaos the first
documentary and I still think I still
think it's worth people maybe going back
and having a look at the interview that
I did with him in in October 2017
because there's a real I asked him a lot
about young a lot about the integration
of the shadow that's when things start
to line up yeah and the more you're in
that space the more they line up and so
the question is if you're like really in
that space
how much do things line up I've had
experiences where everything came
together you know and and and there are
very very powerful experiences and
they're they're also characterized by
it's like everything turns into a
musical symphony where each part is
exactly appropriate for that moment and
and I think music actually expresses
that which is partly why music produces
transcendent experiences you know I
think it is an intimation of Paradise
it's something like that
and you can think about that
psychologically you know because it also
makes sense psychologically that your
optimal experiences are going to occur
when you're most United with yourself
and but I don't know what see we don't
exactly understand the relationship
between our consciousness and the world
we're at our best when we're integrated
completely and there is an effect of
that integration in principle on what we
would normally regard as external
reality because external reality can
line up with that integration as well
and so-called external reality you know
I also think that figures like the
Buddha you know he's an exemplar of the
possibilities of that alignment and the
exercises the yogic exercises for
example our attempts to bring that
alignment into being you know I mean
it's very centered on the body which is
quite interesting even though it's a
spiritual tradition right it's very very
centered on the body and I think people
probably experience that when they have
peak sexual experiences with someone you
know where there's real intimacy because
they're in the same place at the same
time and everything comes together for
that moment you know maybe literally yes
yes literally right and and and I also
don't think that that linguistic usage
is chance right because I think that's a
place where that experience is a brief
intimation of of heaven that might be a
way of thinking about it I've really not
seen him ask those kind of questions
many times since a lot of people have
really focused on the politics have
focused on the gender stuff and it's I
think it's really missing the point
to look at Peterson through a political
and gender politics lens I mean it's a
valid they're valid questions to ask for
sure and he's definitely a controversial
figure and there's a lot to unpack in
his worldview but to have someone
arguing for the reality of spiritual
experience the reality of something like
psychedelics to bring about that
spiritual experience the reality of a
deep mythopoetic layer that we need
to connect to and seeing him arguing
that on the on the kind of world stage
is still astonishing an academic who's
who's quoting young despite the fact he
was told from the beginning of an
academic career don't mention your on
your torpedo your career if you do it's
a it's an astonishing thing that we
should not forget I think despite what's
happened since terms though I mean
there's so many different kind of
tangents we could go down already I'm
sure but I just wanted to complete the
the the the answer of where rebel wisdom
came from because it then I then turned
it into this documentary and then a few
days after I released that documentary
he then had that famous encounter with
Kathy Newman on Channel four News where
I had been working only a few weeks
before I was still freelancing there
even though I'd left there and so and
considering most of my interview with
Jordan Peterson was about synchronicity
and was about these kind of meaningful
coincidences and how do we make sense of
them and what how do we follow the
thread of these synchronicities that was
an extraordinary thing chronicity and at
first what I tried to do was to liaison
the scenes cuz it was almost like seeing
your parents fighting or something it
was Channel 4 News had one perspective
and they were very upset because Kathy
was getting a lot of abuse online Jordan
cleared her son was very upset because
he felt that he was being framed as the
villain and and he hadn't done anything
wrong and I thought and he wanted
another interview with Kathy and I try
to liaise between them that didn't get
anywhere
Jordan was happy to do it Kathy and
Channel 4 News were just just wanted it
to go away by that point and so that
process of what am I supposed to do with
this strange coincidence
turned into the film glitch in the
matrix which I pretty much came through
and in a real sort of flow state over
about two weeks in January 2018 and it
included
awful lot of things that had been I've
been thinking about since the Trump
election so Jordan green Hall I got in
touch with and did an interview with him
and he's a big voice in the film Ken
will was Trump in a post truth world was
not actually named in there but it was a
real underpinning of a lot of the a lot
of the arguments in it and actually when
I spoke to Jeff Souls Minh of the daily
of all that he said that documentary was
a pure integral download which was very
pleased with because it was very
informed by the shadow of liberalism
what is it what is the liberal overreach
that we're seeing at the moment that's
provoking Trump provoking brexit
provoking this kind of rejection of what
everyone up until 2016 thought was a
kind of liberal an ever more liberal
society and what it what is it that
liberal liberals need to own about their
own shadow their own kind of tribalism
that pretends that it's not a tribalism
to for the conversation to move forward
and so glitch in the matrix then Jordan
Peterson watched it loved it and put it
on his channel and that has that's been
by far the most viewed piece it's been
viewed over a million times on Jordans
channel and hers is still the piece that
people kind of get in touch the most
about and one little kind of big head of
plug I've sort of been tracking it since
Jordan put it onto his channel it's now
I think either the fifth or the sixth
most viewed piece on his own channel on
his channel on his channel which is
pretty amazing considering it only went
up about a year ago and some of the
stuff there has been up there for four
years yeah so so that's the long and the
short of it there were these two films
that emerge very spontaneously and then
the the channel emerged off the back of
that and I clearly kind of leveraged my
experience with channel 4 and the BBC
into getting the interview Jordan
Peterson there's clearly a kind of
sealing that's the way you can get with
a podcast or a channel
until you've got a couple of big names
on it and then you can use that as your
reputation to get more people on and I
was with that with with my background
and with the access to Jordan Peterson
to be able to to kind of springboard
onto some other big names yeah well and
that's I mean what I'm really struck by
in in the story you just shared and also
just in watching this unfold in real
time because I remember you know when
you release these documentaries I recall
when Jordan Peterson really just sort of
exploded onto the scene and that it felt
like he was kind of breaking some sort
of conversational seal that then many
other actors came in behind him right he
was kind of this this first mover who
then opened up this whole new territory
that I now associate rebel wisdom very
much with convening people in right and
it's this I guess you know you've used
this term and you've explored this term
through a rebel ystem of the
intellectual dark web is it was a Brett
Weinstein or Eric that they coined up
Eric Eric Weinstein coin in this term
the intellectual dark web and so you've
done I think a lot of mmm
careful study of that term and what what
what what what exactly it is that people
are describing when they they use that
phrase what what's your perspective on
it now is somebody who I think is more
and more responsible for for it you know
you're kind of hosting these
conversations that people are
increasingly identifying with the
intellectual dark web so what's what's
going on there that's a really good
question because we have the the
phenomenon that has now got the name the
intellectual dark web and then we have
the intellectual dark web itself which
is if you look at the New York Times
article the Barry Weiss wrote I think in
summer 2018 probably the names in that
are the names of the people who are
officially in the intellectual dark web
there I know
Barry Barry Weiss was talking quite a
lot to the members of it into Eric who
came up with the term and also the
origin of that of what has now kind of
surfaced as the intellectual dark web as
this kind of space for conversation we
released a film glitching the matrix to
actually a couple of weeks ago which was
a long Illustrated interview with Eric
talking about where the term came from
and where why it's necessary given the
structures that he's seen being erected
since the 1980s in inside institutional
frameworks and how institutional
frameworks have steadily more and more
been keeping out the heterodox voices
hmm and how we've replaced genuine
genius and without genius with
excellence effectively then as
structures develop what they reward is
people who go along with an already
existing status quo excellent people who
play by the rules rather than people who
challenge the paradigms that those
organizations are based on and if you
continue to do that what you end up with
is very fragile
institutions especially once those
institutions are under more and more
pressure and there are more
destabilizing forces as there are in the
culture right now and I think that's
really worth I really urge anyone to go
and watch that documentary and maybe a
player clip from it now I would say that
everybody in the IDW is fairly
disagreeable in the sense of the Big
Five personality inventory so can you
hold a position when you're the only
person in a room that believes that
thing if it's you versus a hundred
people I would say almost everybody in
the core of the IDW is capable of
holding a position where everyone is
against you and I think that that trait
is extremely rare do you see the IDW is
primarily
school project no I don't I see it
primarily as a precursor to anything
decent its what has to succeed for us to
have a political conversation I don't
think we're having a political
conversation it's this kind of loosely
affiliated network of people and who's
quote-unquote in or out of the IDW you
know there doesn't seem to be any kind
of boundary there but it does seem to be
performing a purpose which is presencing
all of these heterodox as you say ideas
into the discourse and my I have a
feeling like there is some kind of
emerging worldview being articulated not
by any single individual but through the
collective conversation like the Gestalt
of the conversation as it happens across
many different mediums and so I think
the nature of the IDW makes it so that
people like yourself you know curators
the people who are having that like
hosting the conversations are in a kind
of unique position because unlike the
people you're talking to you're not as
much locked into a particular
perspective and so I one of the things
I'm most curious about is you know
what's your sense of this emerging
worldview like what what what what what
are the bounder contours of it what's
what are what's being articulated not
buying a single individual by the kind
of collective I think like I said before
it's really interesting to look at what
is the emerging what is the emerging
phenomenon that is outside the IDW
itself because if you say who is in the
IDW at the moment I think that's a very
it's very difficult to know I think it
is pretty much whoever Eric Weinstein
says is in the IDW right and yet there
is an emerging consensus that is
certainly applying to more than just the
IDW I mean you can look at the success
of something like Willett
online magazine Claire layman started in
in Australia I think in 2015 and it's
just gone from strength to strength over
the last year especially and that's
that's a really good that's a really
good place to look I think and and
Colette pretty much is filling the void
that Colette is filling it's kind of
known as the in-house online magazine
for the IDW and if you look at the void
that it's filling it's the it's the
interaction between academia and the
media and there are things that are well
known and established in academia for
example the innate differences between
men and women that are not acknowledged
in the media and a lot of what has
happened is there's a worldview that's
hardened into an ideology in the media
that is not really supported by the
academic research it's become more and
more it's what Jordan greenhalgh
describes as the blue church yes the
blue church has mistaken the values of
openness for an ideology of openness hmm
and that's a really I thought that's a
really great way of phrasing it what we
started with coming through in the 60s
was a worldview that valued genuine
openness and inclusivity and diversity
and all of these very valuable essential
values especially if we're talking from
a kind of we looked at it through this
kind of Wilbur spiral dynamics lens we
could say it's a green world view but
that world view has become increasingly
an ideology and there are certain views
that you must have in certain music you
must not have within that ideology and
it's become increasingly policed by
Twitter more than anything it seems so
there are certain things that you can
say and certain things you can't say one
one good example if you're looking for a
kind of overall frame is the Google memo
was a really interesting moment in in
culture yeah and collect one of their
big breakthrough articles was for
academics respond
the Google memo and it went viral
because they were able to because Claire
Mae layman was an academic herself so
she was able to know exactly who the
right people were to go to to say okay
look at the Google memo that James
d'amour put together which was
characterized in the media as an anti
diversity screed they literally more
than an anti diversity screed and
there's even people I was asking the
Atlantic by Konnor Frias Dorf I think he
said he's never seen a document that was
publicly available to so many
journalists be mischaracterized by so
many journalists hmm and so there was a
real failure along the by the by the
mainstream media around the Google memo
and then so it had all of these graphs
it had all of these kind of and he
explicitly framed it as if we want to
increase diversity in tech we're being
told that the only reason for the lack
of diversity is discrimination there
could be other reasons and he even put
forward some suggestions which are if
men are unbalanced more interested in
things and women are more interested in
people maybe we should introduce more
working together in teams
he actually put forward some some
suggestions of what to do about it
but then the Colet so cool that were
then able to to get for academics to
respond to him pretty much say he got
most of the science right um he then
there may be things that he over
overplayed but he got most of the
science right and for him to affect he
been sacked for that certainly through a
chill put a chill in to just about
everyone working in tech it made it
absolutely clear to everyone where the
boundaries were and that where the
boundaries well how far they could go
and that was a that was a hugely
significant significant cultural moment
moment where the media failed and qualit
was able to to fill a gap and I think
passing that for me I think is where the
that that's where most of the the
emerging
view is it's it's actually restoring the
value of academic truth and you can't
really do that without pointing to their
hat an ideology has emerged that is
trying to shut down a lot of debates and
you can't really get away from that and
I'd like to play a piece actually from
from Brett Weinstein now where he talks
about that so we are all watching
something move across the landscape and
alter what can be said where it can be
said at what kinds of language have to
be used and many people will tell you
nobody really believes that and then
others will tell you oh it's a tiny
number of people so it's you're blowing
the danger out of proportion but those
of us who are paying attention to it are
watching the institution after
institution be lobotomised
by these arguments that really don't
rise to the level of a good discussion
and a college dorm these are not high
quality arguments they are not robust in
the face of what is understood as a
result of decades or in some cases
centuries of study and different
disciplines so how is it that these
wrong arguments carry so much power
that's the question the answer in
general is that game theory provides
loopholes where people can have power
that is disproportionate to their
numbers and disproportionate to the
power of the logic underlying what they
are saying so the wielding of stigma in
such a way that causes people to be much
more likely to voice one perspective
than the counter perspective
understanding the the biases that exist
as a result of a sometimes cynical use
of game theory him and his wife Heather
Heying were the most high-profile
victims of campus activism in newer in
the u.s. in Evergreen college they they
were effectively they ended up being run
out of the college by a mob who are
accusing them of being racists and I
think anyone who looks into it would
would pretty quickly see
that that was not that they certainly
were not racist though there are very
progressive people who were on the
receiving end of an ideology mm-hmm and
that that's that's why this is such a
difficult conversation to unpack because
all of these are very good values and
something's very easy but any value
taken to an extreme if it becomes your
kind of guiding axiom can turn into
madness and as Eric Weinstein another
member of the IDW said on the dave rubin
show with brett weinstein you you cannot
build a cosmology on oppression it leads
to insanity and now i think is yeah if
we're kind of naming what the the IDW is
it's a it's a space where we can have
conversations without being accused of
certain things that will generally shut
that conversation down right right and
it also seems like broadly speaking
people within the IDW and this i mean
you're right like the IDW if it's just
people that brett Weinstein says are in
it like that's not as interesting as I
think this kind of emerging
conversational space is quite a bit
bigger that's enabled by new
technologies right and and that is
playing host to conversations that are
not based in ideology or at least are
attempting to do something other than
merely kind of ideological possession
and then speech acts you know and and
two of the two kind of battle in in the
dark and nothing actually happens and
and you know III appreciate the way
Jordan Greenhalgh is is articulating a
move towards a kind of generative
non-ideological coherence building
conversation that takes place between
and among sovereign individuals which in
my mind as a kind of naive optimist is
where I hope the IDW and this this kind
of emerging conversational space is
headed and I guess I'm curious for you
as another person who's convening these
conversations and talking to people
is like where do you see this headed
what's what's what's your sense of what
the future might bring for this this
whole phenomenon this whole network yeah
there's a really great question because
it really fits so I think pretty much
everyone who's been following the
emergence of Jordan Peterson the
emergence of the IDW and this sense
there is a teleology to this
conversation there is a direction to
this conversation and it's very much one
that's I've been very aware in with
rebel wisdom and it's something that
we're hoping to get more and more in a
position to to influence as well and you
mentioned Jordan Greenville Jordan green
Hall is one of the certainly one of the
most fascinating and important thinkers
that we found since we've been starting
to follow this thread and it it is
leading in that direction and it's
something that like we said before
there's the IDW then there's the
emerging conversation it's under the
underneath it and I think that I would
love to see that kind of that grouping
extender to include people like Jordan
green Hall include people like Jamie
Weil who I think is is holding a really
vital piece Jamie wheal wrote stealing
fire and is a flow state's experts what
I thought what I find with Jordan
Greenhalgh and with Jamie wheel is there
they're both bringing this deep felt
sense of the liminal yeah and and that's
something that can't be faked
I'll add Daniel Shmack Tim burger into
that as well it's really deep felt sense
of speaking from a liminal space and how
do we collectively go into that liminal
space where the right answers will
emerge regulars without that I don't
think we're going to get through and I
think that's the crucial that's the
crucial thing that we need to do is to
learn to get into this into subjective
sense making and what prevents you
getting into it is thinking that you
already know the answers yes and so it's
a so what we're looking at then
one of the embodied practices that are
able to put us into a state of
sovereignty into a state of allowing
ourselves to be wrong allowing ourselves
to give up and this is again going back
to Jordan Peters and I think it says
that beautifully about allowing the
deadwood to be burnt off hmm there's
something really vital about how do we
genuinely get into this space of
intersubjective sense-making and and how
do we do that collectively
I know that's that's really the focus of
jordan green halls work and it's
something that we it's definitely
something that we are attempting to do
with rebel wisdom it's the next it's the
next stage of the project so we already
have a an event coming up in in May
called the summit where we we already we
have Jordan green Hall Brett Weinstein
Heather hi Andy and McGilchrist who are
tremendous thinkers in themselves
hopefully demonstrating on stage
entering into thinking in public
demonstrating this kind of inter
subjective process themselves and then
we're also we have a hundred and fifty
guests and we're going to break them
into small groups and and hopefully
facilitate them to get into that space
themselves as well that's fantastic and
I don't know how how directed are you
being in terms of like is there a goal
for harnessing that collective
intelligence that I imagine the 150
people that make their way to your event
will be pretty interesting people
capable hopefully of doing this kind of
work you know yes what's the what what
do you are you attempting to produce
anything there's a more proof of concept
or what's the it is kind of proof of
concept we've done it a few times
already in smaller events and this is
the largest one that we'll have done and
exactly at the Dunbar number it's
perfect yeah that's interesting yeah it
is it is a kind of proof of concept in
some ways and what I think we need to do
is establish and create a field
which works a community of people who
are doing this together I think the UK
is a good place to do that for reasons
I'm going to later and I think for
various cultural reasons we have a
chance of avoiding the kind of almost
instant polarization that we seem to see
in America whenever something happens
there is a there's just this instant
splitting into two camps
I think that's America's kind of genius
in some ways is this polarization and
kind of dialectic process but it's also
your your drawback as well and I think
the UK has a talent for synthesis and I
think the way the way I think we need to
do it is to build a build a field of
people who are able to enter into that
space that can then maintain that space
against bad actors because I have a
feeling that most of the the ideology
that can come in and wreck conversations
is is done through a kind of social
shaming tactic it's done through certain
keywords and certain key objections that
then look for support within the within
the group to derail to derail
conversations and I think if we can
build a functioning field where though
and the other thing we've done with the
with the summit is there's a sign-up
form when you when you sign up that says
effectively I agree to enter into this
collaborative process I agree to leave
my ideology at the door
etc etc they'd which it's an idea we got
from Brett and Heather for how they
managed to to do their conversations
evergreen because the other thing to
realize about Brett and Heather is that
both evolutionary biologists talking
about the reality of biological sex
differences all of these topics that
have become incredibly difficult to talk
about in in and around the modern left
and they were doing this in one of the
most progressive colleges probably the
most progressive college in America
and they managed to teach there for over
a decade with no complaints no like that
they've mastered it the people who
protested against them were not their
own students one of the ways they did it
was to get people to sign up to a
covenant when they entered into the
class as that says people are on a
massive hair-trigger for any sense of
exclusion so the only way to deal with
that is to turn around that issue into
these are the ground rules you've signed
up for if you choose not to obey them
you're excluding yourself hmm so the
only way to do it is to have a set of
ground rules and then to have some way
of enforcing those so someone who's
willing to enforce those as well yeah
yeah I mean it's what strikes me in
hearing you describe your intentions for
the event and and for rebel wisdom
moving forward is it's a really big
shift in the purpose of broadcast media
right like I think if I'm gonna use a
sort of simplified picture of what
broadcast media has been used for in
recent history it's been to kind of
amplify a particular ideology so that
people can make sense of the world
according to that ideology whereas you
know with rebel wisdom and these this
whole conversational space is an
invitation for individuals to take
responsibility for their own sense
making and their own ability to move
through the world with their autonomy
and sovereignty or however you want to
frame it and so it's fascinating to hear
how you're exploring this kind of edge
where you're using broadcast media right
you're doing things that are you're
producing it and you're sending it out
to millions of brains but the N you're
trying to make that flip so that those
brains look down from their devices turn
off listening to some expert yeah that's
a tricky that's a tricky move to make I
imagine because people really like I
really like you know just listening to
other people talk and tell me how it is
yeah but there is also a huge desire for
spaces for people to to converse that's
something we've really noticed when we
when we bring the that space in and our
live events and ask people to to express
themselves there's a huge buzz in the
room there's this mmm there's a real
hunger for people to express themselves
but there is also it's a very delicate
balance to hold because it's very easy
to slip back in to see I would say this
has happened in America with the with
the intellectual dark web
it was framed as a space for brain
conversations beyond polarization but
has become a polarizing force in itself
someone is either for or against the IDW
and in some sense as soon as it was
named in the New York Times the paradox
was it then became defined as a thing
that you were either for or against
uh-huh it's very difficult I think
that's part of what happens in America I
think it it's almost impossible in in
America to avoid that trap as soon as
you define something you're then either
for or against it and you just get
pulled back into the same polarization
trap I don't like the idea as a
phenomenon has not been polarized in
that way in the UK because I just
assumed that that was I don't think
enough people are aware of it for it to
have been polarized that way in the UK
okay interesting interesting interesting
but yeah I mean Jordan Peterson the IDW
I mean they're there already if you're
in the u.s. that they put you on one
side of the cultural war by definition
oh yeah and it seems very difficult to
avoid that process happening yes I would
yeah I would direct people I'd direct
people there's one there's one interview
that we've done I think we're actually
with Jordan green Hall and we called it
the intellectual dark web and genuine
conversation I think it was called well
I think that's the nearest we've come me
in Jordan at
entering into that collaborative
sense-making process on camera hmm and
it's certainly true that it's an
aspiration as much as it is a reality at
the moment to to have those kind of
conversations but I think the first step
the first step really is identifying the
people who are able to enter into them
yes again once you've done that bringing
them together and that's what I think a
lot of people were very hungry for when
the intellectual darkweb first kind of
broke cover earlier in 2018 if you watch
the conversation between Brett Eric on
the Dave Rubin show and Peterson and Ben
Shapiro amazingly and this was about
they were talking about religion and I
think it was it was pretty much Jordan
Jordan Peterson and Ben Shapiro both
following this real thread of their on
their understanding of the
judeo-christian framework and how
Jordans understanding was able to
include Ben Shapiro's and there was a
real sense of intellectual engagement
and connection and and and ability to
come to a sort of a greater synthesis in
that conversation that was really
exciting and you kind of that's what I
think people were really excited about
was this sense of it's an alive
conversation that's definitely going
somewhere and there's an ability of
everyone to enter into this whether
someone like Ben Shapiro is able to
enter into that same conversation about
something like name a hot cultural war
topic abortion rights or whatever
rather than Ben Shapiro destroys
leftists snowflake etc etc etc who knows
but there was certainly a quality and a
lot of those conversations that was
genuinely emergent and genuinely and it
comes and goes as well I think some
conversations have that and some
conversations don't it's a it's a
process you could use a good analogy is
improv comedy mm-hmm one of the the
rules of improv comedy is always yes and
that whenever you're doing a scene in
improv comedy if someone brings
something in you don't say they say oh
we're on a fire engine you don't say no
it's not it's a spaceship you say yes
it's a fire engine and it's got a
penguin driving it and it because if you
don't kill the scene and so it's a yeah
it's a really crucial value to bring in
to any conversation is a yes and which
is something I've tried to do from the
beginning with rebel wisdom to say yes
and to Jordan Pederson for example we've
done a couple of shows the Peterson
paradox and the Peterson synthesis where
we we had some criticisms of Jordan
Pederson I think there are things that
he can be criticized on but I think
we've done it from a place of genuine
appreciation for the value that he's
bringing and the space that he's holding
and and the the skill that he has which
is why and I think that value of yes and
is why we've been able to have the
success that we've had so far
hmm yeah well and and so I also had or
at least attempted to have one of these
maybe we can call them generative
conversations with Jordan green Hall and
and somebody named Bonita Roy who I love
and I suggest you speak with her if you
haven't already for rebel ism she's
incredible person exploring exactly this
space and what was striking to me is how
difficult it is to have these
conversations and how systematically
we've been trained not in in the
opposite of the skill set that it takes
to have open minded generative synthetic
improvisational discourse mmm and so I
remember when in the conversation with
Jordan you know one of the first things
he said was you got to figure out if
somebody they were speaking with is
actually capable of
doing this thing that we're talking
about mmm and so you know III guess what
comes to mind is the other work that
you're doing around retreats and
workshops you know it makes sense to me
now at this point in the conversation
the the connection between those two
elements of your work right I mean if we
need to have these generative discourses
as a civilization in order to really
kind of quote-unquote make it through
this I have the needle that we're headed
up to then we we need we need to unlearn
a lot of things and we need to learn a
lot of things and we need to do it
pretty quick it seems like yes and so
yeah that just kind of clicked for me it
makes sense now the whole kind of I
guess that the larger business model or
the larger operating of rebel wisdom
yeah I think yeah I'm certainly feeling
the the pressure of time I think since
the Trump election I had a I had a
feeling that he was going to get elected
and I had a very strong sense of for
quite a long time had a very strong
sense that this kind of these structures
that we're taking for granted are
nowhere near as stable as we think they
are and and the things have the chance
have the potential to kind of go south
very quickly and I certainly feel that
and and yeah that that is the thing that
we need is we need to develop these
skills into subjective generative
emergent dialogue very very urgently and
I think everyone else in this space I
know Jamie wheel feels this very keenly
as well Jordan green Hall I'd probably
add brett weinstein to that as well
recognizes how difficult this project is
and how we're kind of threading the eye
of a needle in some sense mmm-hmm and
the
it's not an easy thing to do and it's
very easy to come out of Jordan
Greenhalgh talks about sovereignty when
we're in sovereignty and when we're not
there's a few people that I think should
be brought into the conversation as well
and there's this work that's been done
in in Euro I guess you call it neuro
neurobiology around something called
polyvagal theory and somatic work which
completely revolutionized the the work
of transformation or kind of the more
personal growth work that we do where we
realize now a lot more about trauma and
trauma is defined as anything we're not
able to integrate and this this
realization that the the importance of
the vagus nerve in moderating our
sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous
system we are either I don't want to go
too much into the science of it but
effectively we are either in an
exploratory framework or we're in a
defensive framework and if we're in a
defensive framework we are unavailable
we're unavailable for inquiry we're
unavailable for curiosity were
unavailable for dialogue
whereas if we're in the the more
positive space I need to learn more
about this as well I'm kind of I'm at
the edge of my my knowledge but I want
to talk to two of the guys who who've
done this work if we're in this
exploratory framework that's when we're
curious when we're inquiring when we're
in a space of genuine and we do this in
our workshops as well we call it inquiry
and we ask people sort of close your
eyes going be curious about what you
find be curious about what happens in
your life talk to this other person and
come from a space of genuine inquiry why
do I do this well I've never I've never
thought about how these things fit
together before I never realize that
this might be a reason that I do this
and that's an absolutely essential skill
and it's one that we have to very
consciously develop and there are
various other ways of doing that as well
I know maybe other listeners to this
have heard of something called circling
circling is a practice that is very much
based on the
same principles as inquiry hmm what am i
feeling what is happening in the space
that's arising between us as I'm talking
well and being genuinely curious and and
that can only happen from a place of
sovereignty in a place of where we're
not being pulled out of that space by a
stuff for want of a better word yeah
it's a tricky position to be in because
I'm the one hand I also like you
mentioned I feel this urgency like it
does feel like time is running out and I
don't know how true that is or if that's
just a sense and I invite anybody
listening to come and tell me why I
shouldn't feel that way I would prefer
not to feel that way actually but
nonetheless I do feel that way right now
that there's no sense that time is
running out and and yet it seems that
like all these thinkers and and in my
own experience and I'm hearing this from
you
we're kind of triangulating towards we
actually have to go really slow now and
be really curious and exploratory and
open and generative and it's like oh
that's a very tricky chasm to kind of
lock down like on either side you fall
over and it's a needle before yeah yeah
it is very much so like threading a
needle and I guess this is a mysterious
to hear your thoughts on this are you
are you optimistic I am I think it's I
think it goes back to Star Wars Luke in
Star Wars feeling the force kind of
taking away his guidance system I mean
that is a modern myth that's our modern
religion so it's got to be true there is
there's I mean I Lyla I laugh it's kind
of a I'm being only slightly facetious I
do think that there is something in that
I do think there's something in yeah we
need to gain access to that liminal
space we need to gain access to that
space that that knows what to do that
knows what what is a
propria to the times and I think and
unless we're acting from that space then
I think whatever we bring forth is not
going to be equal to the times hmm and
then and I also feel certainly that
sense of time running out it's not
helped when some of the most intelligent
people we've interviewed have are also
saying the same thing but also it's like
what is I as a journalist I look around
at the world and I see so many
existential threats that that it's it's
I mean at the moment a lot of people are
focusing primarily on the environmental
threat yeah but I I look at I look at
world politics I look at kind of where
we're still only halfway through the
Trump presidency I mean I I just see so
many threats that on on the horizon that
it's it's difficult to get kind of
overwhelmed by any particular one mm-hmm
yeah right well yeah I want to go too
far into the existential risk rabbit
hole yeah I just know enough to be very
worried I mean I know we we've kind of
interacted online around this as well
like Pam yeah I'm concerned at how
neatly so many of so much of the kind of
apocalyptic thinking maps on to the deep
religious framework yeah yeah yeah I've
seen you mention that yeah well describe
your position on that because I'd love
to talk to you a little bit about this
all I would I mean I don't know the I'm
not a climate scientist for example so I
don't want to go too deeply into the
science or express an opinion about that
but I would say I don't see many people
coming forward with what I would
consider to be an integral or a balance
framework around climate change for
example
and I'm which I think would acknowledge
certainly how neatly it fits on to a
very sort of religious framework we'll
all
we're all doomed we need to repent right
now yes
is it genuinely about climate change or
is it about changing people if you heard
that there's a technological solution
tomorrow for climate change how would
that make you feel will you be relieved
or would you actually think no that's
not the point the point is that people
need to stop being selfish they need to
stop being disrespectful to the
environment to stop being etc etc what
what's the deeper it is it about
changing people or is it about changing
the environment I mean that would be
that'd be one suggestion but the other
the other key thing I mentioned an
integral framework for me that would be
to say yes there are all of these
factors that are pushing us towards
apocalyptic thinking on on this subject
and yet yes right because I don't see
much acknowledgement this seems to be
this sort of pseudo naivety among people
I'd say sort of a more kind of
apocalyptic on on climate stuff that
that seems to say no everything settled
science is science is completely
objective it's like so enter the human
is a human endeavor like anything else
grant money is given for certain things
I know how the media works there are big
institutional biases yes towards a
certain narrative and towards groupthink
on these things I'm not saying that it's
wrong but I would like to hear people
acknowledge that and say but still I
believe this because of this this or
this
and I don't see that I don't see an
ability to hold that complexity among a
lot of people in this space and if I'm
really honest the people that I see with
the ability to hold that kind of
complexity I often find coming from a
place of less apocalyptic rhetoric
around climate specifically that's not
to say there are not other kind of big
existential threats as well yeah yeah
well and I've had a lot of conversations
on the podcast and some more coming up
about existential risk and climate
collapse and all of those
very real spectres and at the very least
in our in our psyches and and for me the
the through line for this entire
conversation we've been having is like
if you're certain about it then you shut
down so much of what's needed in any
case like it's not like it's gonna be an
apocalypse and all sudden you just cease
to exist like things are gonna change
rapidly and you're going to be called
forth to respond in ways that you don't
even know about right or like things
will get better and you'll play a part
in that or we but we just don't know and
so that the boring thing is to be
certain yeah and the only honest answer
is to just be more deeply uncertain or
at least you know reasonably uncertain
like just like and that and that keeps
open that space of possibility which I
think you know from our conversation I
feel more like that's really a lot of
the gift of the IDW is that they're just
opening up this space of possibility
where something new can be born yeah and
the the lesson if anything is beware of
ideology aka beware of certainty beware
of anything that tries to put things in
a neat box and then tie it up and put it
in a closet like let's just keep this
going that there's a kind of dialogical
process that we can engage in yeah yes
certainty I mean I find I find
especially like the climate peace at the
moment I'm not gonna say terrifying but
I am very perturbed by how much
certainty there is and how out of
control the rhetoric can get when it is
framed as we are facing imminent
extinction what are you going to do
about this imminent extinction I mean
though that there's nothing off the
table once things are framed in that way
there's nothing that you can there's
nothing that you would really rule out
if you're establishing that those are
the stakes and that's how near we are
and that's where
that's the level of response that we're
required to give again and I I do worry
what kind of yeah what because it's also
a kind of catch-22 because by framing
yourself as wanting nuance or wanting a
conversation or wanting some kind of
dialogue around that you can be framed
as well you're just not taking this
seriously you are a Noir on the side of
the extermination of life on Earth
yeah well I've curious you know you're
in the UK and I've been watching the
development of the extinction rebellion
do you have any kind of commentary on
that any perspective on that that's what
I was thinking I I was aware as I was
talking you guys it hasn't kind of
broken cover quite as much in the US as
it has in the UK so extinction rebellion
is a kind of grassroots Climate movement
that has a very yeah I find a lot of
things that they do I found I find their
use of skulls very troubling they're a
lot they use a lot of iconography based
around skulls and if I kind of look back
at what other organizations in the past
of sort of driven political movements
based around skulls I find it very
interesting that that's the kind of
iconography that they're choosing to use
I'm not sort of saying that there's
never any place for activism there
clearly is but it's a very different
thing to to inquiry and and that's what
I'm personally interested in and want to
kind of see more of yeah I'll probably
get into trouble for the skulls thing
yeah it's curious I mean I've been
watching it over here I had one of the
co-founders Gail Bradbrook on the show
and and at least and and I know because
I participate in Occupy Wall Street that
be there can be a lot of philosophical
robustness and nuance in the mind and
heart of the founders or the instigators
but then it you know to some degree it's
out of your hands by the time it becomes
a mass movement and then it can
go anywhere you know it is in some
respects a kind of collective
intelligence that you don't have control
over anymore and so I loved Gale and I
thought that she had beautiful
perspectives on grieving and the need to
be honest with ourselves about what
we're doing to the planet whether or not
were you know destroying it we're
certainly messing it up pretty bad and
you know like that's that's undeniable
and but then yeah like it can easily
escape the embrace of the people who
have good intentions who founded it it
also reminds me a little bit of Jonathan
Heights work around the coddling of the
American mind where he talked about how
this culture of kind of microaggressions
on campus was effectively was really
count and basically students being told
always to take things the worst possible
way hmm
was direct and a lot of the the
reasoning that was coming through in the
last few years was directly counter to
what you'd be taught in cognitive
behavioral therapy for example which
says whenever you have a thought think
about whether that thought is true what
that thought means and and just to stop
yourself catastrophizing most of the
time and I do worry that there's a lot
of catastrophizing going on yeah
personally I'll just share my
perspective on and this is that I kind
of choose to act as if extinction is an
is a real threat because it calls me
forth to participate in life in a more
beautiful and meaningful way you know
like the kind of person that I become
when I live in a time when like
everything's on the line is more the
person I want to be than the person who
I would be if I thought that things were
chill and so there's a little bit of
motivated reasoning there on my part but
I actually think that's that's kind of
okay like we're all doing that in our
own way yes I think I'd agree with that
I think I implicitly feel the same in
the glitch in the matrix film
Jordan greenhalgh talked about this
polarization
driven by social media as an existential
threat that we be cut we we broken off
into two camps effectively humans had
different capabilities and what we've
seen is those with certain capabilities
going off into one camp and certain
capabilities going off into the other
camp and that that splitting was
existential II was an existential threat
and I agree I agree with that I feel
that we are in the times where the
stakes are that high and I know that my
particular piece is in trying to create
a dialogue and it's a sense making thing
I mean basically what rebel wisdom is is
an attempt to make to create a sense
making framework Network and create the
space for into subjective sense making
to emerge and that I'm I'm convinced
that is my particular piece to own in
the existential struggle that we're
going through beautiful.i it's honorable
and important work and I think I mean
from just my perspective you're doing a
great job like it's really it's helping
me make sense and it's helping a lot of
people I know make sense of the world so
yeah and and it's also you know part of
what is drawing me forth into this in
this conversation and so it's it's an
exciting time to be doing this kind of
work I think and so as we kind of draw
towards the end of this conversation I'm
curious David if there's anything on
your mind or in your heart they'd like
to share with the folks who might be
listening no let me think we've just
brought out a few films with ken wilber
mm-hmm which is something we haven't
mentioned so far but I know that we we
both share an interesting kind of that
framework and it's something that yeah I
guess I kind of end by saying I do think
there's a lot of other perspectives that
I saw the intellectual dark web as the
beginnings of this
conversation and I do think that there
are really important voices that need to
be added to it and I think for example
Ken Wilber in the integral framework
that he produced was a really important
map and it's one that I think Jamie
wheel said to me recently that a lot of
people who are currently breaking trail
are running an integral OS yes integral
operating system and I think that's
that's probably true and and I yeah I
just I guess I just heard to be able to
kind of have a look at the channel and
we're trying to follow the thread of
this emergent conversation as I I know
you are on your podcast as well and yeah
maybe get in touch and suggest some
other people that we might want to speak
to because I I'm sort of making so far
I've been going mostly on instinct of
you know what are the pieces that are
missing where do we need to go how do we
bring this person into the conversation
what does this person have to add and I
I don't know if you're familiar with the
Enneagram yes yeah so I'm if anyone
knows the Enneagram it's a it's a really
interesting personality tool so I'm in
Enneagram five hey me too
oh yeah that's the the curator the curio
Errol
well the Enneagram five that it's the
detached observer I mean I'm yeah that's
stereotypical Enneagram five it's the
philosopher the journalist but yeah the
five is to be a is to be a sort of
slightly detached and be able to see how
things fit together so that's really
what I hope and what my aim is with
rebel wisdom is to stay open enough
myself and my co-founder Alexander Byner
who is running the events and between us
to really stay open to where this
conversation wants to go and to be able
to respond to it and - yeah - help to
help it emerge in the way that it wants
to emerging to continue to get out of
our own way enough to be able to
to to allow it to come through in the
way that it wants to if that's not 234
your audience probably it's like a few
like it
it's a beautiful intention yeah thank
you thank you for this conversation and
and thank you for the work you're doing
I think it's it's very valuable yeah
thank you it's been a pleasure
[Music]
you
[Music]