[Music]
we are now recording and I'm sitting
here with dr. Gabor Martin and my good
friend Melissa woman and it's a buddy
privilege to sit down gobble we've only
just met but we're gonna get to know
each other just a little bit
I'm Melissa this is the first time we've
spoken since we were together in Park
[Music]
yeah where we recorded a few
conversations and one with Rick Doblin
will be already out by the time this is
posted so people hopefully would have
seen that that was quite beautiful as
well now I'm quite interested about what
we're going to end up talking about
today because Gabor I came into contact
with your work I'd say about four and a
half years ago I found your presence
immediately what interesting powerful
and going over some of your stuff over
the last few weeks particularly the last
few days I realized how much your
thoughts on addiction actually did help
me conceptualize some of the things I
was going through and ultimately how to
move forward so it's kind of challenging
always to know how to introduce a
conversation with someone you've only
just met and someone you respect so much
and know has so much to say and there's
a limited time frame because there's a
lot we could talk about and ultimately
what I'd quite like to do is not only
get somewhere interesting but hopefully
further something you know and so given
are you sure you're not putting too much
pressure on yourself yes I'm sure I'm
sure
okay and so all I'll do is ask you
gobble for people that have not been
introduced to you before yeah who are
you what what are you doing somebody
asked me that recently and number of
people have said about me as they call
me uh people whisper I don't you know
concept of the dog whisperer
it's a best-selling book and in North
America and somebody who trains dogs not
by coercing them but some people by
whispering to them no other word
streaming gently and with respect and my
view of human problems is that they all
arise from an individual of at least
they all arise from when we were
children and infants when we should have
been whispered to when should have been
talked to gently when we should have
been held in a nurturing way something
interfered with our parents capacity to
do that and therefore people who wounded
in all those wounds and the defense
against those wounds arise most of human
dysfunctions most of what we call
disease most are immune illness most
cancer most neurological disease most
depression anxiety ADHD addictions and
so on and therefore if you want to guide
people to healing we have to go back to
those early wounds and help people
understand them and and and relate to
themselves in a loving compassionate way
and so when I'm doing my job well then
I'm whispering to them in that sense and
and and know how to get down to the
essence
of what hurt people and even deeper to
the genuine self that has always
remained intact underneath all those
hurts mm-hmm and so that's when I'm
doing my work well that's what I'm able
to do that's really beautiful and I am
curious to know when someone does come
to you for help how do you know what to
do how do you know to help them well it
helps to overhear a framework and I just
you know articulated the framework so
now it's just a matter of asking the
right questions in a way that well no
that's not just a matter of asking the
right questions it's it's a matter of
creating a sense of safety for somebody
so they can open up and answer the
questions and as dr. Stephen Porges a
wonderful American psychologist says
safety doesn't come from a lack of
threat it comes from connection
what's a connection connection so safety
resides in connection not in an absence
of threat so it's when you get a sense
of being connected with and you feel
safe then you can open up and then the
questions rather suggest themselves just
in the course of the conversation so I
can describe it but I you know I
demonstrated but I could if you wanted
to give me a problem I'm sure you I do
it but but really that's all it is is
conceptually simple and practically also
straightforward if you understand I
think what you just said there about
safety is quite interesting and how to
hold someone safely
I guess that's an aspect of how to hold
someone with with love you mentioned
before how in childhood often is not so
much what happens but what doesn't
happen yes so when you look at
people's illnesses very often you can
identify specific traumas things that
shouldn't have happened to them and if
you want to look at the salient example
of it here in the Australian setting
just look at the aboriginal population
here's a group that has been has been
and continues to be socially abused
recent reports about and if you read
them but all these massacres of them
that took place more than than was ever
thought and more recently than I was
ever thought large scale massacres of
abused into the 1930s here in Australia
and the average Aboriginal child I just
heard a couple days ago here in
Australia is a twenty four times this
great risk of being incarcerated in a
Caucasian show well I think we lack the
appreciation of how multi-generational
trauma affects the individual now it is
and and and it's in its it's also
cultural and social and so then is it
any surprise that those people then
would have a greater need to escape from
all the pain and one way to escape for
example is through addictions so so so
that but but on the other hand as you
said it's not just bad things that
happened to you that can screw things up
it's also an the good things that should
have happened didn't happen so for
example in my case I recently read my
mother's diary she kept when I was an
infant and I'm six months of agent and
she's writing and I just read this a few
months ago I'm 74 and just read it
recently and she says my poor little
girl she says I felt so bad for you my
heart was breaking
you were crying from three o'clock in
the morning but I couldn't figure to
five o'clock because the doctors forbade
me to feed you except on schedule and
the dogs a little been so angry with me
if I pick you up and finally it caught
the five I couldn't stand any more
I picked you up and I fed you but don't
think I can do that again
now that's not a question of something
doing bad to me that shouldn't have
happened that it's a good thing that
should have happened now what is the six
month or six please
not six month old sorry six weeks old
experience when the person who brought
them into the world bore them for nine
months
he knows the source of physical and
emotional nourishment deprives her the
presume of contact and he cries for an
hour and a half what's the experience
with that infant you know and such is
the question of the good thing is I
should have happened not happening and
in this culture we see this all the time
and and this isn't a part of loving
parents my mother loved me there's no
question though it's not about the lack
of love in this situation it's about the
misapplication of love you know when it
comes to parents loving their kids I
even parents who hit their kids and
abuse them they still love their kids
for the most part they're just doing
what they know how to do they're just
doing what was done to them they just
acting out their own pain and anger and
frustration but it's not that they don't
love their kids so the issue of love is
interesting one there's there's the love
that the parent might feel then there's
a love that the child might experience
and the two are not the same thing at
all because the child is being hit does
not experience look my inner child was
not picked up and they're crying does
not experience love but that doesn't
negate the parents love hmm
so love is a two-way street and in some
sense it's more connected than that of
course because we're always embedded in
environments and we're embedded over
long periods of time and but let's take
two individuals take a child and parents
let's say that the child is older in
their 30s and parent is 5060 or what
have you there's a sense in which both
people and become responsible for that
shared connection right and so you have
let's say the dynamic is one person
searching for something that wasn't
there when they were younger and the
adult is trying to give that now and
maybe maybe there's something pure in
what they're doing now but because the
perception has been twisted that
connection cannot be made and so there's
a sense in which you're also dealing
with well of course you're dealing with
childhood trauma and other forms of
trauma perhaps but you're also dealing
with the projection of the child and a
misperception of what's actually
occurring and I'm looking here for a
segue actually although we can stay on
this towards some other phenomenon we
see happen in the world where people can
be quite notable forces for benefit for
so many hundreds of thousands of people
now in a figure like Jordan Pederson for
instance and then simultaneously a
beacon of for many a beacon of hate this
is very confusing so how it is that is
that example playing out there with
Jordan Pearson in anyway endemic of
misperceptions well so first of all it's
it's astonishing the first part of your
comments because my eldest son and I are
just writing a book called hello again
and a fresh start for our children and
their parents now a beautiful and it's
precisely about the difficulty of
negotiating a relationship in adulthood
and of course it's interesting
relationship because in the beginning
the child's brain is barely even online
and the parent is already fully
developed mm-hmm and in the ch√°vez
utterly dependent the parent is
providing all the care so there's an
utterly asymmetrical relationship and
then how you make that into an equal
symmetric relationship what you become
an adult but you've been programmed in a
certain way you know that's a really
interesting question and that's really
it's a workshop that my son I actually
do and in fact on YouTube you can find
our names Daniel and grab MIT and watch
how we talk about it beautiful but it's
working on that now so that's one issue
but now we said what Jordan Peterson is
teaching comes down to individual
responsibility then it is responsibility
is important you should all be
responsible for our lives but is the
aforesaid Aboriginal child who's being
historically traumatized and continues
to be discriminated against socially and
his chances of being incarcerated are so
much greater
can we just expect him to be as
responsible as a privileged white male
brought up under very comfortable
circumstances or or do we need to
actually look at the social basis of
responsibility coming out to birth we
can do both but we can't ignore either
one I agree yeah so and he does that's
the first point the second point is is
essential messages yeah you gotta take
responsibility but then what is it we
don't look at what is it that makes it
difficult people who take responsibility
and what makes it people the bigger
responsibility is lack of consciousness
lack of awareness and and and in the way
of awareness in the way of consciousness
is precisely trauma and the third point
about him is that his advocacy is for
parents to bring up kids that fit into
society
and so now in Suriname become social
agents of conformity basically in his
teaching and and basically you better
make your kids into people that you will
like because otherwise society won't
like them well that's one of your
chartering
in other words children is that the
essential child is that the purpose of
child rearing is to help people develop
the individual potential for freedom
therefore capacity for independent
thought the connection to themselves
regardless of what society might think
of that well I think no I'm sorry to
interrupt but you just because I didn't
answer your question and and I realize
I'm interrupting the question of why's
is a focal point for so much mm-hmm he
says two things and and he is very
articulate and very a very astute
debater but there's always a subtext
does the textin is a subtext and the
text is very good at defending and
articulating the text but what is the
subtext there's a kind of anger in him
there's a kind of disdain for him for
people who challenge the social
structure there's a attacking energy and
he's always seen conspiracies of Marxist
intellectuals or to get him well I'm a
Marxist intellectual I'm not a together
I just don't give that mm-hm
and I and I think he represents a
socially retrograde political tendency
and he speaks to people's frustration
and their and their repression mmm-hmm
that's the subtext that I pick up on and
I can't prove that but I'm very I'm
gonna gut level and really I really see
it and of course if I parse this writing
I could give you more examples but I'm
telling you that's my sense of the guy
yeah I think here yeah I appreciate that
point of view too I think what he's
doing is he's meeting an unmet need in
society and on that an unmet need for
meaning and for therefore the concept of
personal transformation which is
transformation is something you know
someone who's involved with psychedelics
involved with trauma work we know that
it's possible we know that people can
transform and they and that other people
do need it but a lot of other people in
society can get very stuck in the
a conception of themselves in patterns
of behavior that no longer serve them
and they don't really have the ability
to both or maybe one of C the platen
theorem or whence they see it how to
even change it I think is it definitely
underlying your work with trauma and
with and with addiction both having
outcomes in which someone repeats the
same behavior again and again the
traumatized person finds himself in the
same situation again again the addict
finds themselves relapsing going back to
the drug again again despite the best
intentions yeah well so let's grant
which I'm free to do that
Peterson is good intentions he has good
intentions he wants to liberate people
so do i the question is how best to go
about it and what's in the ways of
people's capacity to be free now there's
a book written in the 1980s by us with
psychotherapists called Allison other
entitled the drum of the gifted child
which is the first one the first seminal
book son impacts of childhood trauma the
German title of the book the original
title was prisoners of childhood I like
that name yeah it's a much better name
and and by gifted child but it means she
means the sensitive child but regardless
the prisoners a childhood is a much more
accurate title and fundamentally we're
all prisoners of childhood and looking
at myself
and looking at Peterson looking at
almost anybody in this society we're all
prisoners of our chocolates we are very
much programmed by what happens to us
early in life and and and and and
basically so much over as I said earlier
our dysfunctions are arise out of coping
mechanisms to deal with what happens to
us so addiction for example is not a
moral choice just to say to an addict
take responsibility well that's nice
it's interesting how that discussion is
evolved we went from there's a society
believing that yes addicts either were
just making a choice
choice again again and therefore lack of
compassion was expected then we sort of
had the conception that addiction is a
brain disorder it's a chemical imbalance
a disease right well and then so I just
spoke here in Melbourne two days ago to
a group of judges and lawyers and
advocates and court workers on addiction
and and and the legal approach to
addiction is based on the absolute
misperception that it's just some kind
of a change choice so people are making
a negative choice at least our society
that choice that society regards
negative then we punish them for it and
that's the whole legal system is based
on that utterly unfounded idea that
addiction is a choice and the addict
should just take responsibility for it
now yes we would like the addict to take
responsibility but let's ask the
question what's in no way of that and if
we actually recognize that all
addictions or coping mechanisms like I'm
sure everybody in this room has said
some addiction to something or there is
some time some behavior that they craved
and we derive pleasure from temporarily
suffer negative consequences as result
of but couldn't give it up i've surely
had those behaviors but if you ask
somebody i have you - absolutely okay
well let me ask you this question each
of you okay not what the addiction was -
not when not for how long but what did
it give you what did you like about it
in a short term
I liked that I could pull off becoming
who I needed to be and who I wanted to
be you didn't wake up one morning saying
I'm gonna do something to put off
becoming that's an analytical thing I
don't know what you got in the immediate
sense well in the immediate sense it was
participation in a short-term
competitive engaging place of world
competition or hierarchy that was at the
expense of my longer term gain I was
quite conscious of that for many years
doing it okay but what you got from it
was engagement yes and some meaning yes
and participation right yes okay very
good
and yourself I would say meaning you got
meaning meaning and I guess a sense of
meaning and purpose so meaning is
important to both of you
hmm known is important to both of you
it's important to every human being
everyone you know and then the question
is why was meaning lacking in your life
that you had to engage in some addictive
behavior to derive a sense of meaning
and that's what Toronto comes in so what
I'm saying is that now if you start to
other people they'll say that my
addiction numb me out or if numb you out
why did you need to be numbed out
because you were in pain that's when you
have to be known addiction soothed my my
distress it called my nerves it
connected me with other people gave me a
sense of control all these things are
normal human aspirations just as meaning
is in other words the addiction wasn't
the primary problem it was an attempt to
solve a problem and if you understand
why people had the problem no you don't
look at the choices of their brains you
look at their lives and that's what I'm
saying is that all these things are
coping mechanisms and before we just say
to people brightly you're writing
responsible for your addiction
let's explore what's in the way of that
and what problem they're trying to solve
yes I you know I I agree with you um
seems to me though
and this is just gonna be a push and
pull thing because the individual
responsibility is absolutely wrapped
around the collective barriers or the
Escapist experiences or the trauma
that's blocking the capacity to take
responsibility they have to be wedded
around each other because of course the
individual is what strides out into the
world the individuals responsible for
their own trauma in ways that no one
else is or can be because it's in their
own internal world and that's right
right so so what's interesting then is
recognizing
so let's say you've seen the light okay
right there there is a light at the end
of the tunnel and at the end of the
tunnel there's a dim vision of who you
could be right for Ewing it might be
something like the self or the god image
we could explore that idea in a number
of interesting ways I office Stan graph
talking about the stages of perinatal
matrices you know you have the no exit
stage and then you have the stage when
the birthing process begins and there's
a there's a sense of possibility
although it's still incredibly difficult
and we have to be absolutely conscious
of the environmental conditions and just
how difficult it is but nevertheless
when that image of a positive way to be
is there seems to me at some level
there's a choice there's a choice that
comes along it's an intention and it's
move towards a love for your for
yourself and what you could be or again
move towards a rejection of that and
perhaps it's fear perhaps it's it's it's
scary perhaps your surrendering and we
should have compassion for that
understandably but nevertheless right
nevertheless there's orientation
nevertheless that's individual
responsibility and the reality is is
that we can't get to a place in the
world where people can be so powerful
actually that their impact on others can
be such that we do need to have a point
in society where we recognize this was a
decision that someone made that was
towards the side of of evil right simply
because of what they are impinging on on
other people by the nature of their
inability to move towards what they
could be that is good over a long enough
period you know every time you speak
it's like you present the whole vortex
of ideas and it's there's no complaint
or criticism I'm just commenting that
then it's such as I choose it but your
entry point away absolutely don't do I
select here trace to you know to engage
with you so let me then let me think
about what you just said do you mind if
I reset oh yeah
[Music]
let's see where to start yes there is a
self that we move towards when we let me
talk about the healing of addiction the
word we use is recovery now what does it
mean to recover something find yourself
can you if you find something you
recover something you find it and what
is it that we find when we find
ourselves which means to say that yes
there's a self in there that means that
we lost contact with any essence of
trauma actually is the disconnection for
myself yes and so the essence of healing
is reconnecting with the self whatever
the whatever means that's the first
point yes I agree with you when it comes
to responsibility though let's look at
that word a little bit because you may
say the word I may say the word official
and we may not mean the same thing by it
so very often a nothing you saying is
but it was you know in employing the
word responsibility
people often mean who is guilty it was
to be blamed was at fault right so I
just throw that one out it is not part
of this conversation
so they she was not who's guilty because
in my world I don't deal in guilt very
much I just want to look at what
happened and even evil is a concept that
I would I know that's Chuck in a little
gingerly with but not that there aren't
evil things but I don't think there's
evil as such but but in terms of
responsibility let's call it response
ability the ability to respond agency
agency that's that's absolutely how I'm
trying to use it yeah very good then a
question again becomes what is it that
stands between people and their sense of
agency and and their ability to respond
and you know Viktor Frankl in his man
search for meaning a concentration camp
survivor says that no matter what the
circumstances people can choose their
response
yes and in that there's a gap he says
between the stimulus which is the
external event and the response and in
that gap he says is our freedom and in
that freedom is a girl
oh that's true and not true at the same
time because one of the things that
happens to the traumatized brain it
loses the capacity to respond and
there's no gap between stimulus and
reaction becomes automatic right because
it's as if I tapped you need and you
need kicked out forward that's a reflex
you can't help it you're not doing it
it's just a reactivity of your nervous
system yes and and and and people are
programmed that way and the more
traumatized they are the more they're
programmed that way so to talk about
responsible in the abstract is
meaningless because it ought to get
bigger because it all depends on who you
talking to and in what context the real
issue is but I think we would all agree
on is that the challenge is how to help
people move towards responsibility from
reactivity absolutely what are the
conditions that people need to move from
that automatic reactivity to where
there's really a gap between the
stimulus and their response and in that
gap they can find their freedom that's
the real question that's the line
between chaos and order that's I mean
Jordan Peterson again his framework
conceptual thinking is can be bridged
here but I guess what I swear here there
is the way that we view the world is the
world that we live in though well the
Buddha said that the Buddha said 25
years ago the very first sentence in the
Dhammapada probably I get it from she's
saying yeah there's nothing or a
journalist or he says that it's with our
thoughts thoughts are in the lead that
they basically took our thoughts and our
minds they would create the world that
we live in so if I believe that the
world is a horrible place I live in a
very different world then if I believe
there was a benign place and I'll behave
very differently and I'd be a very
different person it so happens that the
person who said that the world is a
horrible place in so many words is the
current president United States but but
what the Buddha didn't say and I so he's
doing his best to create a horrible
world exist what he lives in now the
missing piece here though in the bush
perspective is that before with our
minds we create the world the world
creates our minds
so we create the world with the minds
that the world program into us at every
age and the more formative experience
the more restricted you you the world is
and our more limited your view of
yourself is and the more fearful your
view of other people might be so that
means now you're living it from that
place and a question is how do we
restore how do we overcome the
constriction of trauma and restore
people to true Liberty which is their
birthright and their true nature that's
the best question and I think that takes
a lot more than just telling somebody to
take responsibility yeah I think so too
just a brief neurological fact is we
know that through brain imaging the
traumatized person that they're the
areas of the sense of self are so quiet
so dim my an fMRI they really have lost
their you know that the our sense of a
sense of self our sense of what we what
we love what is meaningful to us where
we want to go our direction that's right
and not only that the same imaging
studies you look at the brain you see
that when people are overcome by
[Music]
powerful emotions the part of the brain
that exercises responsibility and choice
the mid frontal cortex actually goes
offline fraidy she as well see yeah well
that's right absolutely yeah yeah HD is
just one manifestation of trauma as far
as I'm concerned having been diagnosed
with it myself and and so neurologically
you can say to somebody take
responsibility but what if their funnel
cortex is offline because it's
overwhelmed by cortisol yeah so again
you know it's legitimate that we should
support people taking responsibility but
it's important to ask what's in a way of
that and how we help them get there
let's look at that's a real question and
you have spent a lot of time with these
patients so that with addicted patients
in your work well with myself and with
yourself I find it quite interesting
that you have explored the shadow side
of humanity and therefore know so well
how desperately we need
tools of transformation yeah and how
many people are stuck and could be
liberated if there was another way so I
find it quite striking then how how you
discovered psychedelics which are tools
for transformation and can yeah there
are monitors is the in the right
settings liberate us and a rigidity of
our thoughts for sure
now of course spiritual modalities the
pathways of all kinds from way before
the Buddha to the person time have asked
the same question
ancient Greeks know and and Greece
Pythagoras Socrates so these questions
have been asked for a long time but
certainly one powerful and in my
experience effective pathway for a lot
of people not for everybody which is me
is the route of psychedelics precisely
because they get underneath the defenses
that we built up in childhood and they
get to the core of the issues that
motivate us but they also can take us
down to that real stuff that we've been
talking about people who actually
experienced their real selves they
reveal the true being being absolutely
that can happen to people which doesn't
mean that having something being
revealed to you therefore you can not
embody it so there's a you know you're
gonna have these great experiences and
and and as my wife could tell you go
back to being the same jerk that you
were before the experience unless there
is unless there's integration unless the
deep immersion honest as a practice
around it but as a way of revealing
these truths and and and helping people
transform realistic edicts or in the
right context and you have to emphasize
that under the right guidance in the
right context right leadership right
counseling right integration they can be
extraordinarily effective mmm so they
said a few things their environment our
preparation intention then integration
these are
all vitally important to the outcome and
how changed you are from a psychedelic
experience how how much you do recover
from of yourself and one thing that
really helped me at your workshop at
cyclic science 2017 was the focus you
put on the creation of an intention and
recently be going quite deep in Buddhist
practice and I've been discovering that
the same thing applies for what is
practice you're encouraged to stay feel
made it your intention to meditate each
time you meditate so quite I'd love for
you to share some of the thoughts and
some of the reflections you would
consider when recommending someone
create an intention for a psychedelic
experience so if you look at the root of
the word intention it comes in Latin
were a 10 year which is to stretch or
tener at the stretch so intention is
something that you want to stretch
towards internally but you want to move
towards like an agency it's like exactly
yeah that's right yeah that's cool
that's right so when you want to suck it
like an experience you can just I just
want the trip season colors yeah see
some nice colors and interesting animals
so that's people do or you can have an
intention that's related to your
personal development now somebody might
go into the ceremony want to get to know
their fear show me my fear really get to
teach me about my fear or teach me about
love or teach me about show me my power
or help me understand my childhood or
whatever the intention isn't and it's
not when I work with people it's that we
don't set a general intention for the
whole group you know people identify
their intention individually each for
themselves and the intention is not like
a weight that you carry on your neck
that has to burden you it's an anchor
though that you can keep keeps that
keeps you moving in a certain range and
you keep coming back to it because
throughout the ceremony you make of all
these different states and then you want
to come back to your intention yes the
intention without expectation intention
without expectation with
rigid attachment to it yes I quite liked
I think you described five traits of a
good story from Chekhov do you remember
some of those traits yes they talked
about that and and and quite possibly if
I looked on my cell phone I would find
it but I'm not sure trouble is I give
these great quotes but I don't remember
that that's okay I guess when I guess
some maybe we should for four minutes we
have four minutes interesting just begun
yeah it feels like it it's quite a bit
to say because it seems to me like and
just to tie the conversation back to
Jordan Peterson here and we've also been
talking about agency and we've sort of
separated that from a negative sense of
responsibility that can that can hold
you back it seems to me like there's I
an image that flashed into my mind
really is the similarities between
between the two of you but in the same
way that you know you're looking at one
coin with two sides right and that might
be a bit too harsh right no no no that I
mean so what is certainly true I think
Peterson is accurately identified is
that we live in a society that deprives
people of meaning now whether he would
say that society is doing that or not
but that's what he's speaking to and
also doesn't allow us to connect to our
needs or even recognize human needs
that's right yet we're here having this
conversation you know we can we can
recognize our needs not I know I know I
know some people I know some people have
have a horribly horribly impoverished
set of opportunities that are that are
that that we should have nothing but
understanding and compassion for when as
children they have to undergo certain
behaviors that and prevent them but no
no but not only that if you recognize
that much then the question becomes what
are gonna do a better society that keeps
large numbers of people that way do we
just make it into an individual
responsibility
do we say we as a society have
responsibility to do something to alter
those conditions well I I agree with you
but you know what what Jordan Pederson
is calling for and what many people
before him of call for these are not
unique ideas so Jordan of course is that
the individuals proper role should be
towards you know in orienting towards
the health of the society towards the
differentiation out there into the
unknown source and back with something
that will give you a personal question
okay so it's a one-year-old I was nearly
taken to Auschwitz in two until another
that was those the actual effects on my
life nearly it didn't quite happen what
responsibilities would you like me have
taken for that when I was a year old no
I'm not going at things that way I'm
more just coming from the perspective
that it's no but I'm asking what would
you have advocated and advocated for you
as a one-year-old well III don't what
would you as a kid that a conscious
person and I had all the should do in
the world about something like that
we just make it a matter of personal
responsibility or do we say there's
something really really wrong here with
a society that would want to throw a
one-year-old into another I don't think
you have choice but to do both well we
have to recognize that a lot more that
were not just individuals of course and
that and everything that happens it
doesn't have to be as dire and as
dramatic as the story of my infancy but
I'm saying is that individuals develop
in the social context if if as is the
case a black American woman has a
greater risk of asthma the more
expensive racism she experiences and
that's just a scientific fact and I can
even show you the biology of why that's
the case then is her asthma simply her
responsibility was it is it also a
manifestation of a social malaise that
were all responsible for no I think you
and I would agree that it's both I agree
with you and things too is my history of
sexual trauma
a responsibility of mine only the
perpetrator or in the environment in
which such considerations of women and
sexuality have been brought up in of
course I mean no yes moved in absolutely
so so we are tight for time then are we
I use I guess I think I could bridge
that's another ten minutes and then I
would happily do another what how is to
do here this is too much fun he's gonna
spend our time arguing about how we
agree you think you know between perhaps
all of us and Jordan Peterson which i
think is something it does what people
resonate with and it reminds me of
something you said in realms of hungry
ghosts when he went to Alcoholics
Anonymous for the first time and you had
by myself grew up very disconnected from
God the concept of a God even though my
mum was quite religious and you yourself
said that you felt having known your
family's experiences how could there be
well could there be a god that's all
good all-knowing and all-powerful I mean
if he was all good and all-knowing you
couldn't be powerful otherwise you would
have stopped this so that that
simplistic idea of God
I just never bought in and a lot of
people did not resonate with that and
also understanding of science and how
our story lines about God in in in the
West are these books kind of falling
apart in there
empirical evidence that's one kind of
spirituality this the storyline and this
die stick type Garbett you spoke a bit
of another kind of spirituality going to
your face other hand I'm meeting
something lines of maybe you can share a
sense of well I haven't read my book for
us I'm quite well might ever said but I
can tell you what I would say yeah is
spirituality is part of our nature in
the North American native Aboriginal
concept of human beings human life
unfolds in four quadrants the physical
which is the body the mental the ideas
the emotional and the spiritual and if
there's not a balance within those four
quadrants we have some degree of
dysfunction and the more imbalance there
is the more dysfunction is so I think we
are special creatures of which are these
of God or one manifestation but but but
really it has to do with the fact that
we actually are part of creation and
that's not hyperbole or a metaphor we're
actually a part of creation every
particle in us that's in us has always
been here
yes Big Bang I mean we all come from the
same matter so for all our differences
in arguments and hatreds and conflicts
and so on we're all the same thing
the subject is also the observer
absolutely and so that sense of unity
and connection and oneness and that the
individual ego is simply a in a sense an
illusion and you certainly get that in a
psychedelic experience or even in a
powerful breathing exercise you can get
put an illusion Diego is underneath it
all and substitute subsuming Yisrael
unity well that's just indisputable fact
no I'm not indisputable because the ego
can dispute everything but it is a fact
and and so specially for me this is not
exhaust itself in the idea of a religion
or a god or set of practices but it's
actually that our longing and our
finding of the unity yeah I wanna bring
up also the word you said creativity
yeah and I want to share the etymology
of a word now since I know to see you I
really appreciate but you do that and I
like it too so the word creativity comes
from to have grown
yes grown so your growth is a process
that you engage with a process of
transformation and so I guess what the
other element in my sense of
spirituality is engaging in a process of
transformation and that can be I think
the line that I was thinking of before
your book was something long lines of
creating within yourself whatever you
perceive to be God like well the Bible
doesn't say by accident that were
created in God's image and and so in
that sense that God is the creator and
so not since so are we and I didn't know
that source of the word but I can see
why it would be compelling to look at it
that way yeah I guess I could cite me I
think you're probably all familiar with
the fact that psychedelics also enhance
creativity in fact I guess what coming
out of trauma is coming out of addiction
it requires a great sense of well
careful careful about that one because
there's been a study that says the
second alikes don't enhance creativity
that people think that it does but it
doesn't
depends which metric as to ISM can
there's divergent thinking and
convergent thinking both being really
important parts of the creative process
this was done with ayahuasca
it we found that it increased divergent
thinking which is divergent thinking
means way better thinking is generation
of many new novel ideas it's sort of
brainstorming it's coming up with as
many possible solutions whereas
convergent thinking as being is
selecting one I see
and moving forward with it in terms of
personality we know that divergent
thinking is correlated to having
openness high openness to experience we
also know that convergent thinking
actually tends to rely not so much on
personality but more on logic and
reasoning so it makes sense then
psychedelics would increase divergent
thinking but not really have an effect
on convergent yeah
well it's interesting that so we have a
choice to make now because I could
either reset the camera and we could do
a little bit more
it could be time to wrap up I'm afraid
of thunder it's time to wrap up I have
an engagement that much as I like to
continue well beautiful some other time
beautiful let me just say one final
thing which is just that even with the
discussion of spirituality at the end
there and even with alluding to the
the fact of our experience that the ego
can dissolve and calls for some people
to name it illusionary nevertheless
we're still talking about a sense of
agency towards the self and slightly and
so you can move forward or move away
from you can bury your head or you can
be with it and move towards it right and
for me it's it's that fundamental
spiritual reality of our experience that
is a core part of the responsibility
message and it's for that one reason
amongst many that Jordans work in
providing people a toolkit at different
level of analysis in which to recognize
their agency in their life towards the
better is having a positive effect so
even as a bridge there in the nature of
this video look I'm not sure if we're
gonna still again everything you just
said but what I see is that this
particular guy has had quite an effect
on you and you find something enlivening
his message more power to you I again
would be much more interested in
somebody bears their heads as you put it
I'd be much disinterested in judging
them for it as in asking why and and and
and and and what is it that in their
experience makes them so afraid and how
can we help them lift their heads again
rather than just to issue an injunction
that they should take responsibility so
the variance in the question of why and
so this is my method is always is never
to give prescriptions I I would not
write a book called the twelve rules for
life to prescribe people I should live
their lives I'd be much more interested
in inquiry what is it that's in the way
curiosity well I I'm with you on that
one and I think it's a cycle anyway and
there's so much more to talk about um
one little quick question is what I like
to ask at the end is if you could share
one one meme out with the world that
would spread through humanity what would
it be
could be the sentence could be even a
quote
well that's it's quite thematic for in
talking about it's the Socrates it's
it's a cliche but it's also the greatest
cliche there is he says the unexamined
life is not worth living and it's a
question of really exam really inquiring
what's going on and where there's Hitler
Jesus what makes the one one way what
makes the other the other way and
everything else in between so for me
it's all a matter of inquiry yeah what
makes you you
Thank You Melissa it's lovely to see you
again Gabor thank you pleasure
[Music]