[Music]
you
[Music]
welcome back to awakening from the
meaning crisis so last time we took a
look at three pivotal figures both of
the two of them are in dialogue with the
central figure that we were talking
about last time and that's rene
descartes and we took a look at the
debate between Descartes and Hobbes and
how that is so current and relevant to
us today in the debate around the
possible creation of strong AI and what
that means both scientifically and
existentially to us and we then took a
look at what comes out of de cartes
response to hobbes if you remember
Descartes builds a defense against
Hobbes proposal for a completely
materialistic artificial intelligence
computer model of the mind in terms that
are drawn very strictly and I think
rigorously from this the central
insights of the Scientific Revolution
and that seems to save the human soul
from the Hobbesian onslaught but we then
note we pay a really really devastating
price for the cartesian defense we have
a radical disconnection between mind and
body which is radical because of how
embodied your experience of yourself and
your world is a radical disconnection
between mind and other minds because you
only have access to other minds through
bodies and if there is no possible
connection between mind and body there's
no way you can read other people's
mental states off of their bodily
behavior and then we have the radical
disconnection between mind and reality
because descartes gives us two competing
models of how we get in touch with
what's real one is we track the
mathematical and then that is of course
was picked up by positivism and people
who advocate for science as our main
access to reality and then the other is
the cogito ergo sum that all that's left
of the contact with reality is the
moment where the mind touches itself and
we get this a purely subjective notion
of realness that's picked up
the Romantic tradition and is also
prevalent in our world today and we
swing between the positivistic and the
romantic notions of how we decide what's
real in a completely unstable fashion
we then noted that even your connection
to yourself has been undermined because
the Cartesian project is so radical in
its withdrawal it's so radical in its
disconnection from mind body world
tradition history culture that all the
AI is that's in the cogito all that is
guaranteed to exist is this moment of
self-awareness so you end up with is
completely atomic completely
autobiographically empty self adrift in
the terrifying infinite spaces that
Pascal talked about and we talked about
Pascal's response to descartes and how
Pascal was convinced that des cartes
attempts and Pascal was right about this
de cartes attempts to try and deal with
the anxiety of the scientific revolution
by promoting a methodology of searching
for certainty would ultimately come to
ruin and of course they have come to
ruin as we've said instead what Pascal
pointed out is that we have lost all
these other ways of knowing that we're
so central to the axial revolution we
all we have left is a spirit of geometry
we have lost the spirit of finesse we
have lost the procedural knowing the
perspectival knowing and the
participatory knowing that are so
integral to the transformative
experiences that have been central to
our discussion of the axial ages legacy
and of course Pascal himself had such a
transformative experience and found the
Cartesian framework incapable of
addressing or articulating it
I'd like to now pick up on what comes
after Descartes because I foreshadowed
at the end of our last episode that we
are in a quite significant situation we
are radically disconnected from
ourselves
both our own bodies and our own minds
from other people from the world from
history from culture from sapiens whole
institutions from traditions of
transformation we are radically isolated
and bereft and yet we face these
tremendous crises ecological crisis
socio-economic crisis political crisis
mental health crisis they're all
interlocking and we face it and they're
and they're so exigent and so pervasive
and so profound and so complex that we
need a fundamental transformation in
consciousness cognition character
community in order to really restructure
our sense of who and what we are in our
relationship to the world in order to
address these crises now that the the
systemic set of psycho technologies that
have brought about such radical
transformations in the past have been
religion and yet part of the heritage of
Descartes and the Scientific Revolution
and the ongoing fragmentation that has
followed from the Protestant Reformation
is an increasing secularization of the
world that's that's a little too
simplistic I mean it's it's it's
bifurcated you get the increasing
secularization on one hand and then the
increasing attempt to nostalgically
retreat to a priest scientific model in
various forms of fundamentalism which of
course is doomed ultimately to a
complete kind of failure but we this is
happening such that for many of us a
return to religion in order to provide
the multi-level multivariate complex
transformation that is needed to meet
the crises that we're facing is not
available to us
precisely because we are post religious
or we are myopically entrenched within a
pre-scientific model of the revolution
scientific revolution that will in no
way avail us with what we need in order
to address these crises so either way
you want to turn the religious option is
not a viable one what I want to now
explore is why a secular solution for
many people also no longer seems viable
so what I want to argue is that we face
this hard problem of needing a religion
that is no religion but cannot be fully
secular but we don't want it to be
religious and it is filled with all this
paradoxical tension and contradiction
that I've tried to argue is the hallmark
of the Cartesian legacy the way I want
to argue that is to try and show the
responses to the meaning crisis that
come after Descartes and I'm going to
talk about them in terms of the pseudo
religious ideologies and how we have
been traumatized by our interest and
bewitchment by these ideologies but
socially because these ideologies have
led to Titanic warfare and genocide all
bloodshed and so we're trapped between
we can't return to religion and we can't
move to its political secular
alternatives because of the trauma that
has been inflicted by their history and
so we are stuck right there is no
political solution to quote the police
and yet we also are not willing to
return to a nostalgic and therefore
impotent religious framework so we sit
trapped so how did that arise so again
we have to move rapidly and I mean I
don't want to trespass on your time this
video series is already long but we're
moving through Titanic figures here and
it always is I feel a difficult thing to
do but I well I want to talk about the
figure of Conte and we'll talk about
Conte in a couple places so I need to
introduce them here anyways
so Conte is trying to deal with this
fracturing in realness that Descartes
has left right and the the the the the
two sides the inner subjective mind
touching itself and the outer
mathematical and caught brings up a
question that is very important and
there's been other people who have given
voice to this and this is an important
one which is how is it how is it that
math is so good at describing reality
why just accept Galileo's claim that
it's the language of the universe we
have we know long si at one point we had
an answer to why math is so descriptive
reality we had the Neoplatonic answer
the idea that reality is ultimately
grounded in intelligible form and those
intelligible forms you remember the I
das the structural functional
organizations are ultimately abstract
eternal etc and that's the ultimate
grounding that's why many people who are
realists in mathematics formally and
explicitly label themselves as platanus
because that is a way of trying to
explain how mathematics gives you access
to reality when it is nothing like
spatio-temporal material reality I mean
why is it that something like math
describes physics so well and and what
Kant was really trying to get at is how
do I get those two sides of Descartes
together how do I get the side that says
math is real but all I have math gives
me access to reality but all I really
have is access to my own mind how do I
get those together and current comes up
with a really radical proposal he calls
it a Copernican revolution
he thinks it's as important as
Copernicus revolution of the external
world
and the content proposal is a it's a
very interesting one because what I
think it does is is it really
radicalizes things even more so Kant's
proposal is these categories these
patterns of intelligibility we find in
the world the mathematical properties
aren't actually they're not in the sense
we think they are so what caught does is
he basically makes use of a move that
akka made if you remember Occam's razor
and remember I often say people don't
understand what they're invoking when
they invoke Occam's razor Occam's razor
basically says that all these patterns
of intelligibility you think are in the
world are actually in your mind right
what what Kant does is says well these
these ways of measuring the world
mathematically they aren't the features
of the world they are the way in which
experience has to be organized in order
to make sense to the mind so let me try
and give you an analogy for
understanding that right so I'm gonna do
a reverse on the analogy you see me use
when we were talking about Siddhartha
Gautama the Buddha right so let's do it
the other way around the world is very
blurry there's too much and so what I
have to do is I have to filter it I have
to filter it so that it will fit my eye
and my brain and I can make sense of it
so these filters have to be put into
place and so Kant's idea was there are
structures in the mind that basically
act as these filtering frames it's kind
of both a combination of a filter and a
frame and what they do is they impose a
structure of intelligibility on
experience
so this is opposite to the platonic this
is why it's a Copernican revolution it's
a complete reversal of the Platonic
model so the idea is I'm not discovering
the patterns of intelligibility that
structurally functionally organized the
world what's actually happening is this
right this pattern is being imposed on
the information coming in so that it
will fit my mind and make sense to my
mind and that's the basis of my capacity
for reasoning about the world I can
reason about the world not because the
world is ultimately rationally
structured but like Arkham said the
world is a absurd in itself I can reason
about the world because I have filtered
it in such a way that my mind can
process it according to its own internal
grammar so see how this is this is why
it's a Copernican reversal I'm not
discovering in the world the
mathematical properties of things my
mind is filtering and imposing a
structure on them so that it can make
sense and think about them so you have
to take this word and this phrase and
make it really really strong your mind
is making sense of things and it's good
whereas when we talk about relevance
we're going to see that there's a deep
sway in which con is I think right you
say okay so yeah I see how he's he's
sort of int completly inverting the
world from Plato I get that right so
math isn't discovering reality math is
ultimately about how the mind imposes a
structure on reality so it can reason
about it great all right
what does that mean well notice we've
got now the my remember we talked about
this model of the contact with the world
being withdrawn and it's being withdrawn
inside the mind by Luther and then it's
being withdrawn really by Descartes now
not only is it withdrawn it's in prison
the mind is in here and all they can get
in here always has to pass through this
filtering frame and for caught that
means we can never know the world as it
is in itself as he famously said the
thing in itself we can never know the
world as it is this is why of course the
Cartesian search for a certainty is
going to be completely undermined so
ultimately notice how this is all coming
together the mind is ultimately only
really touching itself it has no contact
now at the world it's not only withdrawn
from the world it's isolated and trapped
within itself but it does answer the
question well why does mouth work so
well well math works so well according
to Kant because that's the grammar of
how our minds operate that's why math
which seems such a mental and abstract
and weird thing seems to make the world
succeeds that give us access to the
structure of the world it's not really
giving a structure to the access of the
world it's creating a structure in the
world of experience that is makes sense
to human beings now that's right
that's a really big price to pay the
price you pay for getting the two sides
of Descartes back together is to get
them both inside the mind and to be
radically radically out of touch with
the world now then so you can imagine
that people are upset with this this is
a very challenging idea there's and
there's there's going to be some really
important responses to this they're
going to
the romantics and Hegel but I want to
concentrate on the romantic solution
because I've already mentioned it and
we'll talk a little bit about Hegel when
we talk about Marx so there's an idea
here right that's sort of implicit in
Conte right there's an idea of right
information coming in from the world
right so in the problem with this
diagram is it's too simplistic so think
of the filter as having sort of levels
of processing right there's the raw
information from the thing in itself and
it's getting processed it's coming in
right and that right and then there's
all of this structure being imposed on
it now this by the way is the most
prevalent model in most of cognitive
psychology and cognitive science where
you see this Contin
grammar of trying to understand the mind
is in current contrast between bottom-up
processing versus top-down so the idea
of bottom-up processing we talked about
this when we talked about attention
right is this is this is processing that
starts in perception and moves towards
cognition top-down is processing that
starts in cognition starts from your
knowledge and moves down into perception
remember we talked about this when we
talked about how you do how you do this
right the cat right you see this is an H
and this is an A and how do you do that
well you use the knowledge of the word
to disambiguate the letters and you use
the knowledge of the letters to
construct the word and the two are
completely interpenetrating in a
completely self-organizing manner
outside of your cognitive awareness it
actually makes your reading possible for
you it's a conditioned on the
possibility of you reading and so right
this is the same model here the mind is
imposing a structure and it's filtering
and framing and structuring the
information coming in from the world so
this
tn model is pervasive through all of
cognitive science and for a good reason
it turns out to be a very very powerful
way of looking at things
but as I move this way as I move into
the mind right because I get inside the
framework my cognition of course becomes
more and more rational becomes more and
more mathematically logically
intelligible but think about it notice
you've got is this weird idea now as my
processing becomes more rational more
logically mathematical I'm actually
getting farther and farther away from
being in contact with the world now is
not a seek notice the platonic aversion
that the Platonic right reversion make a
complete reversal of the Platonic
structure is bringing with it a reverse
consequence so for Plato as you pursue
rationality you move deeper and deeper
into reality but for current right
notice as I move more and more
interaction ality I'm moving away from
being in contact with reality now what
comes to mind is well isn't the opposite
then the case and think about how this
is going to make Freud and Jung possible
I mean you know how you get Carl Jung
take part if you don't know can't stop
talking about young because Jung
repeatedly tells his readers I am a
neo-kantian
I'm through and through a content he
tells you that repeatedly and so if you
don't know can't shut up about Jung
because you're not understanding Jung
properly the way you get Jung is you
take car and you take Karnes
epistemology and you addict to gnostic
mythology and that's how you get that's
the equation for Jung
so why do I say this we'll think about
this because if I go the other way if I
open the mind up to these more
irrational less fully processed parts of
cognition the boundary between the
conscious and the unconscious aspects of
my experience as I move into the right
the imaginary irrational dreamlike
aspects of my cognition I'm gonna lose
rationality but notice what I'm gaining
I'm gaining back that lost contact with
the world lakshman talks about this in a
really good book called the lost
knowledge of the imagination right and
so I think this is a misunderstanding
but notice what's going on here and this
is this is why my attitude towards the
romantics is so ambivalent they're
picking up on Pascal they're trying to
recapture the lost perspective all
participatory right knowledge the actual
involved contact with reality but
because they're inside this content
framework the way that's gonna happen is
by moving into right the depths of the
irrational aspects of the mind because
those are the parts of the mind that are
closer to reality and so of course what
Jung and Freud are going to do is
they're going to take that what the
Romantics do about how to reach out into
the world and they're gonna make it well
at least for Freud is completely
reaching down to the psyche for Jung
it's reaching down into the psyche and
back out into the world we'll come back
to that later so this this is the main
idea of Romanticism romanticism
ultimately isn't about loving your
sexual partner in a particular way it's
the idea that we can recapture contact
with reality by moving away from the
rational layers of cognition and into
the irrational layers why does that get
associated with love because remember in
the neo platonic tradition with the
romantics in this twisted way are trying
to get back to they're trying to get
back to gnosis and participatory knowing
in a platonic tradition
the quintessential form of participatory
perspectival knowing is love the
romantics have they get that they're
remembering that so we move into the
irrational and will regain contact and
of course that that relationship to the
world where we're actually in touch with
the other and there's mutual disclosure
between myself and the other that's love
and so the romantic return to reality
through irrationality gets connected
with love and that's how we get romantic
love and we get the idea of it as a
fundamentally irrational force right and
you get romanticism and then you get the
idea that well what is the Faculty that
stands between perception and reason
what's perception here
the part where the thing in itself the
world and here's reason up here what's
the faculty in between that
mathematically intelligible and the
sensuously experienced right well it's
imagination imagination is where the
mind initially imposes that order on the
the raw data of experience see for us
and the romantics were very critical of
this and this is something that they
were right about we understand the
imagination just as moving mental images
around in our head and the and the
romantics made a big distinction between
imagination and that faculty which they
called fancy right or like phantasm
right no no for them imagination right
is how the mind imposes structure on raw
data so that it becomes available to
reason and so the imagination is the
place in which we can get closer
outside of reason to the access to
reality so music
and art are going to be understood as
giving us access through the imagination
to what's real
why because music and art are where the
mind seems to be imposing an order in
such a way that meaning is made that we
can then rationally reflect upon so
you're getting you're getting two views
now right that are coming into
opposition one the older view
represented by the Enlightenment I mean
that in the scientific sense not the
Buddhist enlightenment people like John
Locke the mind is an empty canvas and
sense experience comes in and writes on
it
right that's empiricism so the mind is a
blank slate the romantics have exactly
the opposite view we don't actually ever
know what the world is in and of itself
the world is an empty canvas on which
imagination expresses presses itself out
is why expression is so important to the
romantics to press yourself to press out
the mind in imagination presses itself
on to the world and of course that's
where Jung and Freud are gonna get the
notion of projecting onto the world from
so you have these two connects why the
romantics see themselves in deep
competition with the empiricists who of
course are part of what becomes known as
the scientific model so what's going on
here is these two views the mind is a
blank slate upon which the world
impresses itself Locke uses the term
impressions the world impresses itself
on your mind or the romantics no no the
world is a blank canvas upon which the
mind expresses itself and both are wrong
I mean I I very rarely just sort of
state things but I'm really confident of
this both of these models the mind of a
blank slate is just overwhelmingly wrong
way too much argument and evidence
against it and this model of the world
as a blank slate
that we merely express herself on to is
also wrong but what we get is we get
this weird new thing everybody is swept
up in Romanticism see romanticism is
becomes a pan-european movement it's a
movement of the arts it's a movement in
literature good too writes The Sorrows
of Young Werther you have people like
Beethoven bringing in write a romantic
element to music right you have lots of
romantic poetry you know think of Blake
think of Wordsworth so you have this
movement it gets taken up into religion
by slur mocker as a way of trying to
understand religion it's a pan-european
movement alright and it does or it's
hard to be fair to this but at least at
least it appears to do what religion
used to do it integrates music and art
and literature and the project of trying
to find and make meaning in the
scientific worldview by giving you this
whole framework of how you regain
contact with reality one of the
hallmarks of the religious quest you're
going to regain contact with reality by
moving into the world of the imagination
world
making use of art and music and poetry
and literature all of the machinery
we'll talk about this later of religion
and what it's going to do is
irrationally take you into contact with
reality so romanticism is the first and
it is the Godfather godmother of all the
pseudo religious ideologies okay it
looks like behaves like and performs a
kind of massive transformation on
culture and cognition and consciousness
and people start experimenting with
altered states of consciousness
because of all of this all of this way
of thinking is why Freud is going to
take a look at hypnosis etc altered
states of consciousness B you know it
some people are taking various drugs
right Coolidge and others there's all of
this experimentation precisely because
of this way of looking at things but
what it does right you you're paying a
really devastating price for this pseudo
religious ideology of Romanticism
alright and we have and if you think
that romanticism is not alive in our
culture you're not paying attention to
the fact that we still understand and
use the grammar of Romanticism to talk
about love and we even buy into at least
four periods of time
a romantic model of how love operates
romantic comedies are these weird
metaphysical perversions in which we
throw away the scientific model of
things and believe that somehow love is
this irrational force that brings us in
contact with the course of history at
least our own personal history and
destiny and that of another person and
it's all so much right and it's
devastatingly bad because you
are still trapped when Luther and
Descartes left you you're still trapped
inside your mind not really in touch
with things and the only way you get in
touch with him is by thinking and
behaving irrationally you are trying to
make this machinery of the imagination
carry all of the Neoplatonic weight that
religion and tradition and philosophy
and history carried you try to make your
romantic partner take the role of all of
that no person can bear that no human
relationship can bear that burden so we
go into our romantic relationships with
unreachable expectations of how the
person is going to address
everything that we've lost in our
history and of course they can't which
of course is why many people
simultaneously say that wrote you know
the romantic relationships are the
things where they find or look for the
most meaning in their life and the
romantic relationships are those things
that are precisely cause them the most
trauma and suffering in their life so
these pseudo religious ideologies are
really really important because they
point to an attempt to try and get into
words try to get into words to
propositions into ideological ways of
thinking everything that religions used
to do for us because the problem with
the romantics right see the romantics
get this in one way right they get that
the language can't do it all and that's
why they turn to poetry right to see the
world in a grain of sand and heaven in a
wild flower to see infinity in the palm
of your hand and spend eternity in an
hour
there's Blake trying to use imagery to
point to a transformative experience a
mystical experience but you see the
problem is if you don't have any sappy
ntral traditions if you don't have the
Spiritual Exercises that head--oh talks
about if you don't have the systematic
set of psycho technologies if you do not
have regular and reliable methods and
guides for these transformative
experiences all you have in the end are
the words and if you're not Blake if
you're not courage when you read the
poem you don't I mean even if you can't
appreciate how great a poem it is you're
not capable of getting much from it
because everything has been reduced to
the words see the romantics didn't give
us anything else
they don't give us practices they don't
give us institutions they don't give us
sets systematic sets of psycho
technologies they give us promises they
give us images and they give us words
it's a pseudo religious ideology so it
sweeps the continent but it's like
spiritual junk food it's tasty but it's
not nutritious and so what happens to it
right well it it quickly gets translated
into nastier forms not without first of
all of course setting the world on fire
Romanticism plays a big role in the rise
of the French Revolution and the
Napoleonic Wars
don't forget romanticism Beethoven is
writing music initially because he's a
fan of Napoleon and when the pullian
crowns himself Emperor that's when
Beethoven actually abandons him this is
the time we're talking about why why
would the romantics be attracted to
Napoleon you see we have to be careful
here there's some very good podcast you
can listen to comparing Napoleon to
Hitler oh right that's your reaction
soon as I mentioned the word Hitler
that's fine but right why like of course
Napoleon didn't engage in genocide but
he drenches Europe and blood he launches
imperial conquests there's lots of good
historians would say maybe we only like
to pull him because more time has passed
but why do they like him look what
Napoleon is doing by force of will and
that's what the imagination is he is
passing a structure on the world he is
restructuring the world he is painting
his picture onto the world here is the
isolated self pressing itself out on the
world imagining the world into another
shape and existence
so of course Napoleon is defeated and
science continues to move on and what
happens is right there's a response to
the failure of Romanticism it ultimately
fails now here here's the thing that we
have to understand romanticist and I've
tried to indicate this to you
romanticism fails it fails to actually
do what it wants it sets out to do it
fails to be the replacement for
Christianity and in that but it doesn't
go away so the way I put those two
together the fact that it fails which I
tried to show you but it doesn't go away
which I tried to show you in the notion
that we live with decadent Romanticism
we live in decadent Romanticism and
romantic comedies are the quintessential
form of pornography in which we indulge
in decadent Romanticism so
what happens after the failure of this
great pseudo religious ideology well
there are further attempts to try and
understand these romantic the irrational
aspects of the psyche and its world
making capacity and the way and it's
it's we still carrying this remember
from Wacom and Aquinas the priority of
the will the priority of the will so
here romanticism very quickly passes
into Schopenhauer who is the Godfather
of nihilism and notice that a lot of
these names are now going to be German
good to one of the founding figures of
Romanticism is German even though he
comes to reject it later Schopenhauer
German Nietzsche's German Hegel's German
Marx's German again everything keeps
happening in Germany and I've shown you
why because that's what this history is
unfolding
what does Schopenhauer argue right well
he completely internalizes that model of
the world that we saw around the time of
our command even in Luther he picks up
on corn but he says right let's net note
let's use an up-down model here's the
rational part remember and it's out of
touch with reality and like the
romantics here's the irrational part
right and the romantics saw that this as
imagination and they saw it sort of
spontaneously happening but it's still
an act of will because they talk about
expression pressing out right but
Schopenhauer really zeroes in on this
and he says no no what's down here is
arbitrary we'll notice that that's like
God it's like that God
that we get after akhom here's arbitrary
will this is the this is the will to
live the raw let's just put it the will
to live the raw will this is what drives
you this is what structures this is what
filters in frame it's all of your
experience this will to live of course
this is gonna be important to a lot of
modern discourse it's relentless and
it's pointless because it is not
rational and here's where Schopenhauer
does a twist it's doing this but not
fundamentally in service of your
rational mind it makes reasoning
possible but all of this right so Kant
does the Copernican revolution he
inverts Protestantism and then
Schopenhauer inverts Caunt
thought was it that this is processing
is for the sake of this but what
Schopenhauer says is no no this is
actually who's in charge he says the
will is like a huge man and the ego is
sitting on his shoulders right this is a
little machine in the service of this
and if you don't think that's Carl Jung
you'd better go back and read some more
Jung that's what I mean if you don't get
this Conti and heritage you're not
reading Jung very well right so
Schopenhauer let's use one of
Schopenhauer's quotes because it really
really brings this out and you can see
how it prefigures Freud in such a
powerful way Schopenhauer says that sex
is the cruel joke that the species plays
on the individual because what sex is is
this will to live this irrational will
to live and it filters and frames all of
your experience and it promises you
meaning and you know fulfillment in
everything that God and religion and
history profit and then you have it and
none of that accrues to you any and he
says and then what's the difference
between you who do that for 40 years and
a mayfly that does it for one
so we're restlessly driven by these Iraq
look at look at how again everything's
being drawn into the mind and now drawn
into the unconscious irrational parts of
this is where that arbitrary God has now
withdrawn you know in that Lutheran
Cartesian now Kantian now Schopenhauer
away it's inside and then and we're just
all machines and you get Richard Dawkins
right we're all just replicator machines
for our selfish genes it's not a radical
idea right
we think we're doing all of this for AI
but it's actually all and so for
Schopenhauer is it's this nihilism it's
this pessimism because he saw that once
you remove the connection between
meaning-making and rationality you pay a
very very devastating price for it and
so what do you have there well what do
you have you have a meaningless
existence because it's being shaped and
framed not in contact with reality all
not even contact with your rational
egocentric wave it's just an irrational
unconscious arbitrary will to live that
is shaping filtering and framing all of
your experience with the world and then
you die and what was it all for
Schopenhauer ax has enough of the
romantics left in him that he has this
idea that in art and music we can become
disinterested enough in our own self we
can quiet the will to live enough that
we can get momentary breaks momentary
vacation momentary respite from this
Restless pointless will to live so this
is how this is the godfather this is how
romanticism as a pseudo religious
ideology and nihilism as an existential
response become inextricably linked
together even though most people don't
realize it most people don't realize
that that these two things romanticism
and nihilism are actually deeply
intertwined and closely related to each
other so think about that when
Valentine's Day rolls around
are you actually expressing right the
contact with reality or are you merely
being pushed around by the irrational
will to live so Schopenhauer of course
has a great follower right a person who
is now very prominent because if he's
the Godfather right of nihilism
Nietzsche is the Godfather of
post-modernism
so Nietzsche is a disciple of
Schopenhauer he's actually a disciple of
both Schopenhauer and Wagner and Wagner
represents romanticism in music breaking
down so vogner takes romanticism and he
sort of breaks the last vestiges of
grammar he breaks the connection to the
HOME key all kinds of things he opens up
the possibility for music becoming
untethered from its tradition in very
powerful ways and of course the problem
with Wagner is he's also a very vicious
anti-semite and you might say what's
going on like what's what's just going
on with Germany in this anti-semitism
thing well first of all we've seen how
Gnosticism which is running as an
undercurrent as I mentioned right
underneath the Rhineland mystics and
other things right has I possible I'm
not equated the two but Gnosticism has a
possible version of it that is deeply
anti-semitic but more importantly right
you have a connection back to Luther
why would Luther say that well Luther
would say that because the Jews in
Luther's mind are followers of the law
and people and remember Luther has an
interpretation following Augustine and
Paul and his own exacerbation of it
right people who follow the law are
people who are trying to earn their
salvation the point of the law is to
reveal to you that you're completely
incapable of earning your salvation and
so the Jews who reject Jesus reject
faith and salvation in terms of the law
so the Jews are evil it's interesting
that the two great people the people are
too
have created modern German style or
Lutheran Nietzsche what doesn't eat you
do does he give up all of this no he
takes it and he tries to invert it
he keeps the notion of will he keeps the
fact that it's deeper then rather he
keeps that it's framing the world
filtering he keeps all of that but he
rejects a lot of the Conte and stuff he
rejects the Platonic stuff he famously
says I hate Socrates he's so close to me
I'm always fighting him he's got this
deep conflict with the axial revolution
why because he comes up with this way of
responding to the nihilism of
Schopenhauer Schopenhauer with the will
to power it shares some features with
somebody we'll talk about later
another important Cartesian thinker
we're going to come back to Spinoza the
notion of Canada's so the idea here is
that everything has a will to live here
for a Nietzsche
everything has a will to power
everything is pressing itself out and
the thing about Nietzsche is he thinks
that this is not just a feature of our
minds this is a feature of reality
itself that when we're so Chopin are the
ideas when we're in touch with the will
to live we're actually in touch with you
know that driving force because again
the most irrational part of us is the
part that's in touch with reality and
you get this this will to power this
irrational filtering framing thing but
whereas here it's pessimistic because
it's wearying and it's relentless and
meaningless here Nietzsche says no no
turn it around stop stop beings and this
is who's gonna be as points not being so
Christian stop thinking about all that
negation as what's right this will to
power this pre-christian desire to
extend and create and master oneself in
the world that's what we need because
Nietzsche sees in it something
and there's a deep insight here and and
if we're gonna criticize Nietzsche and
the postmodernist
I don't understand people who advocate
for Nietzsche and criticize
post-modernism you've got to spend more
time getting that working out together
right but Nietzsche sees something here
Heaney he sees a way of getting back
something that was lost in this whole
history how can we get
self-transcendence because Nietzsche
tries to understand the will to power as
exactly that desire from the actual
revolution to transcend oneself to go
above oneself to create beyond oneself
and he had his father's a Lutheran
pastor mm-hmm so he understands
Christianity in a totally Lutheran way
that Christianity is about suppressing
this capacity for self transcendence
it's an unfair reading of Christianity
it certainly doesn't capture Neoplatonic
Christianity Nietzsche is he's deeply
influenced by the Stoics and a lot of
axial age thinkers and he's trying to
bring it back but he's right he's
blocked in some important ways by this
Lutheran interpretation of Christianity
so Nietzsche says Christianity repressed
this and that is why we suffer but if we
remove the Christian condemnation of
this then the pessimistic world wearying
will to live becomes the active creative
act of self transcendence and we can get
back the meaning that was lost in the
meaning crisis
but that's a very dangerous way to start
thinking and a lot of ways because
here's my deepest critique of nature and
and it's it's really hard to critique
Nietzsche because he doesn't have a
single voice he has many voices and they
and they undermine and criticize each
other it's maddening and that's why if
anybody says they have sort of singled
interpretation of nature you have to
really be careful and cautious about it
because reading needs like reading the
Bible purposefully he purposely modeled
himself he wrote also sprach zarathustra
to try and replace the bible because he
understood the role of myth and imagery
and symbol because he's still influenced
by the romantics but here's my criticism
see Nietzsche gets this he understands
how self-deceptive we are he constantly
is criticizing human beings for being
self deceptive but he he can't do
anything about it
he can't do anything about it because he
is reduced in his mind reason has gone
through this content thing and this
Cartesian thing and reason is this
logical framing thing he's lost
something because the problem for
Nietzsche is you have self transcendence
without the machinery of dealing with
self-deception because what's the
machinery for dealing with
self-deception from the Platonic
tradition that Nietzsche rejects
that's what rationality really is
rationality is ultimately about the set
of psycho technology that affords self
transcendence by training you skillfully
to overcoming self-deception and because
although he is so aware of
self-deception because of this heritage
and because he is so attracted to self
transcendence there's a tragedy in
Nietzsche which is what I believe he was
attracted to tragedy because although he
wants self transcendence he cannot
provide us with the machinery of over
coming self-deception other than endless
critique endless satire endlessly
undermining himself he is honest but
he's not capable of the rationality that
is actually the core of addressing
self-deception and therefore he has a
one-sided model of self transcendence a
meshed in a will to power and that is
going to be a very dangerous thing we're
gonna take a look more at that when we
take a look at more pseudo pseudo
religious ideologies and how they drench
the world in post-napoleonic blood next
time thank you very much for your time
and attention
[Music]
you
you
[Music]