story starts in Libya in 2011 where I
used to be a foreign news producer so I
was in Libya for the fall of what turned
out to be the fall of Gaddafi's regime
the rebels were coming into Tripoli
there was gunfire in the air we got into
Gaddafi's compound and we're there with
the Gaddafi's tent which had been burnt
rebels are firing their guns in the air
there's what a couple of times in my
life where I felt like I'm in the middle
of history this feels like an amazing
place and I got my phone out and I
called my parents I was like I just want
to hit get them to hear about all the
guns going off this kind of amazing
moment and I got my mom on the phone and
I spoke to her and I was like listen to
this this is amazing and then literally
surrounded by kind of yeah this this
incredible moment and she started crying
and I was like what's the matter and she
said I'm at the hospital your dad's just
been diagnosed with cancer we don't know
too much but we know it's bad and he was
63 years old he was fit he was though
literally just been on a cycling holiday
that the week before when he felt ill
and had gone in and we knew at stomach
cancer we knew that the prognosis for
stomach cancer wasn't really wasn't very
good and I then broke down in tears as
well and got home as quickly as I could
well I should fill you in a little bit
of the backstory before I won in the air
flying from Libya back to the UK I never
got on well with my father we always
fought and yeah throughout my one of the
the primal memories that I'm sure I've
shared with a few of you today is that I
remember the thing that the thing that I
realized later when I did a lot of men's
work
that annoyed me I knew I fought with him
I didn't really know why until it was
later on it can set I contextualise that
I understood it and it was because he
was a sort of 1780s new man he really
wanted to be different from the father
figures of his
we really wanted to be someone different
which is why I felt it was so tragic
that when we used to play football he'd
be like why did why do you have to have
a goal why can't just pass it to each
other that's kind of and I never
realized at the time but it was like
this denial of the male competition the
male drive the male kind of like mmm
that feeling and I remember fighting
with him and I remember fighting them to
the point where he grabbed me by my
throat and held me up against the wall
once and I can remember the feeling of
euphoria in me when he did that because
it was like yes and I know again I never
contextualized it until later but that
was what I was doing is looking for a
boundary I was looking for that point I
was looking for that place in him and I
found it and I know from my mum later
that really traumatized him like he
really he really struggled with that the
fact that I pushed into that the fact
that he realized he had that in him and
it he really struggle with it for a long
time afterwards and it was only sort of
through men's work later on that I
realized that really owning that pardon
myself
was was a really essential thing to do
that dark side that that killer that
that kind of yeah that part that we all
have that in a totalitarian that in a
kind of Dominator that's when I realized
later I felt safe and that's why I felt
safe when I saw that part of him a bit
of context so now I've landed in London
and going to Southampton I arrived at
the hospital and I see my father and I
go up to him and I just embrace him and
I keep embracing him and my friend who's
brought me to the hospital realizes
after about five minutes of this hug
that he's in the presence of something
really special and he takes a picture of
it which is now on my wall at home like
this amazing picture and I've had lots
of people reflect that there's something
like lots of people have said how
powerful that picture is because there's
something about the way I'm
holding him and the way he's collapsing
into me that feels like a kind of
transfer or of there's something
something shifts at this moment and then
after that I realized I thought he's
going to be gone in he was given three
months to live basically after that he
went back into the hospital they did
tests he said yeah you've got three
months to live and so I sent him a
letter saying look I've done all of this
in a work I've done all of this men's
work and I've got all of these amazing
reflections from people and people talk
about my authenticity and my integrity
and my honesty and all these things I've
realized that their qualities I got from
you whatever I've never admitted that to
you I've always fought with you but I've
never admitted I've never realized that
they're your qualities and it really
moves him getting this letter and after
I said I thought well why the why the
 doesn't everyone do this why
doesn't everyone he's got three months
to live
so I got it I then got in touch with all
of his friends from every period of his
life I got in touch with the family I
said look he hasn't got long to live so
if you've got anything to say you might
as well say it now and they all these
letters started coming in and he got
very sick and my mom ended up sort of
reading a lot of them to him in his bed
and there was all this amazing stuff
there was he what was extraordinary is
that he viewed himself as a failure his
big his core wound was that he believed
that he was a failure he'd never really
achieved anything and all of this stuff
started coming back he was an arts
officer for the council and we got stuff
back saying the Theatre Royal in
Winchester wouldn't exist if it wasn't
for you the Southampton Film Fest would
never have happened if it wasn't for you
you started the street parties in the
road a generation of children grew up
knowing what knowing what community was
because
you and all of us amazing feedback and
somehow the last three months of his
life shifted this image that he'd had of
himself this feeling of being a failure
and it was incredible it was an
incredible gift that was catalyzed just
by that moment I think in the hospital
that healing that moment of connection
and I don't fully understand it but I
believe that and I'm sure that would
never have happened if I hadn't been
able to heal that place in myself that
was still in conflict with him the work
that I've done this kind of work
the men's work we were all there when he
died just before Christmas 20 17 20 2011
it was an incredibly emotional moment it
was incredibly emotional time it's an
incredible cathartic time incredible
precious time for us as a family and
I've told this story before and I've I
think it's one of the most precious
periods of my life it's one of the most
precious things I've ever been involved
with
and for me it just shows them the magic
of this kind of work the magic of the
inner work and how it can catalyze
amazing changes in the outside world
and usually this is where the story ends
but that's not where the story ends
because I realized afterwards I'd
internalized his image of himself but up
until this age of whatever 36 when when
he died
I believed him I believed his image of
someone who was a failure and so that
period of getting all these reflections
and realizing all of this amazing stuff
my dad had done by the time he was my
age he had three kids he'd he'd created
the NART center of Southampton he
created
and Film Festival he created he'd say
he'd done this incredible stuff by the
time he was my age and it completely
shifted that was really tough to then
realize that this guy that I thought was
was a failure to chief far more than I
had at that age and so the next five
years have been an incredible
up-and-down journey for myself
to Michael
[Applause]