[Music]
the more you begin to investigate what
we think we understand where we came
from what we think we're doing the more
you begin to see we've been lied to
we've been lied to by every institution
what makes you think for one minute that
the religious institution is the only
one that's never been touched the
religious institutions of this world are
at the bottom of the dirt the religious
institutions in this world are put there
by the same people who gave you your
government your corrupt education to set
up your international banking cartels
because our masters don't give a damn
about you or your family all they care
about is what they have always cared
about and that's controlling the whole
damn world we have been misled away from
the true and divine presence in the
universe that men have called God I
don't know what God is but I know what
he isn't and unless and until you are
prepared to look at the whole truth
wherever it may go whoever it may lead
to if you want to look the other way or
if you want to play favorites and
somewhere along the line you're going to
find out you're messing with divine
justice the more you educate yourself
the more you understand where things
come from the more obvious things to
come and you begin to see lies
everywhere you have to know the truth
and seek the truth and the truth will
set you free
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
because I got to tell you the truth
folks I got to tell you the truth when
it comes to bullshit
big-time major-league bullshit
you have to stand in awe of the altering
champion of false promises and
exaggerated claims religion think about
it religion has actually convinced
people this is an invisible man living
in the sky who watches everything you do
every minute of every day and the
invisible man has a special list of 10
things he does not want you to do and if
you do any of these ten things he has a
special place full of fire and smoke and
burning and torture and anguish we will
send you to live and suffer and burn and
choke and scream and cry forever and
ever till the end of time but he loves
you
one
he loves you and he needs money he
always needs money he's all-powerful
all-perfect all-knowing at all wine
somehow just can't handle money religion
takes in billions of dollars they pay no
taxes and they always need a little more
now you talk about a good bullshit story
holy shit
[Applause]
[Music]
[Music]
this is the Sun as far back as 10,000 BC
history is abundant with carvings and
writings reflecting people's respect and
adoration for this object and it is
simple to understand why as every
morning the Sun would rise bring
envision warmth and security saving man
from the cold blind predator-filled
darkness of night without it the
cultures understood the crops would not
grow and life on the planet would not
survive these realities make a Sun the
most adorned object of all time likewise
they were also very aware of the Stars
the tracking of the stars allowed them
to recognize and anticipate events which
occurred over long periods of time such
as eclipses in full moons they in turn
catalog celestial groups into what we
know today as constellations this is the
cross of the zodiac one of the oldest
conceptual images in human history it
reflects the Sun negatively passes to
the 12 major constellations over the
course of a year it also reflects the 12
months of the year the four seasons and
the solstices and equinoxes the term
zodiac relates the fact that
constellations were anthropomorphised or
personified as figures or animals in
other words the early civilizations did
not just follow the southern stars they
personified them with elaborate myths
involving their movements and
relationships the Sun with the
life-giving and saving qualities was
personified as a representative of the
unseen creator or God God son the light
of the world the savior of humankind
likewise the 12 constellations
represented places of travel for God's
Son then were identified by names
usually representing elements of nature
that happened during that period of time
for example Aquarius the Water Bearer
who brings the spring rains
this is horse he is the Sun God of Egypt
of around 3000 BC he is the Sun
anthropomorphize - his light is a series
of allegorical myths involving the sun's
movement in the sky from the ancient
hieroglyphics in Egypt we know much
about the solar Messiah for instance
Horus being the Sun for the light had an
enemy known as set and set was the
personification of the darkness or night
and metaphorically speaking every
morning Horus would win the battle
against Seth while in the evening set
would conquer Horus and send him into
the enemy it is important to note that
dark versus light or good versus evil is
one of the most ubiquitous mythological
dualities ever known and it's still
expressed on many levels to this day
broadly speaking the story of Horus just
follows Horus was born on December 25th
of the Virgin Isis marry his birth was
accompanied by a star in the east which
in turn three kings followed to a
located adorn the newborn Savior at the
age of 12 he was a prodigal child
teacher at the age of 30 he was baptized
by a figure known as a tub and thus
began his ministry Horus had 12
disciples he traveled about with
performing miracles such as healing the
sick and walking on water Horus was
known by many gestural names such as the
truth the light God's anointed son the
Good Shepherd the Lamb of God and many
others after being betrayed by Typhon
Horus was crucified buried for three
days and thus resurrected these
attributes of Horus whether original or
not seemed to permeate in many cultures
of the world for many other gods of
found to have the same general
mythological structure Addis of Phrygia
born in the Virgin nan on December 25th
crucified placed in the tomb and after
three days was resurrected Krishna of
India born of the Virgin Devaki with a
star in the East signaling is coming he
performed miracles with his disciples
and upon his death was resurrected
Dionysius of greece one of a virgin on
December 25th was a traveling teacher
who performed miracles such as turning
water into wine he was referred to as
the King of Kings God's only begotten
Son the Alpha and Omega and many others
and upon his death he was resurrected
Myntra
of persia one on a virgin on December
25th he had 12 disciples and performed
miracles upon his death was buried for
three days and thus resurrected he was
also referred to as the truth delight
and many others interestingly the sacred
day of worship of Mithra was sunday the
fact of the matter is there are numerous
saviors from different periods from all
over the world which subscribed to these
general characteristics the question
remains why these attributes why the
virgin birth on December 25th why dad
for three days in the inevitable
resurrection why twelve disciples or
followers to find out let's examine the
most recent of the soul of messiahs
Jesus Christ was born of the Virgin Mary
on December 25th and Bethlehem his birth
was announced by a star in the east
which three kings or Magi followed to
locate and adore the new Savior he was a
child teacher at 12 at the age of 30 he
was baptized by John the Baptist and
thus began his ministry Jesus had 12
disciples which he traveled about with
performing miracles such as healing the
sick walking on water raising the dead
he was also known as the King of Kings a
son of God the light of the world the
Alpha Omega the Lamb of God and many
many others after being betrayed by his
disciple Judas and sold for thirty
pieces of silver he was crucified placed
in the tomb after three days was
resurrected and ascended into heaven
first of all the birth sequence is
completely astrological the scar in the
East is Sirius the brightest star in the
night sky which on December 24th aligns
with the three brightest stars in
Orion's belt these three bright stars in
Orion's belt are called today what they
were called in ancient times the three
kings and the three kings and the
brightest star Sirius all point to the
place of the sunrise on December 25th
this is why the three can follow to star
in the East in order to locate the
sunrise the birth of the Sun the Virgin
Mary is the constellation Virgo also
known as Virgo the virgin Virgo in Latin
means virgin the ancient glyph for Virgo
is the altered M this is why Mary along
with other urgent mothers such as adonus
'as mother Myra or Buddha's mother Maya
begin with an M Berger was also referred
to as the house of bread and the
representation of Virgo is a virgin
holding a sheaf of wheat this house of
bread a symbol of wheat represents
August and September the time of harvest
in turn Bethlehem in fact it literally
translates to house of bread Bethlehem
is thus a reference to the constellation
Virgo a place in the sky not on earth
there is another very interesting
phenomenon that occurs around December
25th or the winter solstice and the
summer solstice - the winter solstice
the day's become shorter and colder and
from the perspective of the northern
hemisphere the Sun appears to move south
and gets smaller and more scarce the
shortening of the days and the
expiration of the crops when approaching
the winter solstice symbolize the
process of death to the ancients it was
the death of the Sun
and by December 22nd the son of the mais
was fully realized for the son having
moved south continually for six months
makes it to its lowest point in the sky
here a curious thing occurs the Sun
stops moving south at least precede ibly
for three days and during this three-day
pause the Sun reside in the vicinity of
the Southern Cross or crux constellation
and after this time on December 25th the
Sun moves one degree this time North
foreshadowing longer days warmth and
spring and thus it was said the Sun died
on the cross was dead for three days
only to be resurrected or born again
this is why Jesus and numerous other Sun
gods share the crucifixion three-day
death and resurrection concept it is the
sun's transition period before it shifts
its direction back into the northern
hemisphere bringing spring into the
salvation however they did not celebrate
the resurrection of the Sun until the
spring equinox or Easter this is because
at the spring equinox the Sun officially
overpowers the evil darkness as daytime
thereafter becomes longer in duration
than the night and the revitalizing
conditions of spring emerge now probably
the most obvious of all the astrological
symbolism around Jesus regards the
twelve disciples they are simply the
twelve constellations of the zodiac
which Jesus being the Sun travels about
with
in fact the number 12 is replete
throughout the Bible this text has more
to do with astrology than anything else
coming back to the cross of the zodiac
the figurative life of the Sun this was
not just an artistic expression or tool
to track the sun's movement it was also
a pagan spiritual symbol the shorthand
of which looked like this this is not a
symbol of Christianity it is a pagan
adaptation of the cross of the zodiac
[Music]
this is why Jesus and earlier cult art
is always shown his head on the cross
for Jesus is the son the Son of God the
light of the world the risen Savior who
will come again as it does every morning
the glory of God who defends against the
works of darkness as he is born again
every morning and can be seen coming in
the clouds up in heaven with his crown
of thorns or sun waves now of the many
astrological astronomical metaphors in
the Bible one of the most important has
to do with the agents throughout the
Scriptures there are numerous references
to the age in order to understand this
we need to be familiar with a phenomenon
known as the precession of the equinoxes
the ancient Egyptians along with
cultures long before them recognized
that approximately every 2150 years
the Sun rise in the morning and the
spring equinox would occur at a
different sign of the zodiac
this has to do with a slow angular
wobble that the earth maintain as it
rotates on its axis it is called a
precession because the constellations go
backwards rather than through the normal
yearly cycle the amount of time it takes
the precession to go through all 12
signs is roughly twenty-five thousand
seven hundred and sixty-five years this
is also called the great year and
ancient societies were very aware of
this and they referred to each 2150 year
period as an age
from 4300 BC to 2150 BC it was the age
of Taurus the Bull
from 2150 BC to 180 it was the age of
Aries or LAN and from one ad to 2150 AD
it is the Age of Pisces the age we are
still into this day and in and around
2150 we will enter the new age the Age
of Aquarius now the Bible reflects
broadly speaking a symbolic movement
through three ages while foreshadowing a
fourth in the Old Testament when Moses
comes down Mount Sinai with the Ten
Commandments he is very upset to see his
people worshiping a golden bull calf in
fact he shattered the stone tablets and
instructed his people to kill each other
in order to purify themselves most
biblical scholars will tribute this
anger to the fact that the Israelites
were worshipping a false idol or
something to that effect the reality is
the golden bull is Taurus the Bull and
Moses represents the new age of Aries
the ran this is why Jews even today
still blow the ram's horn Moses
represents the new age of Aries and upon
the new age everyone must shed the old
age other deities marketers transitioned
as well such as Mithra in pre-christian
God who killed the bull in the same
symbology now Jesus is the figure who
ushered in the age following Aries the
Age of Pisces or the toothfish this
symbolism is very abundant in the New
Testament Jesus feeds 5,000 people with
bread and two fish when he begins his
ministry walking along Galilee he
befriends two fishermen who follow them
and I think we have all seen the Jesus
fish on the back of people's cars little
do they know what it actually means it
is a pagan astrological symbolism for
the sons kingdom during the Age of
Pisces
also jesus' assumed birth date is
essentially the start of this age at
Luke 22:10 when Jesus is asked by his
disciples where the next Passover will
be after he is gone Jesus replies behold
when ye are entered into the city there
shall a man meet you bearing a pitcher
of water follow him into the house where
he entereth in this scripture is by far
one of the most revealing of all the
astrological references the man bearing
the pitcher of water is Aquarius the
Water Bearer who is always pictured as a
man pouring out a pitcher of water he
represents the age after Pisces and when
the sun-god son leaves the Age of Pisces
Jesus it will go into the house of
Aquarius as Aquarius follows Pisces in
the precession of the equinoxes all
Jesus is saying is that after the age of
Pisces will come the Age of Aquarius now
we have all heard about the end times in
the end of the world
the cartoonish depictions in the book of
Revelation aside the main source of this
idea comes from Matthew 28:20
where Jesus says I will be with you even
to the end of the world however in the
King James Version world is in this
translation among many mistranslations
the actual word being used is Eon which
means age I will be with you even to the
end of the age which is true as Jesus's
solar Piscean personification will end
when the Sun enters the Age of Aquarius
the entire concept of end times in the
end of the world is a misinterpreted
astrological allegory lets tell that to
the approximately 100 million people in
America who believe the end of the world
is coming
furthermore the character of Jesus being
a literary and astrological hybrid is
most explicitly a plagiarize ation of
the Egyptian Sun god horus for example
inscribed about 3,500 years ago on the
walls at the temple of luxor in egypt
are images of the enunciation the
immaculate conception the birth and the
adoration of Horus the images begin with
Thoth announcing to the virgin Isis that
she will conceive for us then met the
holy ghost impregnating the virgin and
then the virgin birth and the adoration
this is exactly the story of Jesus's
miracle conception in fact the literary
similarities between the Egyptian
religion and the Christian religion are
staggering
and the plagiarism is continuous the
story of Noah and Noah's Ark is taken
directly from the tradition the concept
of the Great Flood is ubiquitous
throughout the ancient world with over
200 cited claims in different periods
and times however one need look no
further for a pre-christian source in
the epic of gilgamesh written in 2600 BC
this story talks at a great flood
commanded by God an ark would save
animals upon it and even the release and
return of a dove all held in common with
the biblical story among many other
similarities and then there the
plagiarized story of Moses upon Moses
birth it is said that he was placed in a
reed basket and set adrift in a river in
order to avoid infanticide
he was later rescued by a daughter of
royalty and raised by her as a prince
this baby in a basket story was lifted
directly from the myth of Sargon of
Akkad of around 2250 BC Sargon placed in
a reed basket in order to avoid
infanticide and set adrift in the river
he was in turn rescued and raised by a
key a royal midwife for the moor Moses
is known as the lawgiver the giver of
the Ten Commandments the Mosaic law
however the idea of a law being passed
from God to a prophet economy is also
very old motif Moses is just another
lawgiver a long line of law givers in
the theological history in India Manu
was the great lawgiver in Crete Minos
ascended mount dicta where Zeus gave him
the sacred laws while in Egypt there was
Mises who carried stone tablets and upon
them the laws of God were
manual Nino's niecy's Moses as far as
the Ten Commandments they are taken out
right from spell 125 in the Egyptian
Book of the Dead what the Book of the
Dead phrased I have not stolen became
thou shalt not steal
I have not killed became God shalt not
kill I have not told lies became thou
shalt not bear false witness and so
forth
in fact the Egyptian religion is likely
the primary foundational basis for the
judeo-christian theology baptism after
life final judgment virgin birth death
and resurrection crucifixion the Ark of
the Covenant circumcision saviors Holy
Communion great flood Easter Christmas
Passover and many many more are all
attributes of Egyptian ideas long
predating Christianity and Judaism
Justin Martyr one of the first Christian
historians and defenders wrote when we
say that he Jesus Christ our teacher was
produced without sexual Union was
crucified and died and rose again and
ascended into heaven we propound nothing
different from what you believe
regarding those who you esteemed sons of
Jupiter in a different writing Justin
Martyr said he was born of a virgin
except this in common with what you
believe of Perseus it's obvious that
Justin and other early Christians knew
how similar Christianity was to the
pagan religions however Justin had a
solution as far as U is concerned the
devil did it
the devil had the foresight to come
before Christ and create his
characteristics in the pagan world
fundamentalist Christianity fascinating
these people actually believe the world
is 12,000 years old pretty good I
actually asked one of these governments
okay dinosaur fossils
he says dinosaur fossils God puts those
here to test our face
I think God put you here to test my
faith food the Bible is nothing more
than an astrological literary hybrid
just like nearly all religious myths
before it in fact the aspect of
transference of one characters
attributes to a new character can be
found within the book itself in the Old
Testament there's the story of Joseph
Joseph was a prototype for Jesus Joseph
was born of a miracle birth Jesus was
born of a miracle birth
Joseph was up 12 brothers Jesus had 12
disciples Joseph was sold for 20 pieces
of silver Jesus was sold for 30 pieces
of silver brother Judah suggests the
sale of Joseph's disciple Judas suggests
the sale of Jesus Joseph began his work
at the age of 30 Jesus began his work at
the age of 30 the parallels go on and on
furthermore is there any non biblical
historical evidence of any person living
with the name Jesus the Son of Mary who
traveled about with 12 followers healing
people and the like there are numerous
historians who lived in and around the
Mediterranean either during or soon
after the assumed life of Jesus how many
of these historians document this figure
not one however to be fair that doesn't
mean defenders of the historical Jesus
haven't claimed the contrary for
historians are typically referenced to
justify Jesus's existence plenty of the
Younger Suetonius and Tacitus are the
first three each one of their entries
consists of only a few sentences at best
and only referred to priestess or the
Christ which in fact is not a name but a
title it means The Anointed One
the fourth source is Josephus and this
source has been proven to be a forgery
for hundreds of years
sadly it is still cited as true you
would think that a guy who rose from the
dead and ascended into heaven for all
eyes to see and perform The Wealth of
miracles acclaimed him would have made
it into the historical record it didn't
because once the evidence is weighed
there are very high odds that the figure
known as Jesus did not even exist
we don't want to be unkind but we want
to be sexual we don't want to cause hurt
feelings but we want to be academically
correct and what we understand and know
to be true Christianity just is not
based on truth we find that Christianity
was in fact nothing more than a Roman
story developed politically the reality
is Jesus was the solar deity of the
Gnostic Christian sect and like all
other pagan gods he was a mythical
figure it was the political
establishment that sought to historize
the Jesus figure for social control by
325 AD in Rome Emperor Constantine
convened the Council of Nicaea it was
during this meeting that the politically
motivated Christian doctrines were
established and thus began a long
history of Christian bloodshed and
spiritual fraud and for the next sixteen
hundred years the Vatican maintained a
political stranglehold on all of Europe
leading to such joyous periods of the
dark ages
along with enlightening events such as
the Crusades and the Inquisition
Christianity along with all other
theistic belief systems is the fraud of
the age it serves to detach the species
from the natural world and likewise each
other
it supports blind submission to
Authority it reduces human
responsibility to the effect that God
controls anything and in turn awful
crimes can be justified in the name of
divine pursuit and most importantly it
empowers those who know the truth but
use the myth to manipulate and control
societies the religious myth is the most
powerful device ever created and serves
as a psychological soil upon which other
myths can flourish a myth is an idea
that while widely believed is false
and a deeper sense in the religious
sense a myth serves as an orienting and
mobilizing story for a people the focus
is not on the story's relation to
reality and on its function a story
cannot function unless it is believed to
be true in the community or the nation
it is not a matter of debate if some
people have the bad taste to raise the
question of the truth of the sacred
story the keepers of the faith do not
enter into debate with them they ignore
them or denounced them as blasphemers
it is wrong blasphemous and sinful for
you to suggest imply or help other
people come to the conclusion that the
US government killed 3,000 of its own
citizens
[Music]
you
[Music]
and if a demolition team set off when
you through all ventilation to be going
it looks like one of those things is an
old building being purposely dynamited
and blown up with anybody who's ever
watched the building being demolished on
purpose knows that if you're going to do
this you have to get at the under
infrastructure for the building agree to
do the way destruction is collapsing
this was the result of something in this
plant it's not accidental that the first
dollar just happened to collapse and a
psychologist after the collapse in
exactly the same way on how they
accomplish this the off note the
building collapsed to dust you don't
find the desk you know the funny thing
share they don't find the telephone of
computer the biggest piece of a
telephone I found was half of the keypad
and it was about this big
what happened to the current rate was
pulverized and rivers of river there was
soft powder increases that the concrete
resist from solid rocks from
additionally those pictures revolve sees
too much in violations before them a
building was deliberately destroyed by
workplace dynamite to knock it down
I've heard a second explosion Rosen uh
have you do the explosion or explosive
event up the clock and closable women's
of knots everybody knows the me it
sounded like an explosion to sound like
gunfire
bang and it also three big explosions
and we heard a big explosion coming down
and then the entire top of the building
just blew up we saw some kind of
explosion by the force of the explosion
big explosive for February 4 and we get
some laughs
it is big a lot of people to go above
explode there are huge explosion now
Training Command a huge explosion huge
explosion that we all heard and felt he
just would have some kind of followed
explosion of heard a very loud explosion
and that is another bomb going off he
thinks that there were actually devices
that were planted in the building
planted in the building
I don't think anybody could have
predicted that they would try to use an
airplane as a missile a hijacked
airplane as a missile nobody our
government at least and I don't think
the prior government could envision fly
airplanes in the building's no specific
threat involving really domestic
operation or involving what happened
obviously the city's airliner and so
there were no warning signs and I'm
aware of USA Today reports that in the
two years before the attacks on
September the 11th NORAD conducted
exercises using hijacked airliners as
weapons and one target was the World
Trade Center
[Music]
in confidential documents with the
Philippines obtained by CNN the plan is
clear he reward any American commercial
aircraft controllers cockpit and diving
and the CIA headquarters other buildings
targeted the Pentagon and the World
Trade Center security and
counterterrorism was blinking red in the
words of George Tenet
that the warnings of an imminent attack
were so severe that something dramatic
should have been done it was
unparalleled instead our president went
on a month-long vacation the head of
Pakistani intelligence of the ISI Mahmud
Ahmed requested Omar Sheikh to wire
$100,000 to Mohammed Atta who was the
lead hijacker at hijacker Mohammed Atta
received wire transfers via Pakistan the
man sending the money to office is
believed to be Ahmed Omar Saeed Sheikh
Omar Sheikh admitted he was supported by
the Pakistan government intelligence
service the ISI
[Music]
although we are told that four or five
of the alleged hijackers were on each of
the flights if so their names should
have been on the flight manifest but the
flight manifests that have been released
contained neither the names of the
alleged hijackers nor any Arab names
whatsoever
we know that the men who were supposedly
the hijackers had their houses cars
credit cards paid for by the US
government they were in truth agents
evidence was also apparently planted the
passport of one of the hijackers on
flight 11 was allegedly found in the
rebel goes through the fireball through
the silo plank and comes down the ground
unscathed but something happens for six
months they reported they had this
Passport Thor we've got it we've got the
proof and then the guy stood up and was
alive several of these 19 men are still
alive
[Music]
[Music]
of course we're after Saddam Hussein I
mean a bin Laden ECC's January 2001 the
bush infection orders the FBI and
intelligence agencies to back off
investigations involving the bin Laden
family including two of Osama bin
Laden's relatives who were living guess
where in Falls Church Virginia right
next to CIA headquarters when he was
already America's most wanted criminal
he reportedly spent two weeks in the
American Hospital in Dubai was treated
by an American doctor and visited by the
local CIA agent we have not seen one
piece of evidence that links Osama bin
Laden directly to the planning stages of
September 11 this failure to provide
proof was later said to be unnecessary
because bin Laden and a video allegedly
found in Afghanistan admitted
responsibility for the attacks this
confession is now widely cited accrue
but the man in this video has darker
skin fuller cheeks and a broader nose
Osama bin Laden of all other videos we
again seem to have planted evidence in
1976
Osama is older brother Salim bin Laden
hired a man in Texas by the name of Jim
bass to handle all the investments in
the United States for the bin Laden
family Jim Bath also happens to be a
personal almost lifelong friend and
former Air National Guard pilot with
George W Bush the connections between
the bushes and the bin Laden's become
much more clear when George Herbert
Walker Bush made trips to Saudi Arabia
in 1998 and 2000 to meet with the bin
Laden family on behalf of a cub
called The Carlyle Group how could
anyone fly a 60-ton 125 foot wide 44
foot tall playing through this obstacle
course the aircraft before striking the
Pentagon reportedly executed a 270
degree downward spiral and yet Hani Hani
or was known as a terrible pilot who
could not safely fly even a small plane
[Music]
no seats no luggage no bodies nothing
but bricks and limestone the official
explanation is that the intense heat
from the jet fuel vaporized the entire
plane flight 77 had two rolls-royce and
engines made of steel and titanium alloy
and weighs six tons each it is
scientifically impossible the 12 tons of
steel and titanium was vaporized by jet
fuel we're also told that the bodies
were able to be identified either by
their fingerprints or by the DNA so what
kind of fire can vaporize aluminum and
tempered steel and yet leave leave human
bodies intact from my close-up
inspection there's no evidence of a
plane having crashed anywhere near the
Pentagon and as I said the only pieces
left that you can see are small enough
that you could pick up in your hand
shortly after the strike government
agents picked up debris and carried it
off the entire lawn was covered with
dirt and gravel so that any remaining
forensic evidence was literally covered
up the videos from security cameras
which would show what really hit the
Pentagon were immediately confiscated by
agents of the FBI and the Department of
Justice has to this day refused to
release them if these videos would prove
that the Pentagon was really hit by a
757 most of us would assume the
government would release them
it looks like there's nothing there
except for a hole in the ground
basically that's right the only thing
you can see from where we were was a big
gouge in the earth and some broken trees
we could see some people working walking
around in the area but from where we
could see there wasn't much left any
large pieces of debris at all now there
was nothing nothing that you could
distinguish that a plane had crashed
there pancake theory according to which
the fires while not melting the steel
heated it up sufficiently to cause the
floors weakened by the airplane strikes
to break loose from the steel columns
and this started a chain reaction so you
would expect then from that theory which
is the official theory to see a whole
stack of floors piled up on top of each
other and then a spindle a core column
standing to the core of each of the twin
towers consisted of 47 massive steel
columns if the floors had broken loose
from them these columns would have still
been sticking up into the air a thousand
feet the plane did not cut all those
core columns we designed the going to
take the impact of the Boeing 707
hitting the building at any location the
building probably could sustain multiple
impacts of jetliners at the plane to
strengthen abilities Lulu so you're
saying that the Gaudi was actually
designed to cope with a hole like that
all right there you go it was if you had
dropped say a billiard ball from the top
of the World Trade Center 110 floors up
there it would have taken 8 to 10
seconds to hit the ground encountering
no resistance whatsoever between towers
came down in nearly freefall speed
200,000 tons of steel shatters and
explodes outwards over 500 feet this
means that floors shattered at an
average rate about 10 floors per second
there is no scenario for a pancake
effect of buildings falling that allows
them to fall at the rate of freefall now
what can do that
what can move mass out of the way
explosives
you
47 huge steel columns going up to Corp
they're interconnected how do you get
them to fail simultaneously so the cord
is Pierce it looks like those core
columns were cut the way we do this is
by cutting the beam at an angle I
[Music]
started looking at the molten metal all
three buildings both towers in the
rubble in the basement areas and
building seven there's these pools of
molten metal
[Music]
get down below and you'd see molten
steel molten steel running down the
channel rules like you're in a foundry
can we put my column of okay the molten
steel was down three four and five weeks
later when the rubble was being removed
she said that molten steel was also
found underneath World Trade Center
seven so I'm looking through the
official reports what do they say about
the molten metal
they say nothing away but this is
important
evidence so where that come from
thermite is so hot and it'll just cut
through steel through structural steel
for example like a knife through butter
the products are molten iron and
aluminum oxide which goes off primarily
as a dust
you know those enormous dust clouds you
can imagine when you assemble these
chemicals on large scale
[Music]
molten metal pools under both towers
after they collapsed and building seven
now building 7 wasn't even hit by a jack
part of the problem is that most people
simply don't know much about building
seven due to the extraordinary secrecy
surrounding this collapse this was a 47
storey skyscraper this building fell at
525 it was not hit by a plane this
building had fires on only two or three
floors and it was brought down by what
we know was a controlled demolition
immolations they look just like that
kink in the middle and then that
building just comes straight down almost
at freefall speeds they first blow one
of the central columns so the building
falls in on itself building 7 had a
classic crimp or wedge its central
column was blown out first so it didn't
structurally damaged buildings just a
few feet away from us
[Music]
our office was on the b1 level as I was
talking to a supervisor
at 8:46 and all the sudden we hear an
explosion so hard that pushes upwards
and it came from the basement between
the b2 level and the b3 level and when I
went to verbalize we hear the impact of
the plane at the top as I'm walking by
the main freight car the building in the
corridor that's that's when I got blown
I mean the impact of the explosion threw
me to the floor and that's when
everything started happening of a sudden
a big impact happen again and all the
ceiling tile was falling down the light
fixtures were falling you know you got
to go clear across the whole from one to
one to two World Trade Center and then
all of a sudden it happened all over
again some notes it is to the floor
right in the basement you felt it walls
were caving in everything that was going
on I mean I know people that got killed
in the basement I know people that got
broken legs in in the basement
people got reconstructive surgery
because the walls hit them in the face
[Music]
according to standard operating
procedure if an FAA flight control
notices anything that suggests a
possible hijacking controllers to
contact a superior the problem cannot be
fixed within about a minute the superior
says NORAD the North American aerospace
command to send up or scramble jet
fighters to find out what is going on
NORAD then issues the scramble order to
the nearest Air Force Base with fighters
on alert but although interceptions
usually occur within 10 or so minutes in
this case 80 or so minutes had elapsed
before fighters were even airborne
it's a mind-bending anomaly not a single
US Air Force interceptor turns a wheel
until it's too late there are no jets at
all what if they were so confused
and had been so deliberately confused
that they couldn't respond the reason
that they didn't know where to go was
because a number of conflicting and
overlapping war game exercises were
taking place that involve the insertion
of false radar blips on the radar
screens in the Northeast air defense
anchor tenant email we have a problem
here we have a hijacked aircraft headed
towards New York someone described 16 or
something updated episode this is this
real world of exercises is this real
world of exercise
there was another exercise vigilant
warrior which was in fact according to a
NORAD source a live fly hijack drill
being conducted at the same time with
only eight available fighter aircraft
and they have to be dispatched in pairs
they were dealing with as many as 22
possible hijacks on the day of 9/11 and
they couldn't separate the war game
exercises from the actual hijacks
page 172 the US government has not been
able to determine the origin of the
money used for the 9/11 attacks
ultimately the question is of little
practical significance to the American
authorities have not managed to trace
the source of the funding and then they
most amazingly disingenuous statement
ultimately is it as little consequence
it is a massive consequence doesn't it
matter who paid for 9/11 the collapse of
building 7 has been recognized as
especially difficult to explain the 9/11
Commission report implicitly admitted
that it could not explain the collapse
of this building by not even mentioning
it presentation why are you in the
vice-president insisting on appearing
together before the 9/11 Commission
because nine commish line 11 Commission
wants to ask you these questions is why
we're meeting and I look forward to
meeting with them and answering their
questions why you're appearing together
rather than separately which was their
request because it's a good chance for
both of us to answer questions that the
9/11 Commission is looking forward to
asking us and I'm looking forward to
answering them let's see they think they
should be able to stand up and speak
their own words then should go on your
own they should be in common
[Music]
don't you think that the families
deserve to have a transcript or to be
able to see we have you asked me that
question yesterday not the same answer
yes the final report was a unanimous
report that means that there was a
single Commissioner who had any
objection about anything that fact would
be dropped from the report we have found
out that he not only served on the
transition team of the administration
that he was a person who wrote a draft
memo for the setup of the Bush
administration's national security
council and he was an individual who
wrote the pre-emptive war strategy that
was eventually used for the war in Iraq
but he is a close friend of Condoleezza
Rice's we want him to resign there is
literally nothing in 911 report that the
Bush administration did not approve them
we can understand therefore why the
Commission under Zelikow leadership
would have ignored all the evidence that
would point to the truth that 9/11 was a
false flag operation intended to
authorize the doctrines and funds needed
for a new level of Imperial mobilization
[Music]
armed with knives armed with chemical
biological nuclear weapons fanatics
tarath member 11 September 11th killer's
number 11 terrorist Val Qaeda sir do
clear weapons here 9 11th terror therap
evil temper 11 temper 11 terrorism and
danger
September 11 local terrorism terrorism
terrorist terrorist terrorist terrorist
terror of the terror terrorist terrorist
terrorism September 11 mobile terrorism
terrorist terror terrorism September
11th world terrorism terror terrorism
September 11th local tow trivial
aperture of terror terror character
weapons of mass destruction September
the 11th September the 11th eros evil
Paris terrorist terrorist no terrorism
the words are hypnotically repeated
terrorism terrorist terrorist threat and
of course believed to be linked to
al-qaeda but it's the so-called war on
terrorism that's in our faces
practically 24/7 as the inescapable
focus of our existence one day our
grandchildren will look back on this
time and ask how was the war on terror 1
the entire US ruling class ruling elite
comes to see terrorism as the preferred
means and the only means to provide
social cohesion to provide an enemy
image for the society to keep it
together
according to neocon theory from Carl
Schmitt you have to have an enemy image
in order to have a society a very
dangerous thing because now it means
that the entire social order the
political parties intellectual life
politics in general all based on a
monstrous myth monstrous myth
you
[Music]
look the CIA is done in this country
what they've done to us is unbelievable
look at the terrorist acts that have
occurred the CI 9 most about all of it
we had the Marine Barracks their embassy
in Kenya he had been Am 103 we had the
USS Cole we had Wallace city we had the
World Trade Center in 1993 I had that
help the terrorists blow up the World
Trade Center the first time they took
the bomb they got the driver's license
the informant yet before Monteux name
salon the 43 year old former Egyptian
army officer it was given the assignment
to put the bomb together and he went to
his supervisor Safi I supervisor and
said we're going to put a dummy bomb in
your writing in the FBI suit I said no
we're going to put a real bomb the FBI
actually carried out the attack on the
World Trade Center in 1993 they actually
hired Ahmad Salaam and tating 1 million
dollars and gave him real explosives a
detonator and told him to build a bomb
and to give it to the foolish people
that he was controlling to allow them to
attack the World Trade Center complex
unfortunately for them there were only
six people killed not enough to pass the
legislation so what happened is June
later April 19 1995 down comes Oklahoma
City Murrah Building 168 people kill one
year later the anti-terrorism
legislation takes away our
constitutional rights and civil Ares is
passed
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
because a harpist 9:00 this morning we
were actually running an exercise for us
over a company with a thousand people in
London based on simultaneous bombs going
off precisely of the railway stations
that happened this morning so I still
have the hairs on the back of my neck
standing up rightly so you get this
quite straight you were running a an
exercise to see where how you work over
this and it happened while you were
running the exercise precisely supposed
to believe is some kind of coincidence
there was also an anti-terrorist drill
going on on 77 and again just like 9/11
they were talking about attacks on the
same target to send her tube stations
and exactly the same time as the actual
attack happened providing some kind of
cover for what must be operations
orchestrated in some way by the state
[Music]
I am absolutely appalled at how much
people in this country do not think we
are given to understand that I than an
Arabic guy out there and up in the
mountains finance the most elaborate
attack on this country you make some
people in a claim do you think some
people I tell you I will have to a stand
down do you think that people going to
claim were able develop this happen and
when I think about how many Americans
were killed in New York City and
believing as I do that this thing was a
setup job this is a textbook operation
that nothing's used and they've used it
over and over again America has been
suckered in one more time I don't have
to tell you things are bad everybody
knows things are bad the dollar buys a
nickels worth banks are going bust
shopkeepers keep a gun under the cutter
punks are running wild in the street
there's nobody anywhere it seems to know
what to do and there's no end to it we
know the air is unfit to breathe and our
food is unfit to eat we sit watching our
TVs while some local newscaster tells us
that today we had 15 homicides and 63
violent crimes as if that's the way it's
supposed to be we know things are bad
worse than bad they're crazy
it's like everything everywhere is going
crazy so we don't go out anymore we sit
in the house and slowly the world we're
living in is getting smaller and all we
say is please at least leave us alone in
our living rooms let me have my toaster
and my TV and my steel-belted radials
and I won't say anything just leave it
alone well I'm not going to leave you
alone I want you to get mad I want you
to protest I don't want you to ride I
don't want you to write your Congressman
because I wouldn't know what to tell you
to write I don't know what to do about
the depression and the inflation and the
Russians and the crime in the street all
I know is that first you've got to get
mad you've got to say I'm a human being
god damn it
right
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Applause]
number one fastest track our fellows in
general apparently the goomar forum and
three windows
you
ladies and gentlemen the very word
secrecy is repugnant in a free and open
society and we are as a people
inherently and historically opposed to
secret societies to secret oaths and to
secret proceedings for we are opposed
around the world by a monolithic and
ruthless conspiracy that relies
primarily on covet means for expanding
its sphere of influence on infiltration
instead of invasion on subversion
instead of Elections on intimidation
instead of free choice it is a system
which has conscripted vast human and
material resources into the building of
a tightly knit highly efficient machine
that combines military diplomatic
intelligence economic scientific and
political operations it's preparations
are concealed not published its mistakes
of buried not headlined
it's dissenters are silenced not praised
no expenditure is questioned no secret
is revealed
that is why the Athenian lawmaker Solon
secreted a crime for any citizen to
shrink from controversy I am asking your
help in the tremendous task of informing
and alerting the American people
confident that with your help man will
be what he was born to be free and
independent 1775 the American
Revolutionary War began as the American
colonies sought to detach from England
and its oppressive monarchy but though
many reasons are cited for the
revolution
one in particular sticks out as the
prime cause that King George the third
of England outlawed the interest-free
independant currency the colonies were
producing and using themselves in turn
forcing them to borrow money from the
Central Bank of England at interest
immediately putting the colonies into
debt and as Benjamin Franklin later
wrote the refusal of King George the
third to allow the colonies to operate
an honest money system which freed the
ordinary man from the clutches of the
money manipulators was probably the
prime cause of the revolution in 1783
America won its independence from
England however its battle against the
central bank concept and the corrupt
greed filled men associated with it
had just begun
so what is a central bank the central
bank is an institution that produces the
currency of an entire nation based on
historical precedent two specific powers
are inherent in central banking practice
the control of interest rates and the
control of the money supply or inflation
the central bank does not simply supply
a government economy with money it loans
it to them add interest then through the
use of increasing and decreasing the
supply of money the central bank
regulates the value of the currency
being issued it is critical to
understand that the entire structure of
this system can only produce one thing
in the long run dead it doesn't take a
lot of ingenuity to figure to scan now
for every single dollar produced by the
central bank is loaned at interest that
means every single dollar produced is
actually the dollar plus a certain
percent of debt based on that dollar and
since the central bank has a monopoly of
the production of the currency for the
entire country and they loan each dollar
out with immediate debt attached to it
where does the money to pay for the debt
come from it can only come from the
central bank again which means the
central bank has to perpetually increase
its money supply to temporarily cover
the outstanding debt created which in
turn since that new money is loaned out
at interest as well creates even more
debt the end result of this system
without fail is slavery for it is
impossible for the government and thus
the public to ever come out of a
self-generating debt the founding
fathers of this country were well aware
of this
you
[Music]
by the early 20th century the US had
already implemented and removed a few
central banking systems which were
swindled into place by ruthless banking
interests at this time the dominant
families in the banking and business
world were the Rockefellers the Morgans
the Warburg's the Rothschilds and in the
early 1900's they sought to push once
again legislation to create another
central bank however they knew the
government and public are very weary of
such an institution so they needed to
create an incident to affect public
opinion so JPMorgan probably considered
a financial luminary at the time
exploited his mass influence about
publishing rumors that a prominent Bank
in New York was insolvent or bankrupt
Morgan knew this would cause mass
hysteria which would affect other banks
as well and it did the public in fear of
losing their deposits immediately began
masked withdrawals
consequently the banks were forced to
call in their loans causing those
Cyprian's to sell their property and
what a spiral of bankruptcies
repossessions and turmoil emerged
putting the pieces together a few years
later
Frederick Allen of Life magazine wrote
the Morgan interests took advantage to
precipitate the panic guiding the Trulie
as it progressed unaware of the fraud
the panic of 1907 led to a congressional
investigation headed by Senator Nelson
Aldrich who had intimate ties to the
banking cartels and later became part of
the Rockefeller family through marriage
the Commission led by Aldrich
recommended a central bank should be
implemented so a panic like 1907 could
never happen again
this was the spark the international
bankers needed to initiate their claim
in 1910 a secret meeting was held at a
JP Morgan estate on Jekyll Island off
the coast of Georgia it was there that
the central banking bill called the
Federal Reserve Act as written this
legislation was written by bankers not
law makers
this meeting was so secretive so
concealed from government and public
knowledge that the 10s of figures who
attended disguised their names when in
route to the island after this bill was
constructed it was been handed over to
the political front men senator Nelson
Aldrich to push through Congress and in
1913 with heavy political sponsorship by
the bankers Woodrow Wilson became
president having already agreed to sign
the Federal Reserve Act in exchange for
campaign support in two days before
Christmas when most of Congress was at
home with their families the Federal
Reserve Act was voted in in Wilson in
turn made it law years later Woodrow
Wilson wrote in regret
[Music]
you
[Music]
[Music]
congressman Louis McFadden also
expressed the truth after the passage of
the bill a world banking system was
being set up here a super state
controlled by international bankers
acting together to enslave the world for
their own pleasure the Fed has usurped
the government now the public was told
that the Federal Reserve System was an
economic stabilizer and inflation and
economic crises were thing of the past
well as history has shown nothing is
further from the truth
the fact is the international bankers
now had a streamline machine to expand
their personal ambitions for example
1914 to 1919 the Fed increased the money
supply by nearly 100 percent resulting
in extensive loans to small banks in the
public then in 1920 the Fed called in
mass percentages of the outstanding
minds upon thus resulting in the
supporting banks having to call in huge
numbers of loans and just like 1907 bank
runs bankruptcy and collapse occurred
over 5,400 competitive banks outside of
the Federal Reserve System collapsed
further consolidating the monopoly of
this small group of international
bankers privy to this crime congressman
Lindbergh stepped up and said in 1921
under the Federal Reserve Act panics are
scientifically created the present panic
is the first scientifically created one
worked out as we figure a mathematical
equation
however the panic of 1920 was just a
warm-up from 1921 to 1929 the Fed again
increased the money supply resulting
once again an extensive loans to the
public and banks there was also a fairly
new type of loan called a margin loan in
the stock market very simply the margin
loan allowed an investor to put down
only 10% of a stock's price with the
other 90% being loaned through the
broker in other words a person could own
a thousand dollars worth of stock with
only $100 down this method was very
popular in the roaring 1920s as everyone
seemed to be making money in the market
however there was a catch to this loan
it could be called in at any time and
had to be paid within 24 hours
this is termed a margin call
and the typical result of a margin call
is the selling of the stock purchased
with the loan so a few months before
October in 1929 JD rockefeller Bernard
Barack and other insiders quietly exited
the market and on October 24 1929 the
New York financière who furnished the
margin loans started calling them in in
mass this spark and instantaneous
massive sell-off in the market for
everyone had to cover the margin lands
it then triggered mass bank loans for
the same reason in turn collapsing over
16,000 banks enabling the conspiring
international bankers to not only buy
off rival banks at a discount but you
also buy up whole corporations at
pennies on the dollar it was the
greatest robbery in American history but
that didn't stop there rather than
expanding the money supply as recover
from this economic collapse the Fed
actually contracted it fueling on the
largest depressions in history once
again outraged congressman Louis
McFadden a longtime opponent of the
banking cartels began bringing
impeachment proceedings against the
Federal Reserve Board saying of the
crash and depression it was carefully
contrived occurrence international
bankers sought to bring about a
condition of despair so that they might
emerge the rulers of us all not
surprisingly and after two previous
assassination attempts McFadden was
poisoned at a banquet before he could
push for the impeachment now having
reduced the society to squalor the
Federal Reserve bankers decided that the
gold standard should be removed in order
to do this they needed to acquire the
remaining gold in the system so under
the pretense of helping to end the
Depression came the 1933 gold seizure
under the threat of imprisonment for ten
years everyone in America was required
to turn in all gold bullion to the
Treasury essentially robbing the public
of what little wealth they had left and
at the end of 1933 the gold standard was
abolished if you look at a dollar bill
from before 1933 it says it is
redeemable in gold
you look at a dollar bill today it says
it is legal tender which means it is
backed by absolutely nothing it is
worthless paper the only thing that
gives our money value how much of it is
in circulation therefore the power to
regulate the money supply is also the
power to regulate its value which is
also the power to bring entire economies
and societies to its knees
it's important to clearly understand the
Federal Reserve is a private corporation
it is about as federal as Federal
Express it makes its own policies and is
under virtually no regulation by the US
government
it is a private bank that loans all the
currency at interest to the government
completely consistent with a fraudulent
central banking model that the country
saw to escape from when it declared
independence in the American
Revolutionary War
now going back to 1913 the Federal
Reserve Act was not the only
unconstitutional bill pushed through
Congress they also pushed the federal
income tax it's worthwhile to point out
that the American public's ignorance
towards the federal income tax is a
testament to how dumb down and oblivious
the American population really is first
of all the federal income tax is
completely unconstitutional as it is a
direct unapportioned tax all direct
taxes have to be a portion to be legal
based on the Constitution secondly the
required number of states in order to
ratify the amendment to allow the income
tax was never met and this has even been
cited in modern court cases third at the
present day roughly 35% of the average
worker's income is taken from them via
this tax that means you work four months
out of the year to fulfill this tax
obligation and guess where that money
goes it goes to pay the interest on the
currency being produced by the
fraudulent Federal Reserve Bank a system
that does not have to exist at all the
money you make were in four months out
of the year goes almost literally into
the pockets of the international bankers
who own the Private Federal Reserve Bank
and forth even with the fraudulent
government claim as to the legality of
the income tax there is literally no
statute no law in existence that
requires you to pay this tax period I
really expected that of course there's a
law that you can point to in the law
book the code that requires you to file
a tax return of course there is I was at
that point where I couldn't find the
statute that clearly made a person
liable
at least not me and most people I know
and I had no no choice in my mind except
to to resign based on the research that
I did throughout the year 2000 and that
I'm still doing I have not found that
long I've asked Congress who asked a lot
of people in the IRS IRS commissioners
helpers they can't answer because if the
answer is the American people are going
to know but this whole thing is the
fault
I haven't filed an income federal income
tax returns since I laughed I have not
filed a tax return since 1999
the income tax is nothing less than the
enslavement of the entire country now to
control the economy and the perpetual
robbery of wealth is only one side of
the Ludwig's queue of the bankers
holding their hands the next tool for
profit and control is war since the
inception of the Federal Reserve in 1913
a number of large and small Wars have
commenced with the three most pronounced
were world war one world war two and
Vietnam World War one in 1914 European
Wars broke out centred around England
and Germany the American public wanted
nothing to do with the war in turn
President Woodrow Wilson publicly
declared neutrality however under the
surface the US administration is looking
for any excuse he could find enter in a
noted observation by Secretary of State
William Jennings the large banking
interests were deeply interested in the
world wars because of the wide
opportunities for large profits it's
important to understand that the most
lucrative thing that can happen for the
international bankers is war for it
forces the country to borrow even more
money from the Federal Reserve Bank at
interest Woodrow Wilson's top adviser
and mentor was Colonel Edward house a
man with intimate connections with the
international bankers who wanted in the
war in a documented conversation between
Colonel house Wilson's advisor and
insert Edward grade Foreign Secretary of
England regarding how to get America
into the war gray inquired what will
Americans do if Germans sink an ocean
liner with American passengers on board
House responded I believe that a plane
indignation with sweet the United States
and that by itself be sufficient to
carry us into war so on May 7th 1915 on
essentially the suggestion of Sir Edward
grey a ship called the Lusitania was
deliberately sent into German controlled
waters or German military vessels were
known to be and as expected German
u-boats torpedoed the ship exploding
stored ammunition killing 1,200 people
to further understand the deliberate
nature of this setup the German Embassy
actually put advertisements in the New
York Times telling people that if they
boarded the Lusitania they did so at
their own risk as such a ship sailing
from America to England through the war
zone would be liable to destruction in
turn and as anticipated the sinking of
the Lusitania caused a wave of anger
among the American population and
America entered the war a short time
after the first world war cost 323
thousand American deaths
Jadey Rockefeller made 200 million
dollars off of it not to mention the war
cost about 30 billion dollars for
America most of which was borrowed from
the Federal Reserve Bank at interest
furthering the profits of the
international bankers World War two on
December 7th 1941 Japan attacked the
American fleet at Pearl Harbor
triggering our entry into that war
President Franklin D Roosevelt declared
the attack was a day that will live in
infamy a day of infamy indeed but not
because of the alleged surprise attack
on Pearl Harbor after 60 years of
surfacing information it is clear that
not only was the attack on Pearl Harbor
known weeks in advance
it was outright wanted and provoked
Roosevelt whose family had been New York
bankers since the 18th century whose
uncle Frederick was on the original
Federal Reserve Board was very
sympathetic to the interests of the
international bankers and the interest
was to enter the war as as we've seen
nothing is more profitable for
international bankers than war in a
journal entry by Roosevelt Secretary of
War Henry Stimson dated November 25th
1941 he documented a conversation he had
with Roosevelt the question was how
should we maneuver them into firing the
first shot it was desirable to make sure
the Japanese be the ones to do this so
that there should remain no doubt as to
who were the aggressors in the months
leading up to the attack on Pearl Harbor
Roosevelt had done almost everything in
his power to anger the Japanese showing
a posture of aggression he halted all of
Japan's imports of American Petroleum he
froze all the Japanese assets the United
States he made public loans to
nationalist China and supplied military
aid to the British both enemies of Japan
and war which by the way is completely
in violation of international war rules
and on December 4 three days before the
attack Australian intelligence told
Roosevelt about a Japanese task force
moving towards pole Harbor Roosevelt
ignored it so as hoped and allowed on
December 7th 1941 Japan attacked Pearl
Harbor killing 2,400 soldiers before
Pearl Harbor 83% of the American public
wanted nothing to do
the war after Pearl Harbor 1 million men
volunteered for the war it is important
to note Nazi Germany's war effort was
largely supported by two organizations
one of which was called IG Farben IG
Farben produced 84 percent of Germany's
explosives and even a Zyklon B using the
concentration camps to kill millions one
of the unspoken partners of IG Farben
was JD Rockefellers Standard Oil Company
in America in fact the German Air Force
could not operate without a special
additive patented by Rockefeller
Standard Oil the drastic bombing of
London by Nazi Germany for example was
made possible by a twenty million dollar
sale of fuel to IG Farben by the
Rockefellers Standard Oil Company this
is just one small point on the topic how
American business funded both sides of
World War two
one other treasonous organization worth
mentioning is the Union Banking
Corporation of New York City not only
did it finance numerous aspects of
Hitler's rise to power along with actual
materials during the war it was also a
Nazi money-laundering bank which was
eventually exposed for having millions
of dollars of Nazi money in its vaults
the Union Banking Corporation of New
York was eventually seized for
violations of the trading with the enemy
I guess who the director and vice
president of the Union Bank was Prescott
Bush our current presidents grandfather
and of course our former presidents
father keep that in mind when
considering the moral and political
dispositions of the Bush family
Vietnam the United States official
declaration of war North Vietnam in 1964
came after an alleged incident involving
two us destroyers being attacked by
North Vietnamese PT boats in the Gulf of
Tonkin this was none of the Gulf of
Tonkin incident this single situation
was the catalystic pretext for massive
troop deployment and full-fledged
warfare one problem however the attack
on the u.s. destroyers by Vietnamese PT
boats never happened it was a completely
staged event to have an excuse to enter
the war former Secretary of Defense
Robert McNamara stated years later that
the Gulf of Tonkin incident was a
mistake while many other insiders and
officers have come forward relating that
it was a contrived farce a complete lie
once in the war it was business as usual
in October 1966 President Lyndon Johnson
Mista trading restrictions on the Soviet
bloc knowing full well that the Soviets
were providing upwards of 80 percent of
North Vietnam war supplies consequently
Rockefeller interests finance factories
in the Soviet Union which the Soviets
used to manufacture military equipment
and scented to know if Vietnam however
the funding of both sides of this
conflict was only one side of the coin
in 1985 Vietnam rules of engagement for
the classified this detailed what
American troops were and were not
allowed to do in the war
it included absurdities like North
Vietnamese anti-aircraft missile systems
could not be bombed until they were
known to be fully operational no enemy
could be pursued once they cross the
border of Laos or Cambodia and most
revealing of all the most critical
strategic targets were not allowed to be
attacked
unless initiated by high military
officials apart from these imposed
ludicrous limitations North Vietnam is
informed of these restrictions and
therefore could base entire strategies
around the limitations of the American
forces this is why the war went on so
long and the bottom line is this the
Vietnam War was never meant to be won
just sustained this war for profit
resulted in 58,000 American death
and three million dead Vietnamese so
where are we now
September 11th was the JumpStart for
what is now an accelerated agenda by the
ruthless elite it was a staged war
pretext no different in the sinking of
the Lusitania the provoking of Pearl
Harbor and a Gulf of Tonkin lie
in fact if 9/11 wasn't a planned war
pretext it would be an exception to the
rule it has been used to launch two
unprovoked illegal Wars one against Iraq
and one against Afghanistan
however 9/11 was a pretext for another
war as well the war against to you the
Patriot Act homeland security the
military tribunals Act and other
legislations are all completely an
entirely designed to destroy your civil
liberties and limit your ability to
fight back against what is coming
currently in the United States
unannounced to most brainwashed
Americans your home can be searched
without a warrant without you being home
you can in turn be arrested with no
charges revealed to you detained
indefinitely with no access to a lawyer
and legally tortured all under the
suspicion that you might be a terrorist
if you need a painted picture of what is
happening in this country let's
recognize how history repeats itself in
February 1933 Hitler staged a false flag
attack burning down his own German
parliament building the lifestyle and
blamed it on communist terrorists in the
next few weeks he passed the Enabling
Act which completely eradicated the
German constitution destroying people's
liberties he then led a series of
pre-emptive Wars all justified to the
German people as necessary to
maintaining homeland security
[Music]
[Music]
Escalus our enemy is a radical network
of terrorists and every government that
supports them it's time to wake up the
people in power go out of the way to
make sure that you are perpetually
misled and manipulated the majority's
perception of reality especially in the
mythical arena is not their own
it is truly imposed upon them without
them even knowing it for example the
public at large actually believes the
invasion of Iraq is going badly as
sectarian violence doesn't seem to stop
what the public fails to see is that the
destabilization of Iraq is exactly with
the people behind the government want
this war is to be sustained so the
region can be divided up domination of
the oil maintained continual profits
reaped for the defense contractors and
most importantly permanent military
bases established to be used as a
launching pad against other oil bearing
non-conforming countries such as Iran
and Syria for further implication that
the civil war and destabilization is
purely intentional in 2005 two elite
British SAS officers were arrested by
Iraqi police after being caught driving
around in their car shooting at
civilians while dressed up as Arabs
after being arrested and taken to a jail
in Basra the British army immediately
requested the release of these men when
the Basra government refused British
tanks came in and physically broke out
the men from the Basra prison if you
wish to destroy an area how do you do it
well the two ways you can go in there
and vomit and so forth but that does not
very efficient what you do is you try to
get the people in that area to kill each
other and to destroy their own territory
your own farms
and that's what's been done in that area
the way in which you destroy and pawn is
getting to destroy himself by dividing
his ranks against one another then you
feed both sides you have a GCD both
sides in flaming both sides and they
kill each other off and it's time that
some of us woke up to this reality to
understand that people who try to
maintain empires and create empires do
it by manipulating the people they're
trying to conquer you might want to ask
yourself why the entire culture is
utterly saturated with mass media
entertainment from all sides while the
educational system in America continues
its stupefying downward slide since the
US government decided to take over and
subsidize the public school system what
your government pays for it gives when
we understand that then we look at
government finance institutions of
education and see the kind of students
and the kind of education that's being
turned out by these government finance
schools logic will tell you that if what
is being turned out in those schools was
not in accord with what the state and
the federal government wanted then it
would change it the bottom line is that
the government is getting what they have
ordered they do not want your children
to be educated they do not want you to
think too much that is why our country
and our world has become so political
mass media television shows amusement
parks
drugs alcohol and every kind of
entertainment to keep the human mind
entertained so that you don't get in the
way of important people by doing too
much thinking
you had better wake up and understand
that there are people who are guiding
your life and you don't even know it
we're in a lot of trouble because you
people and 62 million other Americans
are listening to me right now because
less than 3% of you people read books
but less than 15% of you're reading
newspapers because the only truth you
know is what you get over this tube
right now there is a whole an entire
generation that never knew anything that
is karate
- this tube is the gospel the ultimate
revelation this tube can make or break
presidents Pope's Prime Minister - is
the most awesome
god damn close and whole godless world I
was not holding a hand-drawn cable I was
largest company in the world controls
the most awesome goddamn propaganda
force and a whole godless world who
knows what shit will be peddled for
truth others network so you listen to me
listen to me
television is not the truth televisions
a guard down amusement park television
is a circus a carnival a traveling
troupe of acrobats storytellers dancers
singers jugglers sideshow freak flies
Damon High football players
where is the board of killing business
but you can post it there day after day
night after night fall ages colored
screech we're all you know you're
beginning to believe the illusions we're
spinning here you're there getting to
think that the tube is reality and that
your own lives are unreal you do
whatever the tube tells you to dress
like the tube you ain't like a tube you
raise your children like the tube you
even think like the tube this is mass
madness you maniacs
eat God's name you people are the real
thing
we call the illusion
[Applause]
the last thing the men behind the
curtain want is a conscious informed
public capable of critical thinking
which is why a continually fraudulent
zeitgeist is output via religion the
mass media and the educational system
they seek to keep you instructed naive
bubble they are doing a damn good job of
it in 2005 an arrangement between Canada
Mexico and the United States was made
this arrangement unannounced to the
public unregulated by Congress merges
the United States Mexico and Canada into
one entity erasing all borders it's
called the North American Union you
might want to ask yourself while you've
never heard of this in fact there is
only one mainstream reporter who has
actually heard of and has had the
courage to cover this issue the Bush
administration's open borders policy and
it's a decision to ignore the
enforcement of this country's
immigration laws is part of a broader
agenda President Bush signed a formal
agreement that will in the United States
as we know it and he took the step
without approval from either the US
Congress or the people of the United
States it's a deal that few have even
heard of it's being done again by very
few people at the very top on behalf of
the investment class but the working
class of people political officials
across our country from communities from
cities and so forth they don't know
anything about this this isn't some
trade agreement it is a total removal of
sovereignty from these countries which
will also result in a completely new
currency called the Amero so apart from
that I think one thing people who are
dollar-based need to focus on is the
Amero that's the one thing that nobody's
talking about that I think's going to
have a big impact on on everybody's life
in Canada the US and Mexico the Amero is
the proposed new currency for the North
American community which is being
developed right now between Canada the
US and Mexico to make a borderless
community much like the EU
and the dollar Canadian dollar US dollar
and the Mexican peso replaced by the
Amero
by default of this Agreement the
American Constitution will eventually be
obsolete you would think that a
situation like this would be on the
cover of every major newspaper that is
until you realize the people who are
behind this movement are the same people
behind the mainstream media and you are
not told what you're not supposed to
know the North American Union of the
same concept of the European Union the
African Union and assumed to be Asian
Union and the same people behind all of
them and
makann is right the North American Union
the European Union the African Union and
the Asian Union will be merged together
forming the final stages of the plan is
meant working on for over 60 years
a one-world government
[Music]
[Laughter]
[Music]
[Laughter]
[Music]
[Music]
one bank one army one centre of power
and if we have learned anything from
history it is that power corrupts and
absolute power corrupts absolutely this
is Aaron Russo a filmmaker and former
politician to his left is Nicholas
Rockefeller of the infamous Rockefeller
banking and business dynasty after
maintaining a close friendship with
Nicholas Rockefeller Aaron eventually
ended the relationship appalled by what
he had learned about the Rockefellers
and their ambitions I got a call one day
from the Terry woman I knew and she said
would you like to meet one of the
Rockefellers I said sure I'd love to and
we became friends and he ended involved
a lot of things to me recently one night
he said that there's going to be an
event there in and out of that event
you're going to see we're going to go
into Afghanistan
so we tried pipelines from the Caspian
Sea we're going to go into Iraq to take
the oil and establish a base in the
Middle East I'm going to go into Anna's
whele and then China and get rid of
Shiva's and the first two they've
accomplished so as they didn't
accomplish and so you can see guys going
to caves looking for looking for people
that they're never going to find you
know he's laughing about the fact that
you have this war on terror there's no
real enemy is talking about how by
having this war on terror you can never
win it because the stakes of the filling
eternal war and sake always keep taking
people's liberties away I said hey
anything Vince people that this war is
really support media meaning it can
convince everybody I mean you know just
that you keep talking about things you
keep saying it over and over and over
again and eventually people believe this
you know you created the star Reserve in
1913 through wise
you create 911 which is another why do
911 you then you fighting a war on
terror and that was when you go into
Iraq which was another lie and now
they're going to do Iran you know and so
one thing leading to another leading to
another leading to another I would say
that what are you doing this for what's
the point of this thing that one money
in the world you ever want you have all
the power I said you know you're hurting
people is it's not a good thing and you
would say well you care about the people
for take care of yourself you take care
of your family and then I said go what
the or what are the ultimate goals here
to the output the goal the optimal goal
is to get everybody's real chip to the
tree with the RFID chip and have all
money be on those chips and everything
on those chips and if anybody wants a
protest what we do or violate what we
want which is turn off the chip that's
right
microchip in 2005 Congress under the
pretense of immigration control and the
so-called war on terrorism passed the
Real ID Act under which it is projected
by May 2008 you will be required to
carry around at federal identification
card which includes on it a scannable
barcode with your personal information
however this barcode is only an
intermediary step before the card is
equipped with a very chip RFID tracking
module which will use radio frequencies
to track your every move on the planet
if this sounds foreign to you please
note that the RFID tracking chip is
already in all new American passports
and the final step is the implanted chip
which many people have already been
manipulated into accepting under
different pretenses we have a Florida
family we were really pioneers in a
brave new world
they have volunteered to be the first
ever to have microchip identification
devices implanted into their body after
9/11 I was really concerned
security of my family I wouldn't mind
having something planted permanently in
my arm it would identify them in the end
everybody will be locked into a
monitored control grid where every
single action you perform is documented
and if you get out of line they can just
turn off your chip for at that point in
time every single aspect of society
revolve around interactions with the
chips this is the picture that is
painted for the future if you open your
eyes to see it a centralized one world
economy everyone's moved in everyone's
transactions are tracked and monitored
all rights removed the most incredible
aspect of all these totalitarian
elements will not be forced upon the
people the people will demand them for
the social manipulation of society to
the generation of fear and division has
completely detached humans from their
sense of power and reality a process
which has been going on for centuries if
not millennia religion patriotism race
wealth class and every other form of
arbitrary separatist identification does
concede has served to create a
controlled population utterly malleable
in the hands of the few
divide and conquer is the motto and as
long as people continue to see
themselves as separate from everything
else they lend themselves to being
completely enslaved the men behind the
curtain know this and they also know
that if people ever realize the truth of
their relationship to nature and the
truth of their personal power the entire
manufactured zeitgeist they prey upon
will collapse like a house of cards
[Music]
the full system that we live in drilled
into us that were powerless there were
weeks that our society is evil but it's
fragmented and cetera and so forth it's
all a big exact log your power beautiful
instruction
there is no reason why we cannot
understand who we truly are wherever
you're going there is notice by the
average individual cannot be fully
empowered we are incredibly powerful
means not saying I said thirty years in
my life the first 30 trying to become
something I want to become good
especially when they would come go to
tennis I want to become good at school
and great and everything I kind of
viewed in that perspective not okay the
way I am but if I got realized I had the
game wrong the game went to find out
what I already was find out what I
already was
[Music]
now in our culture we've been trained
for individual differences to stand out
so you look at each person immediate is
drier and Dumber older younger richer
poorer and we make all these dimensional
to stay in put them in categories you
read them that way and we get so that we
only see others as separate from
ourselves in the ways in which they
separate and one of the dramatic
characteristics of experience is being
with another person and suddenly seeing
the ways in which they are like you not
different from you and experiencing the
fact that which is X's in you which is
essence in me is indeed one the
understanding that there is no other it
is all one and I wasn't born Richard
Alpert I was just born as a human being
and then I learned this whole business
of who I am and whether I'm good or bad
or achieving or not all that's learned
the long way
[Music]
the old appeals to racial sexual
religious chauvinism to rabid
nationalist fervor are beginning not to
work
a new consciousness is developing which
sees the earth as a single organism and
recognizes that an organism at war with
itself
[Music]
you
[Music]
bill hicks used to finish a shows with
this
[Music]
life's like a ride in an amusement park
when you go on if you think it's real
that's how powerful our minds are and
the drive goes up and down round and
round it has thrills and chills that
it's very brightly colored and it's very
loud but it's fun for a while
some of being on the ride for a long
time they begin to question is this real
versus this arrive and other people have
remembered they come back to us and they
say hey don't worry probably quite ever
christmas is just arrived and we kill
those people
Charlotte I got a lot invested in this
ride shutting off look at my furrows of
worry look at my big bank account my
family this has to be real just to ride
the wheel kill those good guys to try
and tell us that even as that and what
the demons running on but it doesn't
matter because it's just a ride and we
can change it in County one it's always
the choice no effort no works
those savings of money just a choice
right now between fear
and love
you
[Music]