all right hello YouTube welcome to our
idea cafe today we are discussing what
have you learned from failing who would
like to go first or I can't go first
well you go first you haven't gone first
and I just want to go first all right a
fail at failing did not make any kind of
notes before it's funny this topic I
could not recall failing I like could
not not that I've never failed just in
that instance like that wasn't that was
big a not just a little um momentary
failure and then I remembered that I've
tried to start countless businesses and
have never made a dollar at any of them
I was like oh right that failure but it
was mainly a failure of not knowing what
my values are not like realizing I was
never gonna feel okay making money in a
game a system and so that failure
repeatedly it needed to repeat because
family not at once wouldn't have been a
repeat enough for me to start realizing
that for me I need to make sure anything
I create to make money myself has to be
Omni when and working for other people
doesn't seem to have that same problem
but it does have the problem of other
people being in hierarchy over me which
is not really a failure things let's
stay on topic um finding now this far
into my journey I can see well I'm going
through failure that there is beauty and
learning in it and so it was the shame
of failing the shame that happened with
failure that held me back way more than
the failure itself and now knowing that
knowing it's just a lesson from life I
don't have shame with failure I still
might have shame from the repercussions
for my actions the actual effect it has
on other people but not trying and
failing so I don't have that what if it
fails and I'm living more and more into
that as as life goes on where I'm hoping
I'm
putting out I don't know where it is an
image of the failures okay it's okay to
show up and be imperfect it's okay and
the more the more of us are willing to
do that the easier it is to create game
B game B is gonna happen along not like
we released something that's all perfect
and then it works it's gonna be
something that's good enough and then we
have to keep perfecting it which means
learning from our individual and
collective failures and I think that is
all I'm gonna share today finally so you
couldn't think of a time you'd failed
when he first started thinking about it
cuz I went through a somewhat similar
process myself and I actually started
thinking about the work about the notion
of failure itself and what does it
actually mean to fail the comment where
I heard it might have been some
throwaway line even if some shitty film
but it stuck with me that you've never
failed until you give up right if you're
still on the path of trying then you may
not have succeeded yet but you haven't
failed until you stopped trying right so
yeah I think that yes being wrong is a
source of failure right but being wrong
should be you know you should actually
celebrate it when you realize you're
wrong about something because you've
elevated your understanding to a higher
level in order to realize you're wrong
you must have understood something you
didn't understand before right and so
you know this kind of face so yeah I for
me what I ended up coming back to is not
so much a personal what have I learned
from failure but what I have learned
about the notion of failure as I got
older and evolved that the whole what
failure is is is is is how you view it
right if it knocks the stuffing out of
you and this way leads you from having
another go then yeah that's that's a
failure but I mean even that it's not a
complete failure until you're dead right
because you might at some point come
back to it and have another go so yeah
it's so yeah that's kind of where I am I
mean I that's how I would actually hope
we could maybe explore the I what we
what the notion of failure actually
is and how it evolves as a concept in
one's life as you get older and gaining
perspective but that's that I'll stop
there for now I think that you know
failure is the norm that that won't
surprise anybody like if you look at
think of it statistically like pursuing
a business you have like a one in a
thousand chance right right that you're
competing with all these other people
right so you're you're you're prone to
fail mm-hmm
but like there's so many ways things can
fail it's not always our fault and it's
not always clear what the lesson is um I
mean I think I think we all easily agree
that failure is a great teacher and mmm
you know we we learn from our past
mistakes but sometimes that's difficult
so I mean the takeaway is obviously
mm-hmm you know don't give up like Eric
saying like if you if you're you know
depending on what you're trying if
you're trying to you know achieve
something that's right or a positive
systems change or whatever you like we
it's not a question of giving up or
being defeated like it's just a question
of when right when when we succeed so
yeah I think we're all we're all humbled
by that we're all failures and that's
that's a that's a good thing
what like one thing I thought about when
I saw this question today because the
prompt is what have you learnt from
failure and you know we could talk about
that all day I can go on about how much
I've failed um but it but it you know
because Hillary Clinton's in the news it
makes me think of her like what what is
she learnt from failure and and it seems
that the answer is nothing
absolutely nothing you know just from
what I've seen today it's a lot of just
you know already you know you're talking
about what happens okay well there is a
documentary there's a documentary
released with Hillary Clinton or about
Hillary Clinton I haven't watched it yet
but I reckon it's probably like an hour
or so and it's you know about you know
it's it's it's a you know interview and
stuff like that and documentary so I
imagine there's a lot of content but
what people are highlighting and what
the news is is running with mmm is how
she attacked Bernie in it basically she
says um like Bob the the quote the quote
that's making the rounds is nobody likes
Bernie mm-hmm right so Hillary Clinton
is is saying nobody likes Bernie which
which isn't you know contradiction of of
the data obviously patently untrue
there's one person who's absolutely yeah
and and you know technically he's like
the most popular senator you know all
these sorts of things you know he's he's
winning by many metrics you know
speaking of failure and and Hillary
Clinton failed and it's so interesting
how she failed why she failed and what
she thinks about it and what she's
learned from her failure sorry yeah I'm
just trying to a you know Ray Ray's a
parallel to our discussion uh like like
just just to touch on and um not
necessarily to say that she hasn't
learned anything I'm sure she has or
that or that
I always know better but it's such an
interesting you know thing how we talk
about failure especially at this scale
when you know we're talking about
movements and organization and you know
it's not just her that failed it's a
kind of culture and it's not it's not
just trumped at one it's a kind of um
you know sixty plus million people got
what they voted for in a sense but are
also failing and being failed on with uh
with delivery and you know resources
all right I was gonna comments I don't
know I mean Hillary did fail she didn't
get the presidency but so did Bernie
Bernie failed in the primary and there's
a certain amount of we can't necessarily
gauge somebody else's failure hmm we can
only gauge our own but we can learn from
other people's without making
requirement that they learn from it so
what can America learn from the failure
if it's a failure that happened during
2016 and what can Bernie learn from his
failure if he wants to I mean bring that
that forward into 2020 wants to learn
and have a better outcome in this one
and yeah that like failure is and I like
Eric's suggestion of like what is
failure I think it is it stopped it's
when you stop trying so I guess because
Hillary isn't running for the president
is that failure is that success cuz I
don't think we wanted her to run I don't
think she wanted to run I think she had
her shot and now she will find other
ways to live her permission her life
whatever she's here to do that's not
failure but she did fail fail at the
thing and she will never get there right
like she might get to win at something
but not that not to be the president of
the United States and that sucks if that
was your ultimate dream yeah I mean
where she failed was authenticity right
she failed to convince the American
public that she was in any way authentic
about what she was talking about and so
perhaps what she might be able to learn
from it is you know the need to remain
authentic if you wish to bring people
with you right if you wish to convince
me you can't convince people to believe
in yourself you know I mean I use a
certain extent you can but no really way
discerning people I'm not going to be
swayed by stuff that you don't believe
me so just coming back to the notion of
what failure is I mean apart from when
you give up right I actually really like
that definition but I think in in so the
common
parlance and this is this is another
really interesting idea that failure as
measured by yourself is your endeavor
not living up to whatever pre
expectations you put into it right and
so you know you've only failed because
it fell short of whatever hopes you
might have had for that particular
endeavor you know it doesn't mean that
by a different set of metrics that it
hasn't been a success do you see what I
mean and so you you have you have
defined what failure and success are
kind of before you even started which I
think put some kind of constraint on the
project from the start right because
it's forced into conforming to a certain
set of success but measurable success
parameters that you've laid out at the
start so I think they thinking about
success and failure is is maybe really
constraining right because it keeps you
on a particular part yeah we were
talking about what was that my
microphone that was horrific what is
that anyway seems to have gone down so
yeah the exclusionary piece of winning
in certain areas like the president the
United States is one person for four
years so you're almost guaranteed to
fail at it right like there's only gonna
be one Democratic candidate out of all
the ones that are running and they may
or may not fail but there will
definitely be one person who fails I
think the same thing happens in the
Olympics where there's like one gold
medal winner and if your silver you're
the first failure and you might never
get a chance to compete there and so
there's a certain amount that when you
have your metric be I have to be the
best at this instead of I have to be the
best I can be at this and even that
comes with a certain amount of
exclusionary that you fail like if you
were in your 20s and able to run a you
know seven-minute mile and now you can't
run SFM in a mile never be able to beat
that number if that's the number you're
trying to beat you might have a new
number in your 40s right you might have
a new metric to gauge with and to see
how how close can I get to that as
opposed to having
be the bar
it's really hard to know them whether
you're setting the bar high enough for
yourself right this is the problem with
being your own judges obsessive I mean
something like the presidency right you
can only ever be one winner right so by
definition everyone else must play up
and so the the Olympics for example I
think is quite I think that's a nice
result because there are various levels
of aspiration you can have I mean at a
certain level just to get the Olympics
do you know what I mean that's that's
you you already succeeded whatever
happens from here on in should anything
happen is a bonus because you've all
died the metrics that you had set these
of you have already succeeded so yeah it
makes success and failure very much a
relative thing right it's not they're
they're not absolute they're not
absolutes they are they're entirely
relative judgments yeah like in the
world I want to live in in my game be
which of course kittycat it has to be
ours or it's nobody is right but like
there's a certain positivity or whatever
beauty that comes from competing with
yourself and yourself alone because you
because misery comes from comparing
yourself with others if you can't be the
gold medal winner and that you're never
gonna succeed at life and that's where
is like if you want to have access to
doing the luge you can do it but you
know what I mean you're not necessarily
gonna be a gold the gold medal winner at
it I think that's a very very different
like everyone can have access to playing
sports by definition there's only gonna
be a tiny tiny minority
who's going to excel at it to the point
where that's their entire life and just
Joe average doing the luge say what what
now becomes your I mean do you even
think in terms of success and failure or
is it is its success I had a good time
and failure is it was boring I mean I I
don't know what loss is it is it even
meaningful to think in terms of success
and failure I don't I'm asking I don't
know yeah and I think that is the
question is like if you can just access
doing the luge plane hockey
whenever it happens to be and you're
just there to participate in the game
there's gonna be a number of people who
like the pre no effect of or going to
succeed at it right they're going to be
the best at that but if that's what
you're doing if you're not going to be
happy unless you're in the NHL unless
you're getting then you're not you're
probably not going to be happy like
you're going to probably fail at that
and but finding the joy in the plane of
hockey in the plane of the sport is the
success and then yes you're probably
going to get to be be the best of it
that being said we need we need we need
an expanded vocabulary in this area
right is gaining you know increased
personal capacity increased whatever you
know whatever it might be but in a
personal level as opposed to on the
global level be actually being at the
really pinnacle of it needs new more
nuance language to for these kinds of
yeah make a lot of new language yes that
just keeps coming up I've actually
started playing hockey mm-hmm and you
know I'm 37 now and I've like only
played for like a couple years in like
street hockey when I was younger and
like the odd pond hockey thing but I've
never been good at it I've never owned
my own equipment until recently and like
now when I go out there I still have fun
but I but I suck like I'm I'm the worst
person out there playing with like over
50 year olds right it's a it's just it's
just dropping but but you know I'm
constantly learning from that because if
you're that that's a good like I've got
the right attitude and it's the right
learning environment where I can
continue to fail and can and you know
iteratively improve like very quickly in
a way not failure right it's progress
it's not failure is progress yeah I wish
I wish we could do the same with
discourse and with ideas you know if
people came to it but with the same
humility and an experience that I come
to with hockey we might uh we might be
able to have a proper game in the first
place right but but real life is a lot
Messier I think people can I do that I
mean not I don't succeed at it all of
the time but like there are times I
succeed at that and I think what you
were saying about hockey that you know
you're playing with like 50 year olds
and you're the worst why and I was it
had this you know like the the idea of
like a big fish in a small pond or a
small fish in a big pond right like you
decide okay well because if you are
playing with five-year-olds you'd
probably be the best right like confide
girls are Nestle to play with you but
like you kind of want to have people you
want to be surrounded by people who are
gonna pull you up right who you're going
to be the worst at but maybe not the
worse right maybe you want to be in like
the lower 40th percentile and not the
like bottom 5% eyelet for that like and
the what is that like the diversity of
experience we're getting to play hockey
with people that you that are better
than you and able to pull you up and
also people that are worse than you had
ever been on skates that aren't Canadian
and you know to be there like to learn
and you can you can train them not
that's necessarily something you want to
do but like that that is absolutely an
intellectual we can do that right
there's people who I think of is
brilliant and I would love to have
conversations with them and and to draw
that out I don't I said I think I'm more
brilliant than other people but finding
that space of I'm a rookie here and I'm
okay with that
because I'm here to learn and here I'm a
genius right and owning that piece
because I say I'm living my genius I
don't mean I'm smarter than other people
and I feel like Eric they froze that I'm
smarter than other people it's like
where I'm the smartest not in comparison
to other people but in comparison to
myself like this is the space that is
easy and fun and what I've struggled and
where I seem to be yes it does happen to
be better than other people but not
because of that because your genius is
the thing you're best at and it might
never be that you're the NHL player in
the gold star winner or the gold medal
winner your average and that's okay just
find the places that you're good and and
bad like where are you bad that you want
to excel at but you but you're gonna
keep showing up if you hated hockey it
would be a horrible place to be bad and
not enjoying it but if you enjoy it
you're more okay to be bad on it right
and keep showing up and improve on it I
want to touch back on politics for a
second because because I was thinking
like you like you're right like like
both Hillary and Bernie lost in 2016
which is an interesting observation and
I think I think Bernie has learned a lot
and the Bernie movement has learned a
lot you know they've they if they've
incorporated a lot of that essentially
and and throughout that the time you
know Hillary and Obama have kind of
slinked away into semi-retirement only
to come out occasionally to like you
know like put down Bernie or something
but a Bernie has continued to like work
for the cause right so things like fight
fighting Amazon and Disney for like
minimum wage and stuff like that is like
like keeping going despite failure right
because it's it comes back to this idea
of an end game and you're you're
fighting for a bigger cause and you're
not gonna you're never gonna fail in the
long run
whereas Hillary or Obama they're they're
being more strategic about it in terms
of wins and losses and and what they
learn from that you know like there just
doesn't seem to be the same degree of
reflection and humility and yeah
progress from learning from those
failures so you know like when when when
Bernie lost as he did or was whatever
stabbed in the back you know he's still
campaigned for Hillary a lot right and
so that was Bernie kind of sucking it up
learning his lesson doing what he
thought had to be done and you know when
when Hillary's asked what will she
support
you know and and she says you know I'm
gonna sort of wait until we see who the
nominee is then we'll see you know it
just seems to me that mmm there's many
lessons not just one but many lessons
not being learned they're from the
failure the failure to you know yeah
earlier she I don't think she ever
thinks that her failure was that she
didn't put herself behind Bernie in 2016
or now she doesn't believe in Bernie's
mission right she's that's not her thing
and so she's and when you said Obama and
Hillary both have kind of like retired
retired but they come up to critique him
or so Obama gets to retire once you're
the president what else do you go to
right like that is don't get to continue
on you don't kind of get to go back into
politics and become a senator that's not
what the presidents do our man he has
tried and can't and she's not she
couldn't go back to being a senator I
don't even know what she actually is
doing at the moment
yeah I mean I think she's younger than
Bernie and of course Obama is much
younger than both of them so even though
he's been president you know he still
has power and and a potential career in
many directions it's just a question of
what you choose right and Obama has
really chosen to kind of you know build
the kind of nonprofit legacy like just
like Clinton did you know kind of be a
be a be a cosmopolitan globalist but not
support the you know the leftists and
the unions and the and the Socialists
and all that mm-hmm and so I think you
know we're failing as a planet I'm not
trying to single out Clinton or Obama's
particular failures but but the
collective failure the group failure
right so what are we learning
collectively and when I see these things
in the news like you know that that you
know they just quite frankly can't
converge on policy and on on you know
morals and whatever it's like it's a
failure you know and we're gonna end so
there's this unbuttoned on all sides of
life now there's this you know constant
kind of threat like oh that's going to
guarantee Trump
or for years you know there's all that
that kind of insults is being thrown in
all directions because everyone's afraid
of what will actually backfire in terms
of strategy and and give Trump another
four years and this is a very you know
credit you know credible possible
outcome if we can't get our shit
together and and yeah unify mean I was
watching the weekly and they were I
think it was the New York the New York
Times who did who puts their weight
behind one candidate and they were
interviewing all the candidates the
Democratic Party and I totally forgot
what I was gonna say which was there was
a very important point of like no it'll
come back to me and then I will bring it
up but like I think there's a difference
like I said we can criticize our own
failure oh that was it it was that Trump
is not the disease he is a symptom of
the disease and nobody is so like there
are a few candidates like Bernie who are
dealing with the underlying issues but
the the thing is you can't just put
Biden in there and be like well you know
he can establish it's like the American
people the world is hurting you're
disconnected they are addicted they're
like we have so many issues and so this
fact like we're polarizing and on on
race on gender on these things that are
symptoms they're not the thing and so we
also can't find commonality with that
right like when because we're dealing
with the symptoms we're dealing with
that level whether we don't have
commonality like there isn't you know
the people who think that it's the
immigrants fault aren't going to stop
being racist and stop being is that a
phobic especially when you haven't dealt
with the underlining reason they're
there which is that they're scared
they're scared for their children
they're scared for their economy and
instead they're just being yelled at to
stop doing that and which makes them
take their heels and further right and
be like no it's it's thrown people it's
the fact that people it's you know not
the 1% not giving us jobs and eroding
our economic system it's the them and
it's always kind of the wrong them when
really I think statistics and stuff do
show now
1% are necessarily evil but they are
that have the greatest effect in the
greatest power and we all have that in
common like we all want our families to
be fed we all want them to be healthy we
all want them to be so we can find the
common ground and go from there but to
need people to first get along it
doesn't work like we're gonna fail at
that that's gonna be a failure
there's and then I want to bring up
something else or to let someone else
talk I'll bring it well I was just
thinking how nonviolent communication
offers a really really really handy
framework that can because I mean you
know what you're talking about is people
have a need for security and belonging
right that's that's that's the need
that's not being met right and so rather
than acknowledging that this is a common
need that we all share and but we all
have different strategies to meet that
need and how can we each engage in our
own unique individual or whatever
collective strategies without
interfering in other people's and
ability to meet their own similar needs
right and so you get tangled up in its
the brown people for it's the immigrants
for it's the poor people's fault it's
the rich people's fault it's the
capitalists or whatever right but but
actually as you said these are these are
all symptoms of the fact that people
aren't having basic needs psychological
needs primarily being met and and and so
the other the ring and the lashing out
is simplicity a bad one right but it
like if we could get rid of these people
then this need that I feel is not being
met would be met right it's a bad
strategy but that's but that's what it
is it's a and and yeah so sorry coming
back saying the the the separation of
strategy from me because the need is the
common ground that's what you're talking
about the need for the common ground to
start from that's that's what it is
acknowledging the common need is the
common ground and acknowledging that
where we are in conflict is over our
strategies
that's that also is common ground then
you've got a difficult discussion but
yeah right like the the one side is like
well we just got rid of the immigrants
and the poor people we'd be fine and the
left is very much back like
no no we just something a rid of you
right right we have do we need you to
stop being you and start being and brené
Brown has I don't remember which
interview it's in but she talks about
the difference like if who you're
dealing with whether it's an individual
or an entire group does it change your
impression of them if you knew they were
doing the best they could
yeah yeah I've had to say that it's a
really powerful idea I agree I don't
come from the assumption that ever you
know like Hillary Clinton's doing the
best job she can Trump is doing the best
job he can not so if we need the system
to be better we can't leave it up to
them right they're doing the best they
can we have to do better like as a
collective we have to be like what do
you need to do better what would get
Trump to do better actually better and
it's not really net it was too bad
already doing the best we can right and
therefore we can't do any better
it's a dangerous assumption like it
might very well be true and I hear it a
lot but I think it's a dangerous
assumption like - especially if we're
like putting the best of intentions and
knew all these you know projecting the
good intentions into all these people
it's like yeah I mean sometimes winning
is failure let's put it that way like
Trump won right um but but but the
system failed you know like the effect
of Trump's win as a kind of plutocrat or
plutocracy is just to really get nothing
done in terms of governance and to you
know cut taxes on rich people uh and
stuff like that right so kind of flips
the question is like what what did you
learn from failure well what did you
learn from success look at what look at
what success does to people sometimes
when when you're just continually
rewarded her for for being a criminal or
or whatever you know yeah but he's doing
the best job he can so if we need him
like he's going to continue doing that
he's gonna continue being Trump he's
gonna continue
looking at his own narcissistic best
interest he doesn't know how to do
different so the collective people need
to come up with solutions for even if
he's doing that how do we come up with
solutions together how can we and when
you look at it from any point of view
you want like people are in poverty
people who have addictions to stop doing
what they're doing they can't ask them
what they need we don't have to give it
to them but it's a better place to come
from it's like right there are diction
levels the best job they can do right
now so what would get them more and it's
generally love and connection and actual
resources and a system that works that
gets people what they need even when
it's not with any like even when it's
you know when I get my when I have a
relationship I'll be happy the best way
to prove yourself wrong is to get the
relationship right to be like oh look
happiness isn't here and so we're so
busy yelling at people to not be in the
position they're in that we're not
helping them get any better and it's
that is where we're failing I think is
by like failing ourselves not realizing
that we are the best we can be in the
moment and failing everyone else that we
like need them to be doing better when
they can't they don't have that they
could they would be doing it yeah I mean
we're all we're all gonna fail at many
things and then in order to have those
be lessons just need to lower the stakes
structurally a lot right so like like
I'm saying with hockey and something
that so if everyone's stakes are low and
it's sort of game affine they have the
opportunity like in a classroom you know
similar is you have the opportunity to
to learn to fit and to fail of course
mm-hmm and and to continually improve
and so it's all about creating the
conditions for a healthy range of you
know trying and failing to do things and
just to take him in the other direction
III can give a couple personal examples
from from the lasts from yesterday
actually because I really felt like a
failure so this is really small small
scale stuff but the point is like what
did I learn right I spilled water on my
keyboard yesterday and end mmm
not right away but almost immediately it
started acting up in the buttons started
doing the wrong thing and very key
buttons like backspace like delete and
and you know return like I couldn't I
couldn't use and the command key so my
whole interface was ruined right I
couldn't use the computer I felt like an
idiot because I effectively caused it
mm-hmm
and I tried I tried taking some keys off
and cleaning it and I tried blow drying
it and nothing worked it it didn't seem
to be wet but it also didn't work and
and I dried it out overnight in front of
a heat source and and it works today so
you know there was a lesson there in
terms of like patience in terms of not
beating myself up you know and then just
dealing with the problem like like step
by step and hoping that things work out
because you don't you don't know that
you failed until the end right you have
to keep trying you have to not give up
so I fixed my keyboard and sit you know
saved a bunch of trouble I also broke
the button on my coffee machine
yesterday and I have not had success
with repairing yet so yeah yeah so so
I'm still learning and I think those are
the kind of things that we can offer one
another both I mean that wasn't a
failure right like even when you're in
your shame the collective community
being able to that's not a failure right
like we've all spill water on our
keyboard you're not a failure of a human
being for it because we can get in those
moments but also the like collective
learning what do you do when you do
spill water on our keyboard what are
effective ways to deal with it and to be
able to learn from people's past failure
right like we all make mistakes how do
you actually clean it up what is the
solution because we collectively can
share that information much more easily
so we don't have to each learn from only
our own failures right we can learn from
each others as well be like oh that's
what you do when you spill water on
keyboard unplug it immediately don't use
it right up I got my phone way a week
ago and it does it takes overnight to
sort itself out either the some reason
they kept thinking ahead headphone
right so there was no sound coming out
and yeah I thought God was hand it off
on sweet works so yeah I could have told
you it takes 24 hours all right like I
feel like that is a big solution for us
as a planet is figuring out how we can
share in each other's failures so that
we don't need to make them all of
themselves I mean the amount of times
that especially in technology people are
like well that's been tried and it's
it's a failure no one wanted it well
what went wrong but what actually went
wrong in the implementation of it
because maybe we can learn and grow I
was just watching this documentary
called Wild West something like that
it's about a cults that started in in
America in the 80s and and there's so
much beauty there like they start this
land and it's really because one
person's a narcissist yet loves her guru
bit like this all goes chaotically wrong
and you by the way they it's like well
any cult is gonna be a disruption right
like and it's like well there's beauty
here like what went wrong and we can
actually have the good without the bad
they also kind of like bulldozed the
community they were right nearby that
didn't want them there and didn't like
there were things that definitely went
wrong there are things that went right
and most of the people who were there
were good kind people working towards a
common good there was nothing broken
about that it was the one person who was
like well we need to like poison the
Tally's people because they want to hurt
the Guru right like this ridiculous
outcomes because there wasn't
transparency and like she gave a coli
poisoning to the town and you even later
she was like people get sick why should
I feel bad about that
you got them sick that's a very
different thing there for a while that
plot I've seen that wild wild country
was called and I've seen that
documentary as well and for a while that
place looked awesome I mean those people
were lit up you know what I mean they
were proper lit up there was nothing
fake about that
absolutely real but I mean it does it
does only take one person in a position
of authority in an organization which is
not completely transparent and boom I
mean it seems to be almost an
inevitability so yeah that their optimum
transparency but also the ability to try
self out on a scale which is not
everyone right that ability to you know
forbidding the instrument experiment
knowing that outside of the boundaries
of that experiment you're not going to
fuck the whole world up if it goes wrong
right and there are people out there
willing to clean up the mess when it all
goes wrong right and reset okay that
didn't work let's let's try this version
whatever so that setting things up so
that you can try since you know having
one government or whatever telling 200
million people 300 million people this
is what we're going to be doing when bad
decisions are made this is extremely
dangerous right you have to have the
ability to contain the effects of
drastic failure of catastrophic failure
right I mean it's all very well yeah we
need to learn from failure and that's
true but you also need to contain the
worst effects so you know be able to
contain the worst effects of it mm-hmm
and I like the idea of starting small
for that very reason if you can figure
it out with you know ten people you can
figure out 100 people you can figure out
the thousand people and you're always
looking to expand it if it wants to be
expanded or create a copy of it that
wants to be expanded right like not
everyone can eat with my community
there's kind of like forty people who
can fit in that dining room but they
could have their own community that they
eat with like there's certain amount of
recreating what works and also learning
from each other's failures I can
guarantee you in the next Co housing
starts there's things our Co housing can
teach them be like here's what you want
to not do and here's what you want to do
especially in Vancouver and like the the
not documentary it was also very clear I
mean that is kind of the definition of a
cult but when it's around one leader
both there's all the loyalty to the
leader which then makes people somehow
do bad horrible things
or if there's a higher possibility there
they weren't transparent about the
finances or wasn't it was like very
clear there's a tiny group in charge
there wasn't and so that's what when you
look at what has happened with cults
that happens time and time and time
again that there's like a tiny group of
leaders and they have more power and
more and so when something goes wrong
goes catastrophic ly wrong they decide
that like their things falling apart so
everyone commits mass suicide like if
it's never that because you're you're
like cohousing doesn't have a leader
there's a downfall with that you don't
know how to go do to ask for permission
but no one person leaving that community
is gonna destroy it it might devolve
over time when a lot of people leave and
new people come in and they weren't part
of the creation of it but that is a
different process than like one guru and
then they leave and then it just
collapses around them when they fall
from the pedestal that like community
falls from its pedestal yeah I mean it's
one of the great challenges isn't it is
to create an architecture where
co-opting of power by a small group of
individuals is simply not possible right
it simply can't be done because if it
can be done sooner or later it seems
like it will be done so is that yes it's
designing an architecture that makes
that impossible with a the distributed
nature of you know it's stove deep down
in the soil right that there isn't a way
of coops I don't know I mean I have no
idea how to do that but it seems that
seems to be essential and grab all the
power of the One Ring but he will it
seems big historical question like we
like I said earlier like we can talk
about all day about our personal
failures but when we're trying to do a
collective project and movement and
thought experiments like we have to kind
of know history together know the same
history and that's not so that's so
tough like like yesterday was
luther king day right and you know there
is there's always there's always on
martin luther king day like conservative
articles that try to co-opt the history
are trying to rewrite the history and
and it's a ritz revisionism right but
not in the good sense of trying to you
know correct the historical record it's
more like saying like like you know at
the extreme end that bet MLK was a
conservative well he wasn't
conservatives hated him and in fact they
hated him so much that at the time they
even got a lot of affluent black people
to hate him you know he was hated that's
the point right and it's like this
happens every year uh on martin luther
king day it's like there's lots of great
content that comes out of course but
there's there's content that tries to
whitewash the history and it becomes
this big you know kind of skirmish
online and and you know so so i saw a
lot of that yesterday and and this
morning and it's like okay this is a
collective failure like we're not
learning the history what have we what
have we learnt right like this is a
question we have to ask like together
and learn and learn together because
it's not necessarily a personal failure
uh you know in this case but of course
people's understanding of these things
are made up by tons of little decisions
which includes failure so if someone's
failing to you know understand the true
history that could be a big gap to close
but but learn learning is difficult
right whether there's failure involved
or not the process of learning is
difficult and what I'm getting at is
just that the public discourse keeps
failing because you know we're not we're
not learning from our personal failures
in research and in discussion etc so you
know that's I hope we can just get
better at that quickly yeah I think
there's a tendency to try and cover
failures up isn't that a role yeah
there's a tendency to try to pretend
they never happened exactly it's a
famous person but I can't think who it
is we'll all know the name but I can't
think for the likelihood is that the
I thought is it Aldous Huxley I think
it's Aldous Huxley the the most
important lesson of history is that we
absolutely fail to learn the lessons of
history that is like having MLK was not
a perfect human being
oh not cuz I know distinct things he's
done because he was a human being so
therefore I know he was not a perfect
human being right but so what I mean
that that to me anyway in my mind has no
impact on you know what he was about in
terms of his life and so girlfriend
whatever you know a way to truly know
what historical figures did and didn't
do in a way that is as easy as looking
up on IMDB who starred in something
right it's not so that we can have we
don't need to have that conversation
every MLK Day it doesn't need to be well
he was this and that he was this the
truth is he wasn't popular when he was
getting started and alive and is that
the truth I just I saw a meme that said
that yesterday it was like how
interesting that like even though now
he's revered he wasn't at the time
because he was earned shut up yeah he
wasn't he was a little bit I mean
obviously he was controversial and
disliked when he was doing all his uh
kind of racial equality campaigning but
but the point is that he actually won
that victory and then became accepted
but then became after that became hated
again and more hated because of the
economic justice stuff right so it
became not about race at that point it
became about you know poverty and then
and then the you know the the the
history of it goes that that's when he
became more of an enemy of the state and
was killed
I guess if success means everyone knows
perfect history everyone knows perfect
science we're never going to get there
we're not even supposed to get there but
having access to something that is more
of a black-white agreed to love like did
this happen or did it not happen if it
did happen who did it when did it like
where did it sit in the context of
history that is create a ball that is
something we can create together when we
don't have access to it it becomes this
endless debate of like well did he do
that did he not do that he was a
horrible person he was the best person
and not finding the truth which is like
he was a human being
there was good things and bad things and
what did he give us and more importantly
what are we doing with how are we
learning from that history how are we
showing up in alive today because I
think we kind of are all cult leaders
that are following like sorry cult
followers we're following these leaders
I know I have in the past when people
have fallen from grace it's like they've
just crumble like it's just like well if
you did that thing I can't trust
anything that you've told me and done in
your books and in your your stuff and
there's a some amount of truth there
Bill Cosby's never coming back
like there's no Bill Cosby was an
example he is what you're talking about
right because he's undeniably abused his
position of you know celebrity and power
and so on to to rape women right but at
the same time he has also done a
phenomenal number of good things I mean
he has apparently put thousands of kids
through college for example through
various scholarships and awards schemes
and so on and so on you know he's he's
made the careers of loads of people I
mean he transformed the image of black
people in the American consciousness you
know I mean he's he did remarkably he
made remarkable positive contributions
with his life and I mean I without
wanting to in any way minimize you know
the the horror of the experiences of the
women that he's abused but you do kind
of you know you can't just throw out all
the good shit he's done and ylabel in an
evil person because of the because of
the horrible shit that he's done you
know it's just I think it's a really
excellent example of the need to
separate the evil that exists in every
so but single human being from each
other and learn from the good and profit
from the good and and and celebrate the
good and and you know condemn and try
and minimize the future attacks of the
evil obviously but I also feel
like everything caused me touch us from
now on is tainted including going back
it's tainted like I'm you can't watch
The Cosby Show and not know that he's
he's who he is now however that doesn't
take away from what he's actually done
like he put people through school he
actually put people through school they
exist with university degrees and so
that ripple effect is still in the world
having good
you're not taking back their degrees
right we're taking back his well you
don't I mean like his degree but like
his right sorry and all the other stars
at The Cosby Show now you don't I mean
they're not gonna get the royalties
they're not gonna get because no one's
gonna watch it or at least way less
people are gonna watch it there's a cost
to that and it's rippling back through
time in a way that maybe is a little
unfair not with Cosby but with some of
them but it's like wait we were all like
we didn't know about Cosby we knew about
the lot of the other ones and now we're
looking back and being like well we you
should have known and how dare you we
were there we were physically present
while it was happening
we had movies designed around these
themes and nobody boycotted them nobody
was like gee this isn't how we should
treat women and minorities we were all
complicit in it and so there's a certain
amount of like I don't know like we're
seeing ourselves in the reflection of
history and we're like reacting to that
it's like well yeah this is everyone to
be as well as we are now like that's not
how that works this is sort of what I'm
getting at to is like you know as we all
grow up kind of together regardless of
what age we're at and as history marches
on and as the internet you know puts
more of it online and mm-hmm we have
this huge opportunity and imperative to
you know collectively learn from from
these cultural failures you know like
the like the Cosby case is a personal
and sort of systemic failure but it also
gives the audience a Jag a chance to
reflect on that failure and on their own
failures you know for I mean I'm trying
to say like the failure of not knowing
better but how would we know right but
just the the collective failure and
lesson that we that we haven't you know
news is interesting in that sense
because there's
always bad news and there's always some
narrative about you know things going
wrong and there's so you know that's
always a chance to learn and like it's
interesting with the Iraq war right it's
like so what do we what did we learn
from the failure of that well it's taken
a long time it's taken you know
seventeen years for for more of a
consensus to be built that it was wrong
some people still no don't don't think
it was wrong but you get what I'm
getting at here is you know how much
time it takes for us to learn our
collective failures and what we can do
about it right now
mm-hmm maybe that is learning from
history is like right we're never we're
in the history of tomorrow and we're
doing the best job we can yet we can do
better collectively together so what
does that look like without leaving it
up leaving it up to our cult leaders
what are they gonna do no no that was
just I'm done know that the Iraq war is
again a really good exhaustively fails
to learn the lessons of history right
because I mean the American and British
governments lied extensively about the
whole weapons of mass destruction thing
right you know and we all know that now
but we knew it at the time right there
are reporters reporting this at the time
and you know the majority of the
population still bought into the
official weapons of mass destruction
narrative right even though there were
plenty of voices at the time saying is
bullshit it's been sexed up it's you
know there is no intelligence to ground
this in reality and it's not like this
is the first thing it's not that the
first time it's just happened has
happened many many times before I mean
there are documents now which show that
Pearl Harbor was encouraged and known
about in advance that the Gulf of Tonkin
incident didn't happen that the
Lusitania was an admiralty ship with
guns beneath the terrace you know that
all of this stuff now which was at the
time using them they were attacked
civilians all they've bombed one of our
ships you know with no provocation so
these lies have been told in the past
and we were told these lies again and we
went to war again and nothing was
different so it would be nice to think
that the
that's a really really really recent
example of how we were blatantly
blatantly lie - it just went ahead and
17 years later we're still arguing about
well there are still some people arguing
about whether it was right or wrong do
you know what I mean
yeah I think what's interesting here
actually is you know you just helped me
realize that that the neo-cons
that planned and executed the war
probably think that they succeeded still
and maybe in their terms they did right
there's this there's this there's this
bullshit not know yeah like I'm yeah I'm
gonna I'm gonna have to to speculate a
little bit about you know the the
honesty and intentions of of that of the
Iraq war but let's just say for example
that all the liars about WMDs knew they
were lying right you're not just going
on with it but they knew and that so in
that sense they didn't fail to know the
truth because they knew the truth they
succeeded in you know selling the lie
right so from their perspective they
were successful because you know and and
so when I when I say speculative it also
gets into the territory of you know
foreign policy in geopolitics and we
don't have all of the information there
right so you know neo cons and realists
would make the argument that oh well if
we didn't go into Iraq the the Middle
East would have destabilized further and
that would have been you know terrorism
and whatnot
we just don't know we can't actually
know what would have happened if the
Iraq war didn't happen and that's how
the neo cons can retain the power
because they had so much power and
control over you know selling the lies
and and carrying out the war that
they've almost made it so they can't
fail it's kind of this too big to fail
idea you know and that's that's again to
come back to what we're culturally
collectively trying to reckon with it's
that it's it's those people that are too
big to fail and that are making these
executive decisions they get lots of
innocent people killed ostensibly
because it's for the greater good but I
think is a society but and also gets
redefined whenever they fucking like
what dispenser
but what success and failure actually
look like right what it is exactly
exactly so we we need to take a kind of
meta perspective on on their hegemony
over what success and failure means in
the world because I think as
progressives we want mm-hmm we want uh
you know success is no war and and
addressing all the the problems whether
its resources or religious
fundamentalism or whatever that lead to
war we want to be able to address those
with other means that aren't appeasement
that aren't pacifism but aren't
militaries army either you know we need
to we need to work work with people yeah
I think there are solutions that know
that we can come to that aren't leaving
it up to our cult leaders ie politicians
and CEOs and things that are like they
have more power so they should be the
ones dealing with it
we can deal with it in a way that's like
okay well we can't go back and undo the
Iraq war but we can look to the future
of like when something happens like
what's happening with Iran what happened
with the plane what happened what
happened is a different thing you know
what I mean we know a plane God fell out
of the sky and people died or actually
do we know that how do we know that and
then but then from there like why did it
happen and who is responsible for it and
at no point in time are the Iranian
people responsible for it so my rating
people might be right the government
might be Trump and his administration
might be but the people aren't and so to
be able to say well why did this happen
and be able to actually follow that line
like the life of MLK like what happened
and yes there'll be great area of like
well we don't know the Israeli idea of
the history versus the Palestinian idea
of history is conflicting at the same
time they're events they agree on they
might not have agree why they happens
that they agree they happens and so to
have that like what happens and how do
we know that's what happens and what how
much of this can we agree on and how
much of it is is gray area right like we
know a plane fell from the sky
theoretically we don't necessarily know
was it bomb
you know was it train malfunction and we
know more now but also watch it unfold
and watch what is the moment of truth
now and I did see a video of it I mean
we at the end of the day we still don't
know like you're saying but I saw a
video of uh you know as a rocket or
missile or whatever you you know it's a
it's a it's a nighttime very far away
videos all you see is a little light
going into another light and then it
exploding right but I saw the the video
of ostensibly what what happened is you
know that's that's the official story
exactly pretty obscene to see it's like
you see this rocket going to a
commercial plane and then boom and it's
a ball of fire in the air and
everybody's dead like it's I mean we can
believe the official story that it was
an accident but that doesn't give me any
comfort that's pretty disturbing it's
like get your fucking fingers off of the
buttons or whatever it is and you know
like like like decommission these
weapons I know it's people responsible
actually responsible and these things
happen when someone's saying hey there's
weapons of mass destruction in this
country if we don't go in and hurt their
I mean do give them freedom and
democracy we're going to pay the price
okay well how do we know that there's
weapons of mass destruction give us the
freaking evidence and if there aren't
what are you willing to put on the line
your are you going to go to jail if it's
a lie yeah you're gonna find out what
price are you gonna pay if you go to
find there wasn't anything in the yeah
yeah I like that a lot
exactly it's a good point to close out
and to because we're at a time but
basically just the idea that like I said
these neo Cotton's like like wolf woods
and Rumsfeld and stuff they knew that
they were what they were doing was wrong
and that they would you know likely
succeed on their own terms but none of
that was carried out
in a context where their failures would
have consequences for them and that's
that's precisely the point
absolutely absolutely is because there
are consequences to fellows often anyway
exactly and if you're if you're in the
elite those consequences can be
neutralized or mitigated and that's just
not fair yeah yeah I mean they're
they're failures have catastrophic
cascading effects for hours like there's
a certain amount
personal failures and learn from them
and grow and were allowed to make
collective failures and learn from them
and grow but individual failures that
have horrific implications we need to
deal with them before they even happen
we need to look at yard there weapons of
mass destruction how do you know you
have an inkling sorry that's not enough
to go to war with actual evidence okay
and then what happens if that's not true
what happens if you faked that I like
what are the actual implications before
it ever happens um yeah I guess that is
you can say goodbye to YouTube and
discuss what we want to discuss next
week on YouTube