yellow says yeah and it doesn't let me
move so a little weird are these weird
videos also I like how they take a
picture of you for the thumbnail and I
don't know that's better or worse it's
probably better for most people
then the awkward weird one that they
just picked for like Facebook live and
stuff or if you upload a video to
YouTube it just kind of picks a random
one you can still pick a better one it's
like always like freezes you in a weird
position which I kind of prefer to like
the fake smile of the photo but that's
like a whole a whole other side today I
want to talk about a topic that is
definitely gonna get me into trouble but
then because of that it's one that I
don't necessarily talk about in coz it
brings in cultural appropriation in a
way that maybe we're not supposed to
talk about it and but it's the idea of
the individual versus the group and it's
not crystallized ideas that I can
explain really well it's still something
that I'm dealing with and it's in my
issue of one of the things that which is
not stupid alteration that I was talking
to myself in camera about this morning
was this concept of what was I doing
group versus individual oh that when
you're under stress we like our bodies
go for fight or flight just like our
autonomic nervous system is either like
fight or run away and you don't really
make a choice the whole point is it is
like a nervous system reaction to this
to the stress or the thing these
perceive as as life-threatening we as a
society there's a spectrum from like
people who flight to people people
flight to people who fight and the
fighting people we call heroic and the
fighting people we call cowards and yet
let's say it's 50/50 like we had to as a
species as a very war driven species
had to kind of make bravery the thing
that was good right because if you had
your army that you needed to fight and
they were gonna run away and tie it as
opposed to fight that's a problem and
how I was thinking about this this
morning was the difference to the group
of the individual so chances are we
survived by fleeing not by fighting
because for individuals your comp
against danger it may generally you come
out better running than fighting that's
not always the case you can chase you
and kill you that's why we do fight
sometimes but chances are I think it's
safer to run than to fight that's why
that's the option that some people take
some animals take and so that's how
we've survived in how our genetics cup
has started we were here is probably
that our ancestors ran and hid and ran
away from danger and didn't decide that
they needed to take on every tiger and
every lion but at the same time as a
group it's very different because as a
group if you have an army of a thousand
versus another army of a thousand and
half of these ones defect but only 25%
of these ones defect clearly the group
with more bravery ie less flight is
going to win over the other group and so
on a group scale fight wins and yet on a
personal scale flight wins if that if
that makes sense so for this also comes
into play for me is cultural
appropriation I was just looking at this
amazing Instagram site about things
called ask ask a POC and it is which
I've had this idea before not just for
for people of color but like for every
group right like pregnant women women
who've been gestational carriers people
who have had brain tumors y'all have had
like we're so weird in our society of
like both we want to connect with people
we connect with people it's kids
alienating it's like oh so why don't you
do to a pregnant woman it's like blonde
you're not pregnant well that's kind of
sucks don't assume people are pregnant
why are we go so fat phobic and life but
I know
like some people are okay about talking
about it would like to and then other
people aren't and it's just about
consent and asking permission then some
people even that would be uncomfortable
if it's like how do you treat somebody
even ask if they can ask me a question
and so this idea of group versus hey
someone asks someone asked on their like
how do I talk my other white friends out
of not wearing dreadlocks like how do I
explain to them that they are not
allowed to wear dreadlocks and that
always is weird to me not like I don't
want to wear dreadlocks
I don't think white people look good in
dreadlocks but it's an individual choice
so you can't say someone's not allowed
to do something with their hair or their
body because it's something that's owned
by a culture because it's not it's group
versus individuals so those are the
conversations I think we need to have on
a group scale so when we have like the
prevailing culture is like western white
culture and part of the reason that all
of that like African American culture
and I can't like let's be honest art
comes out of out of hardness right like
it's when you go through struggle as a
group you make beautiful art it's not to
say that like that should be a good
thing to put the struggle but it's
understandable that people are drawn
towards that better art at the same time
as an artist which I'm not it makes
sense that people drawn to that style of
art are gonna want to copy or bring that
into their art form right so the fact
that white people get recognition for
doing rap and R&B and jazz and stuff
that is phenomenally from black culture
that's a group conversation chin and
it's ridiculous right like that white
people are like drawn to black culture
but don't but are still few racist as
 like that's that's problematic
as a group as individuals though like
you're allowed to like what you like and
not like what you don't like and do the
art that you want to do and where the
fashion you want to wear personally it's
like it's the individual versus the
group and there's something about when
we don't have that conversation that way
the angry and loudest individuals win so
it's not like we pull a group of people
and ask
hey gay people how do you feel about
straight people being in your spaces
well 90% of you are okay and 10% of you
aren't so we are gonna let the straight
people in or or vice-versa
sorry 90% said no so you can't come here
that one would be more understandable
but instead it's like 10% of people I'm
doing 90 10 so it's very sorry 10% of
people or vocal and say you don't have
to be on out dare you be here so people
don't feel feel allowed and then the 90%
don't really have a boys like it's like
the instance it gets is is Twitter like
they'll be like Twitter exploded on this
person Twitter's racist Rogers angry
eight orders horrible and you're like
okay if you have a news poll and you ask
people some like obvious question that
like Cruz was a racist or not and it's
like 90% art and 10% are we wouldn't
look at that and be like oh my god
people racist you'd be like our races
but Twitter doesn't work like that
it's just like the ones that are the
media doesn't work like that it's like
we get like the fact there's more
violence in the news there's an action
more violence overall we just see it
more and it's the anyway that's just
some other thoughts on like that I've a
lot of thoughts of cultural
appropriation which is both what it's
trying to accomplish I very much want to
stand for I want to stand for less
racism and more equality and less like
privilege for people that this less
privilege based on stupid right but
I don't think cultural appropriation
helps that but I think that it's
flipping like it's like it lets the
anger win as opposed to like it's like a
oh gods
but my body needs yoga I don't I'm not
gonna really apologize for it
I don't even know I was trying to look
up per capita like whether cuz it's true
it was it was it's it's from India but I
don't think many Indians actually
practice it because it's not it's it's
kind of like white people saw it white
like yoga moms like you know hope so and
we're like that's my thing no and that's
not that's not a lot that's cultural
appropriation like all of it is that but
at the same time I don't know there's
some truth there for me where I'm like
wait if it has been like so co-opted
that it's actually kind of like when I
hear yoga I think of like I don't know
if if I'm wrong in that if it is
predominantly one if the people on the
planet practicing yoga if there's more
Indian people practicing it then white
people that's probably the case because
there's more Indian people but if that's
not the case it's definitely not like
prom prominent in India like because
there is more of them but I was talking
per capita basis and per capita there's
definitely more Americans that practice
yoga then Indians that practice yoga I
tried to look up those statistics and I
couldn't so that's just my like
assumption that might be wrong like I
don't know like who owns it I'm like I
don't and these just things like to say
that like this is the right way and this
is the wrong way and anyone who thinks
that culture probations like the worst
thing on the world is like racist and
horrible I'm like no it's like it's my
feelings and I like me I need to allow
people to speak not I don't need a
podium to speak on I don't need to be
like suppressing people color talking
about how it's affecting them because if
I have a friend who is like listen you
can't know i'ma stay people like that's
not I wouldn't I'd be like okay I will
not use that term in front of you if it
triggers you if it's like I will not use
it but there's a reason I use it because
it is part of it's like how I say Amen
at the end of dinner when I'm praying
with my my my mom but I don't pray when
she's not around like a and she knows
that I'm not like living a lie it's like
okay I can be part of this and say like
a bee
into prayer when it's like amen even if
I'm not necessarily Christian and want
to want to give and I don't pray it's
like all right it's like namaste the God
in me slits or ballast to the God in you
like I'm like there's something so
beautiful about that and like anything
we use repeatedly it loses its meaning
and I get like I don't know how it's all
about the idea of the group versus
individual I was also happy in the
scanner as I said these are not
crystallized thoughts and so this video
I did before which is a nice on here
it's on the Facebook group of the normal
curve and how how it like you don't
really pick where you are like height
wise intelligence wise anything and your
ability to even move up on it like get
more intelligent get more skill even
that is its own its own thing of luck on
that on the the normal curve and the
point is as I was also looking Adam like
dealing with out on an individual basis
is like okay I very much feel there is
no better in worse right like bravery
versus cowardice clearly bravery is
better but that's because we've labeled
the flight cowardice it's like that's
not what it is it's like okay confront
or run away and those are both have
their places and they both you're more
likely to survive when you run away and
with a group like so it's an individual
it's like you have a certain skill set
and that either makes you better worse
than other people and that's not true it
makes you different than other people
but not better or some other people and
looking at that whole like where people
are going to give their action and
workplace to yeah and dealing with like
okay well people who give more more
voice like the 20/80 rule we're like 20
percent of the people do 80% of the work
twenty percent of the effort gives you
eighty percent of the outcome and
thinking about that in terms of like
well weight or if you're part of that 20
percent how does that feel cuz I'm
rarely part about 20 percent do you feel
like you're doing way more and obviously
you see people or are you happy to do it
because that's the I want to tap into
the happy to do it part if those people
are never happy to do it then we like
we're gonna have to the eighty percent
are gonna have to do the 20 percent
it'll be a new 20 percent who do the 80
percent the 20 percent to get the joy
out of the 80 percent
but like that there is like where are
you and I haven't written this down yet
so I need to like sit with paper and
draw it out of like that you there's
like what what you can do like your
skill level with what you want to do
your desire to do it and somehow like if
one surpasses the other what does that
look like and there was a third factor
and I remember what it was then the
group part clicked into my head I was
like oh this is kind of like racism like
it's it's but it's on the group level
where it's like one group thinks they're
better than everyone else and that like
the loudest the people on the far end
like the loudest voices get heard and
there's like something there that I'm
still working with I'm like oh yeah this
seems to be but it's also really weird
because like I'm like everyone's equal
everyone's even it doesn't matter
whether you're flight or fight it's like
you're put on this planet you're
supposed to be on this planet you're
supposed to be who you are so how what
does that look like when when they're
they are less desirable category can
decide on what ends of the spectrum and
what does that look like for groups like
in groups fall along a spectrum if it's
like okay I don't know I like people who
are part of this culture you know what I
mean for any given trait are gonna be
more likely to fall somewhere in versus
other ones which is how demographics
works it's like if your culture what's
the word incentivize it's one thing
that's gonna be more in your population
right if you incentivize bravery if you
incentivize cooperation if you
incentivize beauty those things are more
likely to be in your your that's how
evolution works and we're likely about
Sonya generation and so different
cultures are gonna have if they were
breeding individually in groups separate
from other people they're gonna have
different qualities and the issue isn't
that one is better or worse it's that
this no no like and then there's with
the inner group like if you're part of
this a group and B group is different
each have good and bad categories and
there's people in the a group who don't
identify with the a group of people in
the B here note about the B group and
whether or not the eight groups open to
be people joining them and vice versa is
a whole other
other issue but I don't know I'm gonna
stop here because it's 15 minutes at a
verdict on wait too long and I'm just
gonna go on Paris go and maybe chat so
that people can um join it if they want
to and I won't be feeling quite so
isolated hats and yes hopefully whatever
I did say this video a cultural creation
is something that I both like don't want
to talk about because it's not my space
and something that like constantly comes
up in my mind of like wait this doesn't
sit right with me and this is weird and
this is hurting the people it's supposed
to be helping in real ways and can you
talk about it no okay and I'm kind of
both okay with this isn't the time or
place constantly and wait this has to be
bit like somewhere has to be the time in
place and so city knows I cata me like
yes we need this and do we need this all
at the same time and that I'm very white
presenting and don't have much of a
platform or voice on this matter but
it's not I'm trying to talk about like
the group versus the individual and
being able to separate those into four
conversations