[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
I was listening to that announcement you
made about the emerg podcast this
morning actually just thinking about so
you saying that you're changing
direction a little bit perhaps for
exploring what was the phrase you used
say systems and systems transformation
with the grounding in say personal
development and then perhaps looking at
it from the other direction like going
more into actually personal development
in the context of the fact that we're
going through systems change
I was running like maybe it would be an
interesting topic to just explore first
is like why this sense of a need for
personal development that say levelling
up humanity and how we express ourselves
as humans within this time and as you
said I don't know if you have with the
answers to that but I was important you
got - sure sure with that yeah so why
why the focus on personal development or
personal change yeah well so one one
thing that I think I'm really fascinated
by and this is probably to some degree
my Buddhist training is that it seems
obvious to me and to many people that
there is this dichotomy between systems
change and personal transformation and
yet I also have this thinking suspicion
that it's a false dichotomy right that
there actually it's like an artifact of
our misperception that we even separate
the two at all and in fact we can sort
of like acknowledge that this system
which I think that you and I kind of
agree is has some fundamental issues
that we need to kind of work out with
some degree of urgency you know because
the biosphere isn't like waiting to
unravel it's unraveling now that that
that it the this
system that is currently the problem has
already been that which has constructed
us so the mind that is attempting to
find a way out is the very mind that was
built or the very human you know that
was built by the system which is self
terminating and so there's this kind of
like like a recursive chicken and egg
problem when we think about systems
change in personal development and so
you know I in any case like the
conversations I had in the podcast have
always been like looking in kind of
refracting through a side but always
acknowledging that you can't talk about
one without the other that there is a
way in which they're deeply together
they are not separate and that I think
the attempt to do systems change without
changing our perception changing our
perspective is itself like deeply
misguided in some fundamental way which
I can't even really express it's more
like a felt sense and similarly like the
idea that we can somehow just atomized
ourselves and change ourselves over here
without a relationship to the larger
system and the systems that were
embedded in that also is well first of
all feels very boring to me but then
also I think is just not like a real
thing it's kind of like a bad thought
it's like not actually how things work
in the world so yeah that's that's kind
of like where I'm at and went with the
with the shift in the podcast it was
kind of like noticing that I was sitting
over here with the kind of in the
personal change kind of reaching out to
the systems change if we're going to
maintain this dichotomy and now I'm kind
of moving over with the view that I have
generated through all these
conversations speaking with people like
some of whom you're speaking with that I
now have of like okay this is the flavor
the taste the texture of the world that
we want to create together like how then
do we then look
back on what is possible in terms of
personal transformation from that new
view and so that's kind of the ship it's
it's it's it's a it for me I experienced
it as being quite subtle but it also
will result I think in quite different
conversations going forward mmm I mean
something that was coming to mind for me
while you were speaking there is this
sense that human beings we are ourselves
systems that exist within system for a
system of thoughts and recurrent
thoughts and recurrent emotional
patterns and indeed bodily systems
gastro systems fluids and electricity
moving around us all the time and there
isn't a line between that system and the
except really other than save the skin
and what we can feel but like if I
didn't eat this morning then I would be
grouchy now if I didn't have friends and
family and loved ones around me then I'd
be a hell of a lot more miserable than I
am now we wouldn't be having this
conversation if it was a matter of fact
that we both exist within some kind of
shared system within one another then
that makes me think perhaps even to this
idea that we've lived under this this
idea of say perhaps individualism for
quite a long time that people are
autonomous rulers of this own Kingdom
that begins here and ends there and that
legitimizes a lot of the economic
structures we live under as well because
the people who are most effective at
ruling that Kingdom from here to here
are those who get to win but well when
you pick it apart it's not
simple there's that phrase man is legion
for example which I really like and I
think that really speaks to the matter
like each one of us is many competing
sub personalities and some of them
oriented towards might be good that true
and the good and the beautiful and some
of them are not an understanding that
and getting just a feel for that before
even really trying to go in and in size
on it and change it but just
understanding how all these pieces of
working and where there's conflict
between them and where there's harmony
it matters and it seems from that
perspective now like artificial to draw
that line between weapons here and what
happens out there because they'd want a
microcosm with the other mmm yeah yeah
and what comes to mind and this is I
think something that Zach Stein has
really clarified for me I know you've
had on the show recently it's like well
I I sometimes think about it in terms of
like maladaptive software that's been
installed if and so you know we can we
can play with a way of looking that sees
that there is no such individual or no
such thing as an individual right and
that can be very useful to kind of see
the situation in a in a new way perhaps
it can also be very useful to see that
there are individuals like that I'm
talking to you and that can help us kind
of reflect or refract the situation in a
different way and so one of my kind of
operating assumptions is that that sort
of flexibility in how we look is
actually the kind of meta move that's
most important that we can say operate
from the perspective of the human and in
the case that you're speaking about like
what comes to mind is liberal humanism
and the way in which this this kind of
philosophical almost like it is a kind
of metaphysics it's a claim about the
way the world works right so the way
that I render it is like liberalism is
this idea that we ought to design an
economic system that more or less is
oriented towards satisfying human
preferences right that we and and
humanism is that like you said is
something like the man is the measure of
all things and so you look at that kind
of core operating system which for me
was so deeply embedded into my
psychology and my organism that has
taken me years to even sort of be able
to peer out of it and you kind of
collectivize that and you see of course
we're destroying the planet
of course were destroying the planet
if you take those two core assumptions
and it also kind of comes down and
creates this sense of you know other
things greatness too but of me being
over here are you being over there me
somehow having some kind of separate
apart existence from the systems that
I'm embedded in and so I think it's
really helpful to look at what are the
assumptions and ways of seeing that
perhaps are constellated the problem
like you say like it's not so simple we
need to spend perhaps all of our time
almost all of our time actually getting
clear about the situation in the problem
space and and less of it acting I think
because to act with a misunderstanding
of what the problem actually is is quite
likely to just create new problems that
we then have to solve
oh I can't hear you
if that's me still can't hear you you
can hear me though
there you go yeah you got me yeah
okay now now I have to try and remember
that thread yes I mean
one of my thinking is
right conflict conflict that exists
within people that so often then ends up
getting projected outwards is
fascinating and perhaps one of those
real interesting insights a of the debt
psychology movement that often the parts
of self that we are most uncomfortable
with we will identify in those around us
really pick on so I mean I can talk from
experience having at times felt like
I've been just out of control with
certain destructive behavior patterns
consumptive behavior patterns and then
when I see that happening you see
someone else engaging in that there's
like a real visceral disgust to it it's
like dude why are you doing that and and
when we
talking about this personal development
great stuff I mean that's such a broad
umbrella but
I think well a big part of it for me
recently has been like understanding
these points of conflict and then
- just like if the conflict can't be
gotten rid of then at least get rid of
some of the feelings of frustration or
guilt around the fact that that conflict
exists I'm actually not entirely sure
where I'm going with that you can
referred there yeah well I mean there's
there's a there's a kind of
sophistication that I think that you're
referring to which I in in my world so
part of the reason why I made this shift
in the podcast is also because I live at
this place called a monastic Academy and
there I'm doing a lot of work to design
curriculum and the the the stated
purpose of the curriculum is to create
what we sometimes call awakened leaders
but essentially you can unpack that to
mean people who have the capacity to
lean into the world in such a way that
it kind of bends toward justice bends
toward goodness constructs the more
beautiful world our hearts tell us is
possible and so there's this ongoing
inquiry about how do we create those
people what does it mean to create those
people and when I hear you speak about
how you have this kind of reflexivity
about what it means to judge another
that for me is like a kind of almost
like a core component of that sort of
person right they and and I I mean we
have this we do a practice called
circling at many are familiar circling
it's like a relational meditation
practice at maple Manasseh Academy and
one of the teachers there has brought
this fantastic little what is it like
add on practice with encircling there's
called mere swords and so we typically
have like a sign like some this is audio
you can't see it but I'm holding my hand
in such a way that I can indicate you
right so I say I have a mere sword for
you and that's it that means like a
judgement that I have about you but that
I know that I then hold up the mirror
because it also means that I have the
judgment about me right and this is like
a very as you say like a union sort of
this goes way back but that we can even
see that I think is a huge innovation in
human consciousness because most people
are just totally blind to the way that
they
check that out into the world right and
how much peacefulness and coherence can
we generate by owning our projections
but then also like by sharing them with
each other so that we can all grow if
that's the state of intention so it's
like I love that kind of thing I love it
because not just to see
oh I'm judging you I must have that part
inside of me and I probably have a kind
of messed up relationship with it but
then also to either tell other people
because that's like the courageous thing
to do and quite beautiful I think but
also to be told there's somebody to care
enough about you to give you their nasty
 they're nasty judgements it's like
I I serious that as being such a gift
and so beautiful when people care enough
about me to tell me how they like see
know are judging the hell out of me and
and three that's increasingly I see that
as like a core capacity of these kinds
of people that we want to create is like
the courage and willingness to be
transparent about these kind of things
instead of as is very common in
spiritual circles kind of just like
hiding them and maybe doing the work
yourself a little bit but like you know
I don't I don't want to be seen as
judgemental I don't think it's Eve it's
having these tendencies yeah there's
something very
liberating about being able to show
those you know less what would I call
them it's not less desirable but like
less normally socially acceptable signs
of self others and it's it's you know
I've been thinking a lot recently around
this idea of perfection and this
standard of convention that I think to
just some degree well I don't know if I
can say everybody because I don't know
but I certainly have walked around with
the inside my head link I think there's
a deep unconscious sense of like having
to be perfect and having to be perfect
means having to like everybody and be
totally at peace in every situation and
and manifest a kind of goodness and
trust and love towards everybody but the
issue is if that just leads to you being
inauthentic and holding back and then
then it's missing something and there is
that freedom that comes with with
opening that space up and really being
able to just own in company the fact
that we have we have nasty bits you know
I'm reminded of my a conversation we had
with Ian McGilchrist a few months and
one of the things that just reminds this
stuck in my head was he said as a
psychiatrist one of the things that he
just heard and was fascinated by over
and over again was how many people on a
deep level really believe that they're
perfect and that they have to be perfect
hmm but how much
inner conflict and as a result Alta
conflict gets produced as a result of
the fact that things don't really match
up with that idea and I guess where my
thought has gone recently is like oh if
it is a correct statement to say that
there seems to be something that exists
within what would you say the
unconscious makeup of released a lot of
us is this idea of perfection where does
that come from now if we learn idea what
are your thoughts on that do you think
it's a fair judgment of people to have
description of psychic makeup well I
mean I can certainly I'll speak for
myself because I don't have a lot of
training in this area but
I've been sometimes I used the four
facet model from integral philosophy to
talk about like human development so
I've been doing a lot of what is called
in that model cleaning up recently like
working with shadow material sort of
like what we've been talking about a
little bit and I've noticed for me that
my drive to perfection is constellated
as a response to a deep feeling of
inadequacy worthlessness and brokenness
right that there's this kind of like
feeling belief that I'm worthless that
I'm somehow fundamentally broken and
that like that got encrusted over with
this compensatory drive towards
appearing to be perfect and smart and
competent and yeah I mean it's been a
ball and chain that I've been wearing
for most of my life and it's only
recently as I've kind of gotten
underneath it to look at these sort of
wounds or these beliefs that I felt a
little bit liberated by it but I I in my
model I think as I'm speaking I'm
realizing this in my model I imagine or
I believe that those who feel that like
intense drive to perfection also having
them this deep wound of inadequacy
worthlessness something like that and so
that I noticed that having that
perspective generates a lot of
compassion both for myself in those
instances but also for others who I see
operating from that yeah yeah I'm
curious what you what you feel about it
or not I think that that resonates I
mean where I've been thinking is more
from the actual I've been thinking about
it in terms of religion and spiritual
worldviews actually where my wandering
is is that is it some kind of hangover
from seeing existence through like a
kind of two world lens mmm and that
there is the perfect divine sphere and
then the fallen sinful corrupt
human world and just wondering if you
know use the word software earlier in
the conversation if that software has
been run by people far mmm thousands of
years we may say at least at least a
couple of thousand years yeah and then
even if perhaps we no longer consciously
adhere to the idea that this is the
world of original sin I'm lapsing into
Christian but we're in the West we're no
longer but we're still in that world and
that there is the transcendent world
that exists somewhere but it's not
access to church anymore I mean even
perhaps it tax itself on to that
mythology of liberal humanism like that
perfect world exists that place you can
get to if you just buy the right things
yeah serve yourself out by the right
things yeah yeah I think there's a lot
to what you're saying I think it's yeah
there's so many different ways of
looking at this and I I think I hadn't
yet explored as much as I ought to the
sort of Christian roots of some of these
ideas but it must be the case right that
like that original sin is functioning in
my consciousness to a greater degree and
not our consciousness to a greater
degree that we think and yeah I I think
it you know in general though like what
also comes up for me is that within the
sort of more spiritual milieu there's
this very kind of this platitude that
everything is perfect
right like and and you should
acknowledge that everything is perfect
spiritually everything is perfect and it
to a certain degree if you could just
see that you would be happy and chill
and whatever and again that what comes
to mind is is what we really want to
cultivate is a flexibility in ways of
seeing because it's really awesome to
see that everything is perfect it's
excellent it's an excellent way to see
things that you are already perfect that
nothing needs to be done that perfection
is like an imminent experience that is
just available to you right
now if you just stop struggling like
that's awesome really profoundly
beautiful and also like is mad
broken and we have to work our asses off
to fix it and I want to be around people
who can like oscillate skilfully between
those two and many other ways of seeing
the situation because that's really for
me like that's the that's the key that's
the dance it's like can we like pick up
and let go of these frames in order to
explore usefully and be a benefit in
this time of transition it's like that
you can't get stuck even when I say oh
you know these this drive to perfection
has its roots and inadequacy it's like
that's just a way of looking that it
depends on a whole psychological frame
that you know I'm not committed to if
that might be completely wrong way to
look at it maybe it better to look at it
in this case more like from a Christian
kind of historical construction where
maybe it's better to look at it like
from the perspective of this sacred that
we're all kind of like struggling in
this schoolhouse of life to overcome
those kind of what look like wounds but
are actually catalyst for our own
development and for the state like the
salvation of the world like maybe that's
more of an interesting and useful way to
look at I don't know but I want to be
around people who like I also don't know
and want to play like that mmm
you know I'm thinking now of the last
chapter of Zack Stein's book that I read
because of your podcast thing you know
you know the last chapter right I
presume where he's talking I mean about
what are the books on
education for people listening and the
last chapter is really about spiritual
education and he quotes a bunch from
slavery Jack's writing on Western
Buddhism and the gtex argument that in
some sense a certain form of Buddhism
has become the religion par excellence
for capitalism but the very fact that it
pretty much teaches accept yeah step the
way things are be at peace with it life
is suffering but you can transcend it if
you just let go of your desires it's
just kind of funny given that I mean as
you've already pointed out like the
paradigm we live under it's all about
the satisfaction of desires and kind of
weird sense of transcendence through
achieving and chasing desire
hmm yeah yeah I love I love its critique
I mean he called this is very strongly
when she calls it
I think the hegemonic ideology of late
capitalism which that's pretty caustic
that's pretty radical and yeah I mean
what comes to mind it's just like I know
so many people okay wait let me make
sure this is a fair assessment I used to
live in Boulder Colorado very much a
center for spirituality in America and
there were I knew or it was common for
people to be Buddhist and consist
consume so much stuff go to Whole Foods
you know participate in this whole
emerging economy and there's something
that feels to me very tricky about this
area it's like I and I did it - I did it
- and I used Buddhism I used these
practices to kind of numb out and to
chill well participating in what I if I
really asked myself and I'm really
honest with myself our systems that are
destroying the planet and so there's
there's something more here than just
there's got to be something more here
than just feeling good I'm feeling at
peace and giving up some of our desires
for our own well-being and it's yeah I
don't know what else to say other than I
I just I really feel resonant with that
concern that slob logic has I don't
think he gives enough credit to Buddhism
I think like Western Buddhism is it was
a kind of particular synthesis of
Buddhism that is you know or the Western
Buddhism that he was critiquing is is a
particularly problematic strain of
Buddhism it doesn't have to be like that
and Buddhism itself isn't any particular
way but yeah
yeah well I'm interested in the perhaps
the contrast between spiritual practices
that seem to be about escaping and
transcending the world versus ones that
seem to be about optimizing yourself for
actually being in the world now I think
you get strands of that within all
origins I mean it reminds me it goes
back to that point I was making perhaps
that is again my thinking around that to
world mythology if you're constantly
wrapped up in the sense that there is
the perfect sphere and we're not in it
and the way to get there well I don't
know if it's do spiritual practice
produce through something but you're
never quite there and so there's always
a kind of inability to be fully present
with the here and now
although that's interesting because then
I think of the mindfulness movement
which seems to have taken the practices
out of the East and remove them of their
spiritual bent and then it's like well
it's all about learning to be in the
here and now but I think that also uses
something so now we're at like to have
multi-perspective ilysm again yeah so
it's so tricky and this is I mean this
is what I spent so much of my time kind
of quote-unquote trying to figure out
right like how do we deploy what Jon
Verve a key would call like an ecology
of practices in such a way that it
actually resolves some of these like
maladaptive conditionings and ways of
looking such that we are like we can be
liberated to participate in this time
between worlds like what does that look
like and it is not easy it is not easy
it's not easy in there's so many ways in
which these practices these technologies
can instead of liberating that possible
future version
of ourselves become reduced into
something that reifies and gives
permission to some of that maladaptive
conditioning and it's like it's very
very very very tricky each time that I
think I have a or typically when I think
that I know what it will take I later
find that I was actually like doing the
very thing that I was just saying kind
of like taking a partial perspective and
like wanting it to be a certain way it's
it's endlessly fascinating to me and
endlessly humbling I've been spending
some time more recently in the kind of
circles of Alexander bard the
philosopher mm-hmm he is interesting
because he seems to be in this space but
then also with a kind of different angle
and I think he seems to be having this
spirituality around creativity and
creating a sense of a grand narrative I
mean I suppose one of his big pointers
we need a grand narrative again which
well it's interesting to observe that he
seems to get under the skin of some of
the more American like anglo-saxon
people in this space who there's a sense
that actually grand narratives are over
and that we need this like meta modern
multi-perspective ilysm but also like to
chill out and let come let emerge rather
than trying to to like push through it I
don't know if I'm doing the best justice
to spective here but
there is that it's an interesting
dichotomy that's going on there and I'm
fascinated by the fact that there seems
to be some rivalry hmm like for example
I've heard Alexander refer to the kind
of stuff that were bunch of you North
Americans doing is that they're doing
good stuff but ultimately they're just
sitting around in circles talking which
which people so I would think the the
neuro hacker collective guy the
collective intelligence death yes yes
yeah John drove a key as well like I
think in fact the language is used it's
like they're working on on the will to
intelligence but not the will to
transcendence which is mmm to build to
actually build that which comes next as
opposed to just he would use the phrase
talking about what comes next
mmm yeah I mean it's sure and we need to
talk about what comes next before we
build it and we probably should you know
talk about it well and when we when that
tipping point comes I think is you know
different people have different
sensibilities around that and also like
I kind of agree I mean that's why I
lives where I live I feel like I am in
fact building and participating in
creating what comes next which you know
we could get into that but you know I'm
I also would I talk a lot about kind of
perspectival flexibility and meta
perspective flexibility at the same time
if all of that flexibility is not in
service
other grand narratives so to speak then
like it's feels quite masturbatory
I think that that grand narrative is
implicit in things like the neuro hacker
collective right but we can make it
explicit the world is on fire
leverage your perspectives choose
perspectives accordingly right this is
the time to show up this is the time
when we need heroes you ought to become
a hero use your perspective of
flexibility to create or recreate
yourself as a hero and that for me is
the creative impulse right is that we
now get to decide it's hard we can do it
to create ourselves into these heroic
individuals who can stand forth and
attempt to do the impossible the
seemingly impossible of what Jordan
green Hall calls threading the eye of
the needle and actually coming out the
other side of it in a way that we're
better off than when we started
and that is exciting to me that bat for
me like fills me with you know libido as
Alexander bard might like College yeah
that felt good Daniel I've been
passionate I liked it yeah yeah I mean
this is what I care really almost the
most about
[Music]
[Music]
you