hey everybody it is Jack Murphy and you
are back on the Jack Murphy live podcast
the flagship podcast of the liminal
order you can find me on Twitter at Jack
Murphy live at the web site Jack Murphy
live.com come stop by see what we're up
to join the mailing list and get
involved with our community the reporter
but enough about all that today I have a
guest on the podcast that I'm very
excited about his name is beau
Weingarten he is an evolutionary
psychologist and I've been a big fan of
yours beau on Twitter for a while now
and I've also been digging in through
your back work in your current work and
I find that we've got a lot of stuff to
talk about so I really appreciate you
joining me today and how's it going for
you man awesome I'm having a good day it
was my first day of class at Marietta
the first day of school
well it doesn't ever change or is it the
same every year it's a it's equally
exciting every every year that I've got
how long have you been teaching there
well this is my second year at Marietta
College I taught as a graduate student
at Florida State I think I taught for
four years there so this is about my
fifth year of teaching year of teaching
yeah so that I just want to get a little
background - that's a good start for us
because I don't know personally I don't
really know too terribly much about your
background either so can you tell me
just give me the quick you know the
quick story on how you came to be where
you are right now and especially how you
are have come to be sort of so prolific
on some of these important issues that
we're going to talk about today yeah I
don't I I don't know how far back I want
to go or you want me to go so I'll just
sort be a professional and an education
background and yeah I guess
educationally I was I went to undergrad
at Grand Valley State University which
is just a small college and Allendale
Michigan and I've just been a reader for
most of my adult life prodigious reader
I like fiction a lot poetry I was
actually in literature for a long time
but I was also interested in
evolutionary psychology biology and I
tried to I tried to find the field that
would allow me to sort of synthesize my
disk
interests I thought psychology is is
sort of the sort of like a focal point
where the humanities and the hard
sciences come together that's what I
thought at least so that's why I got
into psychology has that has that
perspective changed at all since you got
into it it's changed a lot yeah I well
I've become more skeptical of most
psychology and I've become more
interested in oddly both history and
genetics I see as sort of the more
important fields now for understanding
human nature right and I you know I
think that a lot of people are getting
that same sense right and as the our
ability to learn more about our genes
and how they play out in our day-to-day
lives in our culture and society I think
more and more people are starting to get
that sense as well how has that affected
your you know sort of your work in your
field and and your your progress as a as
a you know an evolutionary psychologist
um yeah that's an interesting question
so I guess well so I still think
evolutionary psychology is an important
intellectual edifice it's an important
sort of I mean because genetics they
don't really make sense without
understanding natural selection and
understanding evolutionary theory so
evolutionary psychology is still sort of
like the foundation of my thinking but
then just as far as most like
traditional psychology you think about
lab studies and these sort of theories
that aren't as grounded in evolution I
just don't have a lot of confidence that
that are true or that they're actually
explaining much and we have replication
crises and a lot of the effects that we
get are kind of small and it's not clear
what they mean and then I look at
genetics and I see how much they their
fields actually progressive its advanced
they're making new discoveries every
year we're getting more associations
between snips as they call them single
nucleotide polymorphism
and behaviors or traits and it's just
amazing what they can do and that you're
doing you know ancient DNA from
Neanderthals and we're looking at me we
know that Neanderthals and a lot mostly
non Africans interbred these are things
that's like tangible progress right
that's knowledge that we've actually
accumulated whereas I look at social
psychology and I'm like are we any
better than we were in 1950 do we do we
know a lot more
I mean maybe and I don't want to
disparage Social Psychology too much I'm
a social psychologist technically that's
what my my dissertation my doctor is and
bought I'm pretty disgruntled with the
field of Social Psychology I think I've
learned more from reading history books
than I have from reading Social
Psychology tax laws well you know it's
interesting I heard a Peter teal and
Eric Weinstein talking about how there's
been a lot of progress in the science of
bits and technology but not a lot of
progress in the science of physics and
they sort of they didn't get into
genetics and it's interesting that you
bring up this idea that in the field of
genetics there has been a ton of
progress and there has been a ton of
learning and there there is a system in
place that seems to reward you know
continued evolution and thinking there
whereas in some of the other humanities
especially it seems that the system in
place actually is retarding progress
there yeah I think the thing with
genetics right is it depends because
there is sort of the the smaller level
and then there's the more broad
theoretical perspective and so in the
theoretical perspective I actually think
the field although it's constantly
making progress and it's figuring out
how human human groups cluster and
ancestries etc actually the theoretical
the conversation is retarded by the same
political concerns that actually in my
opinion stultify progress in the rest of
the social sciences right there the
concerns about race about group
differences those things actually do
awry
but it's just they don't affect the
concrete analyses and so you get
progress in the concrete analyses but
then when people talk about like what
does this mean etcetera and I can give
you an example right for example Nicolas
Wade's book a troublesome inheritance
which was published I think it was 2014
it might have been 2015 it was I I would
advise any of your your listeners who
are skeptical or who have heard bad
things about it or read bad reviews
about it to read it for themselves but
there are some problems with it but it's
a pretty good account of what we know
about race today and it was absolutely
excoriated by population geneticists who
ended up writing I don't know how many
signed it I think 160 or some maybe even
more signed this open letter denouncing
the book and then it got published in
the New York Times and it's just tragic
to me because it's a book that it's
judicious and it tries to do a good job
of sort of bringing population genetics
together with what you know sort of
racial thinking for the past hundred
years or whatever and putting this
together in a synthesis that was really
interesting and so that that's all you
could you give a quick summary of what
you're talking about there cuz for
people oh yeah or just you know the yeah
either sort of your takeaways from there
that you you know caused you to remark
on it here yeah yeah so I mean I was or
is interesting because I already I kind
of got into thinking about human
variation and maybe in earnest and maybe
like two thousand twelve or thirteen and
I didn't want to write anything about it
because I didn't want to get myself in
trouble and I wanted to get a job after
I got out of grad school and so I was
kind of just sitting on it and thinking
about it and reading more about it and
then I heard this book was coming out
from Nicholas Wade and he was a
respected science journalist at the New
York Times who had been writing about
human evolution and in fact he had - he
had written two books previously about
human evolution before the dawn and then
one of
religion that I don't I don't recall the
name so I was really excited about it
and so the basic framework looks
something like this
humans this is a simplified story but
something like this you know humans
evolved in Africa and somewhere in you
know probably Eastern Africa I mean
exactly what it doesn't really matter
about let's say 200,000 years ago or so
and about 60,000 50,000 years ago or
whatever
spread out up through the Middle East
you know it's complicated because
there's a lot of admixture groups in
Europe mixed with peoples from the
steppes etc so it's a complicated story
but humans you know inhabited many
different regions of the world that had
different selection pressures right they
were colder they had long winters they
had different flora and fauna
they had different amounts of
ultraviolet radiation and we what we
would expect from natural selection
pretty straightforward is that if you
evolved in relative isolation again
there's there's admixture there's
breeding going on but groups from
Scandinavia let's say from 3,000 years
ago a lot of those people are in the
same basic area their ancestors right so
you evolve under different selective
regimes you evolve different traits you
get different skin color you get
different hair texture you get different
no size you get different cheek
structures you get all sorts of
different things
um adaptations to altitude you get among
Tibetans Ethiopians I believe and
somewhere in South America and South
America all these different adaptations
anyway so you get different groups what
we call race is you know those are the
broader categories so you can say
continental races and you're just
talking about Africans Asians North East
Asians Europeans Oceania and American
Indians or em or Indians or Indians
Native American or whatever and then you
can subdivide those further and the
basic idea is we would also expect
psychological differences among these
groups not huge differences right but
just slightly different
and there are different propensity z'
and that's what Wade argued Wade argued
that's what we would expect and indeed
that's what evidence suggests and the
reason Wade thought it was really
important the thing he seemed to think
was very interesting about this was it
suggests that different groups of people
however you want to categorize em races
human populations whatever you want to
call them creates slightly different
cultures because of the type of people
they are
right and so so Asians maybe are a
little bit more agreeable a little bit
more conformist than Europeans so they
create slightly different cultures than
Europeans create and although they have
very small differences individual trades
when you aggregate the people and you
create a culture that can lead to very
big cultural difference rights right
yeah so that's the basic framework that
Wade had I had already come to this
conclusion I'm not I mean I'm sure Wade
had come to a long time before this but
I was already ripe for this idea I had
these like very similar ideas that I was
thinking about and when hit so what his
book came out I think 2015 I decided to
go public I wrote a review of his book
right I was like alright whatever I'm
gonna write a review of his book and be
honest about it with my brother and then
I was like you know what these ideas are
just too good they're too explanatory
somebody needs to write a very good sort
of popular article on this and so I
eventually with my brother and then
another professor Bryan Boutwell we
wrote an article about it for eventually
got published in evolutionary
psychological science so we wrote that
article and I've just been fascinated by
the separation stance and as you can see
from my I think the review one of the
things you said we'd talk about probably
the review of the syma races also
Alliance of race yeah so uh I'm just
gonna sort of freeze down here for a
second you you were way shirt while you
were talking a question popped into my
head well first a comment and a question
the first comment is like to me the idea
that this is some sort of radical notion
that's like new on the scene in the last
five to eight years seems crazy right
it is it seems it seems very logical the
second thing was and this is kind of
just out of left field but if the
aggregated differences result in
slightly different cultures does that
mean that perhaps these different these
aggregated differences may also lend
themselves to people thriving under
various forms of government and also to
yeah that so what it was try to pin that
question because that's a great question
and something that I've been thinking
about lately I want to know something
about the first comment you made the
first comment you made was about how
this is some like radically new or idea
or whatever it's just bizarre to you
it's not actually a new idea it's
something that people took for granted
since the 1800s and then it got it
became so politically incorrect that it
basically went underground so if you go
back and you read for example I've been
reading the anthropologist Carleton
Coons writings on race and he's often
caricature it as just this silly racist
but you go and you readers work and it's
just I mean he's wrong about some things
he's writing in the 40s 50s and 60s
right but it's so it matches like the
world as I see it quite well and it's
very informative and interesting and
then at some point people stopped
writing about it or most people did
write because they just get you in
trouble people call you racist you might
lose your job etc so it's not a new idea
it's sort of like the rebirth of an old
idea I would say the second question is
a very interesting one in the answer I
think the short answer to it is yes I do
think that called people create cultures
that are sort of attuned to their
psychological traits and so it makes
sense to me and we have to do a lot more
research on this of course I mean I
qualify it by saying I don't know this
is speculative with some evidence but it
makes sense to me that yes if you put
say a bunch of Japanese people together
they will create a culture that is
different from the culture that a bunch
of German people will make and it's
different in a way that suits that are
and tendencies and and that means I
think and this is something that I'm
kind of grappling with now that
Universal liberalism maybe isn't the
ideal for everybody
now that doesn't and now this is
interesting right because when I had
this tweet about this and people went
crazy on it and we're saying oh are you
saying human rights aren't universal no
I'm not saying I'm just saying that
maybe certain people like what we would
consider an unnecessarily authoritarian
social structure might not be to certain
groups of people
right I mean it would that also apply
sort of with it to the strata within the
same same group so what you know I think
just sort of in a hierarchies within the
same groups right like maybe people with
different cognitive abilities different
emotional makeups and whatnot may be
more inclined to thrive under certain
governments or regimes and yeah and all
the alternatives as well what's crazy is
I wrote down on this question while
reading your stuff and I scratched it
out because it's too dangerous to ask
what I'm gonna ask I'm gonna ask but and
then we then we can actually just ask
the the revised question the first
question was does everyone deserve
freedom and I I scratched that out
because man we can't start talking about
that so let's stuff let's change it to
does everyone thrive in freedom right
right okay so so be yeah because there's
everybody deserve freedom sansa so
freedom's like an unbridled good and
like if you're a good if you're a decent
human you you should get it but maybe if
not you don't deserve it or something so
so yeah I think the second question is
better and I would say no I would say
they don't I I don't I don't think that
there's strong evidence that now I mean
the thing that's hard about this right
is that the word freedom especially in
the United States just sounds as though
it's an unalloyed Rahad
everybody loves freedom if you're
against freedom
you're an evildoer or a bad person or
whatever right so when you say some
people don't thrive
in in a free they don't use freedom as
responsibly as other people that sounds
bad but I don't think that it needs to
and I don't even think that it's
necessarily good to thrive in freedom
I'm not really making value judgments on
it so let's take a difference I take a
clear example I don't think those people
would look at are you familiar with
Amish people sure okay the Anabaptist I
think most people in the United States
are familiar with them at least I
wouldn't it they're they're not and they
don't inhabit a liberal society liberal
with a smaller all right not liberal but
liberal I don't think anybody would look
at the Amish is sort of the Paragons of
freedom on the other hand it seems to me
that their culture works for them and
that the people who inhabit it are to my
knowledge perfectly happy with it and I
don't see why that's wrong that that's
probably not a battery and I get I guess
so you could look across the Pacific
think a in China so like maybe maybe
they're just inclined in a different way
to have a different relationship with
their government and and culture and
society I mean it's that right that's
where it gets tricky though because it's
like you don't want to go too far so
like I don't want people to think I'm
going so far as to say what happened in
Tiananmen Square was like a good thing
or something right you know what I mean
right or that like Mao Zedong's rate
regime was like a benevolent regime if
only you're a Han Chinese person or
something no but what we are saying is
and I do think this it's true like if
you you know you look at an Asian city
for example I mean the number of people
you cramp into an area right he'd like
the population density is off the charts
and I think a lot of Europeans would be
uncomfortable living like that and it's
just not a problem or it's not as much
of a problem for agents I think that's
just like one example and I see no
reason again and I think this is
important and this is what trips people
up when we have these kinds of
conversations is that they always bring
value judgments into it right and like I
don't think you need to it's I like
Anglo society don't
get me wrong I like it I like the
British tradition of freedom and
liberalism but I don't think it's
necessarily better for everyone
I'm not I'm not trying to say that I
think it works for people who like it
and for people who have certain
psychological tendencies but it might
not work for other people and they make
a different culture and here's here's
another important thing that I think is
is worth saying is I in my ideal sort of
vision of the world you would be able to
join the group who's psychologically
psychological propensity smach your own
so like if I you know maybe I'm an
enamoured with Asian culture and I want
to become like sort of qualified
Japanese if you will
now I understand Japan doesn't want to
become majority European but maybe they
let in one two percent and then you can
identify with that Society I think
that's a good thing right
right right well you know all these
things good good bad by what by what
measure all right that's yeah that's the
other thing and and I you know again
freestyling here like we use our economy
we use a GDP you know and growth and I'm
like well okay that's good but who is a
good for like what it what are the
metrics that we're using to analyze
whether or not something that's positive
positive right oh we always difficult
yeah yeah I think when I say that I have
in my mind like some sort of idea of
human psychological well-being right
right so if you I guess I put it this
way so let's say that you're a Japanese
person and you have traits that make
Anglo societies really appealing to you
and you feel as though maybe Japanese is
bad because they have a little more it's
it's it's a little less collectivistic
than some of the other Asian countries
but it's a little bit more I believe
still than than a Anglo society so let's
say you want to become a part of an
angle of society and that would make you
happier or it would make you
psychologically flourish I would think
that's good if you carry on if you can
if you're allowed to flourish in
whatever way that is that's what I would
try to
right you know this idea of grouping
ourselves with people with similar
psychological profiles or
I don't know characteristics or whatnot
that's fascinating concept to me had not
really thought a bit from that
perspective but I do continuously think
about how Twitter social media has
allowed us to congregate with people
based on like-minded views and shared
values mm-hmm rather than geography or
happenstance or there in your college
dorm or whatever it would arise and for
me that's been transformative it's
really and that's sort of the foundation
for a lot of the work that I'm doing
which is like building communities
around shared values that transcend
geography and and and all the rest and
something you said also made me think
and also in doing some reading of yours
today
if are the psychological characteristics
of the group prone to change and if so
does that then mean to that you know the
type of culture society government that
is best suited for those people would
change over time as well yeah I think
that I think there's good evidence that
it does at least to a degree so there is
research by um there's some researchers
I really like and modernism
or I guess modernist theory ronald
Englehart and ritual richard I think
it's well Christian well so excuse me
and they look at the way values changed
with existential security and affluence
basically like the more safe you are the
more your needs you're sort of like a
Maslow's hierarchy almost right the more
that your primitive needs are taken care
of and the more secure you feel the more
you people tend to value self-expression
and secular values and and there's they
have pretty good evidence that this is a
trend that occurs in all societies are
pretty much every society from they look
at world value survey and other datasets
and that would suggest that yeah and
also what's interesting that they found
is that there's sort of like a critical
period during which your values are kind
of set and it's you know let's say it's
I can't remember exactly but let's say
it's like between 8 and 18 so like if
you grow up in this environment during
that time and then the environment
changes you tend to keep the values that
you grew up in there sort of like and
what that suggests is that it's some
sort of psychological calibration to the
world you inhabit as like a teenager in
some sense and then your values are
roughly shaped by that for the rest of
your life basically but it does suggest
that as society gets wealthier and
people are more safe and they can take
care of needs food shelter etc they are
going to change that are traits do
change a little bit they do because they
want freedom more they want to be able
to express themselves those kinds of
things matter more to them and that does
suggest that the optimal Society you can
see you're in a society it changes it
changes for the next generation in each
generation changes a little bit right
and I mean I guess this is uh this is
sort of common sense that the younger
generation always rebels right they
always want they go against these values
and stuff and you know there's something
to that
apparently so yeah that's an interesting
thing does that I'm just crazy maybe but
like to me than all that sounds like a
constitutionally based government
anchored in time would be problematic
yeah well that's a good so the way I
think of a constitutionally based
government is that it should be sort of
the bare minimum structure that you need
to preserve some sort of order in your
society and I mean I guess I'm
personally I mean I do I I don't have a
strong political identity but I I I tend
towards some sort of Burkean
conservatism so I'm generally cautious
about change so I think it's good to
change
and to attempt to preserve what's
working but there is inevitably going to
be this conflict that younger people you
know they're gonna want to dye their
hair and get a lot of piercings and
tattoos and express themselves and
they're gonna care more about symbolic
things we think it's all about like well
you should be carrying about the economy
and financial things and to them it's
like no you should care about opinions
and symbolic expression and maybe even
this explains partially virtue signaling
because to them that's really important
do you have the right moral opinion is
something that's more valuable to
somebody who's seventeen and grew up in
a completely affluent world in which you
didn't have to worry about where you
gonna get the meal tomorrow you know
well you know this is this dovetails
very nicely into the conversation I
wanted to have with you about your
writings on the West the Enlightenment
and the depth of liberal liberalism yes
you want to just sort of give a little
background on that big piece you did for
quill that sort of like set the stage
for us here cuz there's a lot of
fascinating stuff in that piece man
which which one specific there were two
there was one was like the twilight of
liberalism and one was progressivism in
the West I'm combining the two because
because they work I think they're
related right so yeah I think that I
think yes yeah that's a good that's fair
because because people have been saying
you know people I come from I come from
the backwaters of the Internet
originally right like and on the fringes
for years now people have been saying
that progressivism and liberalism that
we are the progressive them that we see
today is leading towards you know an
erosion of Western society and to say
that five eight years ago what you were
just you know absolutely insane person
but like you know people more and more
well respected folks are starting to
acknowledge that that this is this is
the case and that our American politics
currently are leading in a direction at
least some factions antithetical to
actual society and civilization that we
were based on and we are sort of the
torchbearer for so this is a very
fascinating moment to be aware of what's
happening and and your two pieces
together I thought were really relative
relevant and timely so let's let's look
at again well so that's interesting
because I I didn't participate in the
back waters of the internet so I don't
know what people were saying there but
I'm sure that if I had encountered
argument say ten years ago I probably
would have thought it was crazy too and
in fact I even thought it was at least
hyperbolic maybe two years ago and then
I started to become more and more
alarmed by these things that were you
know just becoming more commonplace
right and the more I thought about it
and the more I witnessed it and the more
I had to I mean I I'm sort of in the
epicenter of progressivism in academia
right I mean this is it doesn't get more
progressive I don't think it did start
to alarm me and I see I think the
watching the Democratic debates has only
persuaded me that article was exactly
correct right right like it's it's just
the this progressivism and and I want to
be clearer I I'm not like a I'm not like
a super conservative person I'm actually
like kind of a populist economically um
so I'm not coming at this from I I've
I've never voted for a Republican in my
life right I've always voted Democrat so
I'm coming at this from a wayward
Democrat who's just alarmed with what's
happened to the last coalition and the
argument hardened yeah okay yeah I know
I run into a lot of people who even my
mother I was talking to my mother and
she was just like what's happened to the
Democratic Party I'm like I don't know
so I guess the you know I was very
alarmed by it and people were I was
crying I was basically like a both Sider
you know I was like both sides are
exaggerating the threats on both sides
and
you know they both have problems but
people made a lot of good arguments to
me about the dangers of progressiva so I
mean I I I just became persuaded that
that was correct and then I started
thinking about it and reading articles
and picking out the problems with it and
I think I ended up you I think I had six
of them in that article you know and we
can go over each of them because they're
each interesting but there are just a
number of these alarming trends that
seem only to beginning worse so far as I
can tell about progressivism and the way
that it it seems to me I think as you
said antithetical to Western values now
I know this is what the brig Asif will
say so to be fair to the progressive he
or she's gonna say well what's Western
civilization right and it's you know
it's really hard to define but there are
certain features of Western civilization
respect for the individual personal
autonomy rule of law equality before the
law private property markets etc these
things that worked so well that Western
civilization reached the peak of human
you know like human civilization the
peak of human civilization is the West
from you know I don't know 1700 and tell
Mallory right and and that's something I
would like to attempt to preserve so
that that paper is kind of about these
trends that I see that are going against
those values right and a lot of the
things you identified like the cognitive
divide Geographic mobility and sort of
the aggregation of people into the
cities the elites and such the an
evolutionary mismatch I mean a lot of
these things I wrote about them in a
roundabout way in my book called
Democrats a deplorable which actually
really digs very deeply into this very
notion of like hey I've been a Democrat
my whole life and I don't know what the
hell's going on with the Democrats
anymore and and and for me a lot of the
feminist overreach in particular sort of
systemic attacks on on masculinity and a
variety of different issues like
basically the abandonment
of science and in reality and an
understanding nature these were things
that to me were so critical that like
I'm able to look past some of the more
distasteful elements of our current
president but only for the the fact of
like not giving any more power to those
ideas in the Democratic Party and having
them reinforced throughout our
institutions and academia and all these
things and it's led to very interesting
circumstances for a lot of people and
you know you you feel it your mom feels
it but lots of people who would never in
a million years of consider themselves
to wanna vote Republican are taking a
hard look at it because this stuff is
actually it's actually against why we're
here it's like if if if an abandonment
of science an abandonment of reality of
disregard for nature of total blank
slate ISM except as selective blank
slate ISM as I think I read that you had
written at one point you know if yeah I
think I call III I don't use the term
anymore just because it gets into a
bunch of like people get into debates
about the term so I just say
environmentalism
yeah but it is I mean everything you've
said I think effect I was just thinking
about this and talking about this Trump
uses crude language and a lot of the
populace around him do and they talk
about the elites this the elites the
elites that but the fact of the matter
is there's some truth to what they're
saying that's right there's usually some
truth to any kind of propaganda so I'll
say that it's propaganda but let's look
at the truth of it and it a lot of the
things you're talking about let's say
feminist overreach as you as you called
it the what's happening here it seems to
me is that the 2% of the most educated
elite part of the population that - top
2% or whatever they have such an
outsized influence on culture because
they have access to the media to the
Internet media to all of the mainstream
and not only are they that they're not
content with just having like almost a
monopoly there but they moralize so much
that if you if you forward alternative
views not only do they just try to kick
you out of it but they try to call you
an immoral person you're a sexist you're
a bigot you know and I I agree with I
mean it's just odd because if you if you
like I have friends who aren't in
academia or a part of this sort of UE
and they have no idea what's going on
right they like traditional sax rolls
right like they think like men being too
masculine and having some kind of outlet
for that and women being feminine and
they don't think that it's bad that you
would stay home and raise kids you know
they're not forcing their wives to but
they think that these kind of sacks
walls give people meaning in the world
and a way to sort of channel their sort
of natural proclivities if you will and
I think that's really important I do I
was actually talking about this
yesterday was somebody just how it's
unfortunate that you know we sort of
destroy these sex roles but for most
people for most of the time they're
probably good they give people a sense
of meaning and purpose and they
disappoint you and that's important
because you can't have freedom without
some kind of guide without some sort of
disappoint for that freedom without some
sort of expectation that hey if you're
gonna be a man here's what you do you
take care of your wife you take care of
your family you take care of your kids
and that gives you you know meaning in
the world yeah yeah exactly exactly you
know like might and my dad would take me
hunting and teach me how to shoot and
like do these things that like gave
people meaning in their traditions that
are really important for people and when
you eradicate those traditions so
quickly - that's the other thing that's
kind of alarming to me about this is
it's happened so quickly like I was
thinking compare the 2016 Democratic
primaries to the 2008 I mean even in
2008 it was pretty woke but it was
nothing like what it is now now you have
people calling for
federal funding of abortions for trans
women or trans men I can't remember
exactly what he said you know like he
had to include this like 0.2% of the
population to make sure he was
consistently walk right and I just think
it's it's really unfortunate I mean I
guess I'm going on a tangential right
yeah but I will say that ok so here's
like I think you add to that to you is
like I have no problem with
transgendered individuals at all I think
I knew them growing up and I I never
even thought about it but the this sort
of elite movement has turned it into
this divisive political issue in which
now when I think about it right I don't
think this is just a human I think oh
this is a political group now a Lobby
that's that's trying to make it so
people can't say simple biological
truths about the world and I don't I
think that that's incredibly destructive
because it makes it not about individual
dignity which is what I should be about
which I would have thought about before
is just like look if this person wants
me to use this pronoun I will it's not a
big deal we treat this person with
respect because of course we should be
nice to people but now it's turned into
you have to use the bathroom
you're gonna play sports with you know
with you know you can play women's
sports if you identify as a woman that
kind of stuff all of that's happening so
quickly and the debate about it is
mostly silenced you can't even have the
debate which is another problem it's the
same thing with immigration which maybe
we can get into but like these are
issues where you're not even really
allowed to have the debate and that's
what really disconcerts me about it
right right well freedom of speech and
ideas and competition of ideas these
things are you know not allowed you're
not allowed to have a competition
because you're not allowed to have
hierarchies because hierarchies are bad
I want to I want to get into hierarchies
with you in a second but I want to just
go back to this concept of guardrails I
believe in your writing as I picked up
on how there's liberalism leads to the
removal that guardrails and and you're
making a distinction between the the
government telling you how to live and
your your society or your culture and
your peers sort of telling you how to
them the former bad
the latter good right like we need we
need like checks and balances and norms
and and customs culturally enforced
culturally like Peter sign with his
enforcement nanami concept that blew up
last year I remember and and that these
guardrails are coming down and so what's
gonna happen and and where is that
leading and what what is that what is
the end product of liberalism anyway is
it is it no constraints I mean is that
the is that the goal is the goal to be
unconstrained period without regard for
that thing so I mean that's the problem
that's right and this is where this is
where I am sort of politically and on so
many issues right now which is is the
process more important or the outcome
more important and because I'm really
struggling with that because maybe maybe
that's really because maybe the process
leads us to bad places but maybe the if
we focus on the outcomes it leads to bad
process it's like let's talk about that
and the guardrails in liberalism like
what's happening to our culture well so
that second that that thing you said
your ass when I wrestle with that a lot
too so we'll set that one aside first
because that's more tricky to deal with
the it syndra yeah so like it's
important you know we're not saying that
as like somewhat socially conservative
person I'm not saying it's like the
government should be doing this I would
in fact I like it that you know churches
do it or the community and look I like
choice I'm glad that we don't inhabit
like 1620 say MoMA or something I like
that there's more freedom right but it
I do I have become more convinced of
this that there is this sort of ennui
alienation that's happening because
people just don't have a meaningful sort
of path in life a narrative symbolic
path that's carved out for them by
community norms and standards and so
some people thrive with this because
they're you know very intelligent
self-discipline controlled people they
can achieve in that kind of environment
in which you don't have that right a lot
of other people unfortunately they play
a lot of video games and use a lot of
drugs and you know that r22 and they
have nothing going on in life and I
don't know what I would do either I mean
because it used to be let's say you're a
24 year old male you sort of had this
idea of what you were gonna do you were
gonna go to work you were gonna have a
wife you were gonna take care of your
family and that would give you pride
people would look at you and they would
say you know Bob Jones takes care of his
family he's 30 he works at the furniture
store you know he's not some hotshot but
he's taking care of his family and his
kids right and that's meaningful I
always think of the are you familiar
with the show The Wonder Years you
kidding me when I was when I was growing
up I was the same age as the characters
when I was growing up oh okay awesome
yeah so like I I mean you know what's
interesting is I rewatched that not too
long ago and this is how I know I was
getting older is that I actually
identify with the father around
but um what struck me is you know the
dad in that show he was just kind of
like some as far as you could tell you
something like manager like sort of
Pyrrhic rad this there's no defense
industry place I believe but he had a
family and he took care of his family
and he provided for them and that gave
them meaning and dignity and a lot of
that's disappearing for people and they
just don't know what to do with it and I
think it's one of the problems is that
people who are you know they're writing
for Vox or they're writing peer-reviewed
article
in there in academia I don't think they
understand the problem because they
don't need that kind of structure right
that's not what they do they're their
intellectuals they just read books when
they're when they have free time they're
like cool I can read a book a lot of
people when they have free time they're
like cool I'm gonna smoke five joints
and play call of duty on there you know
and that I don't think some people think
that sounds like somehow like
condescending or something but I don't
mean it to I just think that that's like
objectively true there's research on how
people use their free time in the United
States and it's not the way you think
they should write even have leisure
choices written down here in my in my
notes from from your writing because
it's such an important element and it
comes with this thing called the
cognitive divide that you mentioned can
you can you talk about that a little bit
yeah I mean so people such as Charles
Marie really I mean Marie probably more
than anybody drew attention to this idea
that there's just this sort of I mean
this is actually what the bell curve was
about even though people think the bell
curve and they immediately think raised
it was really about intelligence and
class structure and in the in the United
States
and then he wrote coming apart which was
more about that and the basic idea is
that American society has become really
good at sorting people based on their
cognitive capacities such that very
intelligent people are sorting through
this college machine they're going to
elite universities and they're going
they're you know living in these elite
communities and people who aren't
cognitive elite unless even say people
who are below average and intelligence
are getting left behind and they're
sorting into their own group and the
problem with this is that when you
separate these groups one group thrives
in like this sort of world without with
a lot of possibilities in leisure time
the the cognitive elite the people with
IQs 125 and above they are they do they
read books they practice programming
they teach themselves things they write
articles whatever
they're thriving in it whereas the
people who are let's say a hundred and
below but especially like 90 and below
are fundamentally rootless because the
institutions that used to give them
meaning and provide structure for them
are relentlessly attacked by these
cognitive elites and I think it's like
it's important you know that it's yeah
it's not like I don't think it's
ill-will from the cognitive elites it's
they don't need the institution so they
don't understand the point right so like
for example religion and I and I'm I'm
not a believer personally but I've I've
never been super sympathetic to like the
new atheist but I was a little more
militant in my atheism when I was
younger and and now I think like I just
see like the structure that religion
even if you don't have the beliefs just
going to a church and having a community
with expectations and moral values is
really meaningful to people and right
and so it's like it's just sort of
short-sighted and hubristic in a way to
attack all of these institutions as
backward simply because they don't
provide anything for you as monogamy's
another one that I think a lot about so
it seems as though we're moving a little
bit away from monogamy and especially
elites I think I read about I've read
about tacky leads for example and their
behavior I think maybe they're able to
do polyamory maybe they are maybe these
people can get away with it but I don't
think most people can and I think
teaching this to people as though it's a
viable option it's probably not I mean
again I'm open to the evidence and I've
actually I've had conversations with
Jeffrey Miller or I think probably
nothing on the process Oh awesome yeah
yeah yeah so he's you know openly
polyamorous
and he's talked about it and I've had
conversations with him and I respect his
views on it I just think I would be very
cautious about promoting that because I
think a lot of people think they can
handle it and what it really means to a
male as cool I get to have sex with like
more women and it's actually probably
destructive to most relationships and to
get to I mean I think Jordan Peterson in
the idea of socially enforced monogamy
there's something to that right people
who hendrik for example they've looked
at societies and it's correlation also
there are problems with it but there
seems to be a benefit to having socially
enforcement alchemy it seems to make
society function more smoothly it
reduces male-on-male competition for
mates etc right right so that's what I'm
getting at it's like I do think it's
fair to say there's this subset of
cognitively leads who promote this very
libertarian progressivism this sort of
destruction of all narratives that are
supposedly confining or constricting
right sex rules religion whatever it is
that supposedly defines somebody in a
rigid way they want to destroy it and I
think they don't understand that
destroying that means taking meaning and
guidance away from a lot of people right
right it's like you're standing on a
suspension bridge and you just do you
don't know why that rope is hanging you
know from the thing up there and you're
like hey let me cut this you've got one
and everything's okay you're going to
cut another and you cut another and cut
another before you know it you're gonna
cut that last one and your whole bridge
is gonna come crashing down that's
actually a really good analogy thinking
I like that except for to make it work
it's even the elites are like held in a
different areas so the ropes they're
cutting don't hold on to them they hold
everybody else right so we've really
covered a whole lot of things here that
are personally important to me and
things I've been chewing on a lot
personally I've practiced some form of I
would call ethical non-monogamy
over the last 10 years and I'm doing it
in a relationship in which you know
we're not gonna have children together
we've been together a long time but I
already have children and so we have
different you know different goals and
motivations than people who are coming
together in their early 20s and seeking
to form a family I would not recommend
polyamory or open relationships to
people who haven't had a bunch of
relationships have low you know sexual
partner counts and are seeking to build
a long-term stable family unit like no
you know like even Jeffrey Miller he has
grown children like or at least one and
so like he has different motivations for
his relationships and I would think that
he will too would acknowledge that
polyamory is about fringe is the work
before it's that word that means not the
normal thing and it always sounds like a
bad word anyway I'm getting cold um it's
it's a typic atypical yeah but whatever
I don't know you know and and so it's
just uh it's just by definition
something that's on the fringe and not
the best thing for everybody
sure and but now what I wonder about
that is here's my like my question
because I've had this conversation a lot
and personally I'm I think I'm just like
I have some conservative tendencies
myself so I think monogamy is probably
the best way to do it at least for me
but although I can understand other you
know like I understand it guys I would
just to me it's like using drugs so like
I think there are people who can use
cocaine and they won't get addicted they
use it Friday night they take a bump or
something they feel good and it's great
for them I don't think you should
encourage it though right it's something
like where if you're a type of person
who can handle it you'll probably figure
it out there's no need to tell a society
that hey we should be encouraging people
to try coke because it's great right
right that's how I think I feel about
polyamory it's like look if you if you
sort of stumble into or you figure it
out or whatever okay cool but like I
don't think we want to mainstream though
no definitely not and even as I
written about ethical non-monogamy
plenty I still have II added it with
like this really doesn't apply to most
of you are in fact you know this isn't
related so move along now
but intro but but it also all this is we
talked about this earlier about changing
psychological characteristics and then
what the best kind of society would be
and then talking about how these the
Continental groups you know races or
however you want to describe them have
slightly different makeups and then
therefore maybe I'm slightly from
culture Society and taste the preference
and whatnot and then we started talking
about well would that apply in the
strata within within those groups right
and then now and then we're talking
again here about this is good for me but
it's not good for everybody else right
and then so then I keep thinking all
right well man I'm starting to feel like
you know this is for me and that's for
you and it sounds so condescending and
it sounds I know like you know the
corrupt power-hungry guy who's in charge
who's like this is like now I'm in
charge I'm gonna have a thousand wives
and I'm gonna do all these things and it
won't matter and I can do coke um Friday
nights cuz you can't and a lot a lot but
you know drugs one wife go to work this
is what we need for society and culture
and it makes me feel like a bad person
but like I don't know does the evidence
suggest that that maybe there should be
and are and always will be I mean the
Epstein thing you know throws another
wrench in this sort of what are what are
the expectations of us as humans and
where do we find meaning based on our
class level or rayon or IQ or or what
right right so that I mean so so much
there that way you you I mean you could
write thousands of pages on this and it
would still be interesting right but one
thing I was thinking about what that is
that is kind of why I think there's a
tendency for the elite in societies to
live a kind of debarked life that is
rather repellent to ordinary people you
know this is kind of a theme in history
and like I feel this way when I was
they had something they called like I
think they called him cuddle puddles I
was reading this book about the I think
it was a woman from the tech just
talking about sort of bro culture in the
tech industry and like it was actually
something I was I was kind of
unsympathetic to because I was like oh
it's just another thing about how these
people are so Sauk says but it was
actually I mean it maybe it was
exaggerated and some of the claims were
neither here nor there but there is
something i opening about just the
degeneracy the decadence of these just
immensely wealthy humans in like than
just hypocrisy right you know and it
strikes me that there should be maybe
some moral discipline among people who
are lucky enough to be the elites and
society and no I don't think that means
like I do think like look if it's hard
because I'm almost recommending if you
can have a bump of coke on Friday hide
it from people so I'm almost advising
hypocrisy to some degree but I think
Peterson's Jordan Peterson's take on
this is kind of noble like if you're
Dwayne the rock Johnson like do every
dude a good deed and like stay with one
woman man you know like discipline
yourself and leave some for the rest
basically yeah exactly exactly and I
mean it sounds and I'm not trying to
make women sound like resources but they
click a heart and and in summary forever
yeah yeah like right exactly so in some
way you can think of it that way right
and it's like if Bill Gates has six
hundred wives then that's 599 fewer for
other people right and so which is the
exact thinking behind the notion of
culturally enforced monogamy right is
that in a world left up to pure you know
sexual dominance and you know for lack
of better terms alpha males like
acquiring all the mating partners and
you're going to run left with a
destabilizing force of you know Maitlis
men
yes exactly that's exactly right you
know what's interesting is that the the
this relates to economic redistribution
and this is why I find so I find it
interesting because people have
contradictions views on these often but
they're really the same thing it's like
if you have too much economic if the
economic distribution is is to disparate
right it's it it causes it destabilizes
thing correct you know you can say it's
libertarianism and this is how the
market allocates it I don't care if
people feel as though you've got a
billion dollars and they've got not a
lot they're gonna be angry about it you
know and then same thing if you have
five beautiful women and they have none
they're not gonna be happy right right
and and with the mating to I mean that
it goes even beyond them just being
upset I mean at least in my
understanding is that you know married
men with a partner much far more
productive economically and safer and
saner and healthy they also have like
lower their they're much less yeah
they're less violent they don't commit
crimes especially having children also
disciplines men yeah which is which I
think I've picked up on the same
contradiction that you alluded to before
which is on making sweeping
generalizations here but on the left and
progressive and people who even veer
towards like collectivist tend to have
like some of the most liberal sexual
practice yes and so and so they're like
super super market oriented when it
comes to sexual practices right and and
then you get the Conservatives who are
want to be super liberal with their
market policies but then yeah then
sexually want to do exactly like every
monogamy distribution sexual recess
which makes me what makes me wonder if
either one of those is like an
organizing first principle because if
you can contradict it and this versus
that then maybe it's not
and then just also just it provides for
like endless endless laughs and and
discussions and just consideration I
mean again I I went to George Mason for
economics so I'm well steeped in
libertarian education I've shaken a lot
of
out of my system over time that happened
also when I went to Georgetown for grad
school for International Affairs so like
I got really I got I got both ends of
the perspective maybe that's why I'm
heterodox an interesting person to talk
to and so and I've been struggling and
this is sort of tying it back to that
question that we penned the process or
the outcome and I and as I I see sort of
the takedowns of libertarianism
happening and this you know the
adherence to the markets as a sort of
religion or sort of mystical force or
Heyford yeah and whatever the outcome is
the good and then and then looking at
like my individual freedom and liberty
and others individual freedoms and
liberties and then thinking alright well
how do we get to what's best for the end
and is is the you know Adam Smith stuff
is that is that dying I mean art I hear
conservatives Republicans sort of Mogga
types talking sort of in terms of like
socialism and like you know ending
taking the endowments from colleges and
and populist thinking combined yeah
conservative thinking which is not
necessarily libertarian thinking and I
have been I've never been less anchored
I think than I am right now
he's quite funds I'm very on in credit
to myself I was not there so interesting
I would say about Adam Smith right is
it's important to put Adam Smith in his
time right Adam Smith is writing in a
completely different environment from
the one that we inhabit as I think
people you know people Brielle Adam
Smith this Adams with that the the there
wasn't concentrated corporate power and
Adam Smith stay the way that there is no
right he did it no there's nothing like
it so it's you know I I'm skeptical and
cautious about organized power in
general yeah but sometimes is useful and
I'm very skeptical of libertarianism
let's see I just I've never found the
idea of Liberty
so I mean not maybe when I was 19 I was
I was kind of libertarian ask but just
it's very unpersuasive to me I'll put it
that way no give your point about the
contradictions really interesting to
think about though with the sexual thing
I actually almost want to kind of hold a
not let's do it because the thing you
said and I was thinking the exact thing
you said so progressives tend to be the
very redistributionist about resources
economic resources but then very liberal
about sexual behavior in fact so liberal
that they many of them openly promote
some sort of non-monogamy and this goes
all the way back to the hippies right
with the idea i remember in fact there's
a Wonder Years character and they say
like the idea of like you know of
marriage is like it's like you're owning
somebody and that's like bad right
there's just this idea of sexual
ownership but it's it contradicts the to
contradict but I think the reason
progressives don't see that is because
they think that it's wrong to think of
sexual of women as in some sense of
sexual resource right they view that as
demeaning and objectifying women but
what they're not seeing is that it's the
same thing with economic redistribution
you're taking money from somebody else
right right it's not as like I really do
think this and I've had the same I can
criticize myself because I've had these
thoughts to you it's hard did you think
about the fact that when you tax you're
taking money from other people right and
you know I think progressives don't
think about that so they don't see they
just see it as like the government's got
more money to redistribute right know
that money is coming from the worker or
from somebody else and that's taking me
from them now I'm ok with that because I
I care about the outcome and I think the
outcomes better for everybody when we
don't have too much economic any
quality and we don't have too much
sexual inequality right right like I've
never you know like people Hollywood
celebrities are going to have very wild
sex lives relative to most of us
right and that's okay we can kind of
deal with that but if if they start if
you know Brad Pitt gets to marry 35
people at the same time and Bill Gates
get 600 and stuff
pretty soon we've run into some serious
problems yes and and on the conservative
side you're right like there used to be
and I think you're right about populism
the Paul Ryan wing of the Republican
Party is just dying right now it's uh
it's it's disappearing it's more a bond
right now and it's going to die soon and
I'm you know I'm happy about that I I'm
looking forward to the future of the
Republican Party a sort of Holly asked
future a more populist nationalist but
less boorish because that's my problem
with Trump as you said I think you
sucked it up and you vote I mean I guess
you voted for oh my gather I did I was
okay public supporter okay so I can
totally understand that
I wasn't able to get past the the
crudeness and I don't that sounds like a
sensibility issue but I I really I worry
about it's a fact on I worry about the
divisiveness about turning everything
into some divisive issue that's what I
didn't like so I just like an example of
that it's like the whole football
standing for the anthem like look I I
would rather people stood for the anthem
I think you know you're getting paid a
hell of a lot of money you can respect
the American flag but I don't want our
president to turn that into some issue
that divides people but that's kind of
my problem and where where I run into
problems with Trump but I like the sort
of what he could stand for I act I find
that very appealing the the sort of
let's unify as and again I'm not saying
he's a unifier but I think you could
have
a more unifying message about we're
gonna take care of each other more or
less markets are cool but less like free
market is everything a little bit more
redistribution but also more nationalism
more America first restricted
immigration etc that's sort of the
vision of the Republican Party that I
could actually vote for and I mean I'm
becoming so on board I'm gonna vote
Republican pretty soon I don't know if I
can vote for Trump right but if you gave
me a populist Marco Rubio I would be
voting for him in 2020 right right it's
fascinating a lot of a lot of people
held their nose and pulled the trigger
for Trump and I think that the
mainstream media gets the whole story
wrong they tributing the white non
college male who did actually vote for
Trump in large numbers but those those
people would have voted for whatever
candidate had the are next to them like
yes there's just no question about it
right the the group that they need to be
looking at and of course I've already
written a book about it it's the the
people that were Democrats and who made
a conscious decision to like step off
and away from the Democratic Party and
to step into what is by all accounts
without you know a difficult thing to do
which is you know at times to defend or
you know support Donald Trump but made a
very conscious decision to do it and and
then all the reasons why which are
basically all the things that we've been
talking about here today
right so did you vote for just to get
did you vote for Obama I sure did okay
in 2008 and 2012 I sure did okay and so
it was for you was it mostly like this
sort of like woke Miss and progressivism
that yes I mean I you needed yeah I tie
it back you know I can see very clearly
like changes in title nine changes
and the rise of intersectionality then
as well just like all the things we've
been talking about here about sort of
the decline and the attack on sort of
our Western ideals and the basis for our
civilization and whatnot and and then to
know that the tyranny of the minority
right so like if if we if we vote for a
Democrat then all the institutions the
Department of Education everybody is
going to be staffed by these people
looks good and then and then they're
gonna affect you know systemic change
through stroke to the pen like case in
point title nine yeah that was
disastrous
I totally agree with that and I here's
the question would you vote for Obama
again if he were running no okay no
because at this point you're just
looking to what the woke nurse is too
feverish in the Democratic Party and I
know I couldn't I couldn't couldn't vote
for any Democrat really yeah because
because of their coalition right yeah
exactly that's what I worry about too is
because like I'd like to think I could
vote for Biden but I don't like their
coalition yeah their coalition I'm
afraid of their coalition yeah and I'm
especially are they in their coalition
hates you dude well there's I mean did
you see the the bado O'Rourke speech the
last one
no I tuned I tuned all that crap out
really at this point I do like to catch
some headlines but they do I don't blame
you but it was basically a America was
founded on racism it's it's a thoroughly
racist country and it's still racing I
mean it's just this yes you know in its
leak America has had problems with
racism in the same way every other
country has but like this notion that
everything that's American is the way it
is because of racism is totally bogus
right it's just it's divisive it's bogus
it's just ridiculous and yeah white men
are fleeing the Democratic Party because
the Democratic Party quite explicitly
asserts they don't like white males
correct yeah how can how can you vote
for a coalition that wants to see you
destroy it basically they
you know I've written a lot about this
and I've thought very very carefully and
you know the core of intersectionality
which now is basically like the new
moral code of the progressive left
identic identifying everyone by
oppressor and oppressed and then the
various different levels of oppression
and of right of course the intersection
of all of all of those things and and in
in kimberlé crenshaw is like watershed
paper on on intersectionality she says
right there she says you know white male
power is implicit and understood it's
like that is the the moral and religious
core of the progressive left and the
resistance and right in you know to them
I'm sorry I'm interrupting I think this
is a good a good point and something
we're thinking is that like Anglo
society to them is white male power
right that's that's my problem with it
because what they're identifying is it
in my opinion white male power its Anglo
society and yes Anglo society is
predominantly white but it's not
exclusively white and it's actually gone
out of its way to allow people who
aren't white full citizenship in our
society and that that's the thing that
boggles my mind is just the United
States look we'll just stick with the
United States and call it an Anglo
society because it basically is is it
has gone out of its way to be decent to
people who are not white right like bend
over it not look like obviously there
are sins in the history of the United
States nobody is trying to pretend that
slavery was a good thing to my knowledge
and nobody's saying Jim Crow was awesome
but at this point we are like one of the
most tolerant countries and one of the
most welcoming and that that's Anglo
society and they view that as the enemy
and that I have a problem with that I
think like that's not it's I don't want
to destroy that I like anglo-america
it's a nice place you know home free and
in its
bet it's this is the thing that's sad
too is that like I almost feel bad
saying I like anglo-america like I'm
saying something and more all to say
right well no you're announcing out it
right I know I know it's just like
terrible it's like we can't have we
can't have those people populating our
institutions and say what do I know I
know so in fact this is but we can't
make it even worse
we can't you these new strands of
thinking though right are the ones that
have really really appeared since like
two thousand ten eleven twelve and if
you do like searches on Google search of
terms for like intersectionality and
whatnot it's just some skyrockets like
straight up at like that mm yeah what
what Bradley and is it Cheney a shoe I
forgot I I feel so bad to the co-author
I did Cheney Dan Campbell Oh Manning in
Campbell excuse me the victims culture
had been Oh have you read that yeah yeah
yeah so it's kind of the same thing as
when you were talking about
intersectionality which I know I haven't
read about intersectionality I just
ignore those debates but it's it's sort
of the same thing it says sort of
reverse hierarchy of victimhood right so
like what is they feel as though white
males are the most privileged therefore
they're the lowest on the hierarchy
they're the least deserving and we can
mock them and ridicule them and what
would it be like black people who are
disabled and transgendered would be at
the top of this because they're the most
oppressed and I guess the logic of
intersectionality is each one of these
things adds to their oppression oh yeah
okay interactions and don't you think
this is what I think and and I think the
unfortunate thing is that this teaches
people to be victims and like oh my god
yes I like I look like Denzel Washington
is one of my favorite humans on the
planet I don't care if you're black
purple yellow
I don't care I care that you buy into
the values of our civilization right and
you participate in it that's what I care
about right yeah and it bothers me that
you have the
this narrative in which you're actually
teaching people to find oppression right
yeah yeah so as a gen Xer I've tweeted
the other day
Gen X the only generation to be taught
not to consider race or gender and you
know prior generations they were always
the you know talk about race from a the
power side of it wrong in and now and
now the successive generations from us
are talking about it from the oppression
side yes and so everybody around us
talking about it except for us
you know Gen X you know be colorblind
okay right yeah and then and then that
and then that wasn't and that's that's
what have you seen that mean there's
this meme it's it's an excellent one
it's it's basically it's called
everything it's racist and so it's like
it's like if you see color that's bad in
your races but if you're colorblind
that's bad in your races if you if you
flee that's called white flight that's
racist but if you come in that's
gentrification and that's right says
everything is racist and Prejudice and
like I do think I think think the thing
that's disconcerting about that is it
actually one of the things I wrote about
in a different article is the way that
like this alienates people like you and
me
and even like people I know who have
been Democrats for a long time and we're
people who are I think we're like
tolerant people we we don't care we
wanted to be you know what I mean like I
was taught to treat people as
individuals that's what I care about and
and now I'm a lien ated from all of
those kinds of causes because I don't
like the people it's not I don't like
the people I don't like the ideology
that's infected those causes and the the
endless diversity is great mantra you
know what no like let's be honest about
it sometimes it's bad sometimes it's
hard some people want to preserve the
culture that they have and they feel
good about that and that's okay and
that's okay right exactly it's okay if
you live in rural Iowa and you want your
society you know your community to stay
the same good for you I understand that
and you
be able to have those feelings and
that's perfectly legitimate and like you
know it's interesting I wrote it didn't
take off and I actually I was admit I
was a little depressed about that I
wrote this article it was during the
primary it was it was called the rise of
Trump or the rise of Donald Trump or
something and basically my brother and I
predicted that he would win or get close
to winning because of all these things
that were happening and in the fact that
you had these people who were just
getting alienated and they didn't
understand like you know they you call
you call now and the first voice that
greets you in some of these things in
Spanish and like I'm okay with that
because I'm educated or whatever but if
you're a person in Iowa you're I'm not
trying to pick on Iowa my dad's from
there I like Iowa but you know if you're
a person from you know and you don't
speak Spanish you don't understand why
it's speaking to you in Spanish
you kind of get irritated by that right
yeah it's totally understandable and I
think we have to try to be sympathetic
to that and I wish we could just build a
coalition between people who care about
real social justice I would say you I
care about it do you do you um have you
talked to clay Rutledge he's he's on my
list actually okay yeah talk to him
I wouldn't totally I'm gonna listen to
your I'm gonna go back and listen to
your earlier podcast now but um he's a
really he seems like a really cool guy a
conservative professor you know I don't
know him in person but we exchanged DMS
and stuff and like you know there are
lots of people like that that would be
in this coalition of decent humans who
are so alienated by this right right
that's a it's only getting worse
- there's it is I know none of the
trends are reversing they're
accelerating technology communication
media all of it
and it's actually it's actually evolve
din - and you can catch this on some of
my other podcast which are it's evolved
into emergent Network warfare basically
and so what's the idea behind
the idea is that the marshall mcluhan a
while back wrote that the the third
world war would see the blurring of
lines between civilian and military and
it's it's possible that that's already
happened now not in the third world war
but here in aus cold you know civil war
where you have the eyes these ideas that
are emerging and these are these are
collectives the networks without without
like clear leadership right right yeah
so and so they're emerging and they're
engaging in this on online conflict
already and I personally myself have
been a casualty of this online conflict
I was once photographs occupying the
same physical space as Jason Kessler who
was a guy who organized the
Charlottesville rally were oh yeah yeah
so I was there covering a March and a
protest and antia and all right sort of
altercation I was just there to take
pictures and be you know just be there
and and write it write an article about
it later and someone took a picture of
me standing next to him the ante for
people took that picture then went
through all my social media and
everything and then figured out where I
worked and then went to my job and I was
Iran charter schools in Washington DC
executive director of charter schools
I'm a school turnaround expert okay I
would go into the worst performing
schools in the city and learn them and
turn them around hundred percent
african-american communities minds right
and so they went to my employer and
they're like Jack Murphy his real name's
John Goldman which it is and he is a
Nazi and look he's with these Nazis and
everything and dude I got suspended and
fired like a mom what for you yeah for a
man I didn't I should have looked in I
didn't know your story I should have so
so Jack Murphy is like was like your
online persona yeah my innate my full
name's John Murphy Goldman and my named
after my grandfather John Murphy and
everybody called him Jack so is that is
that Jewish
yeah I'm half Jewish I'm happy okay I'm
a half I'm a half Jew Nazi racist that
poor black kids in the inner city get
better right and you know what that's
exactly what I'm talking about that's so
despicable
they really look like why why go after
somebody like you what's the what is the
point of that like there are actual
people who are bad in the world no doubt
right but but like is there another
thing that I've just I've talked to
people about this a lot it's just like
this obsession with racism in general
it's just like look there everybody
debate is what Trump said racist is it
racist is it racist
look there are lots of things that are
bad that aren't racist right and like we
can just say that's bad and conversely
there might be some things that are
justifiable that are racist like racism
is not the worst sin in the universe and
it's so weird that were like are we're
just like so obsessed with is that
racist is it racist to say there are
race differences is it racist to say
that you know and it's just it's such a
counterproductive discourse it's it's
like a new national motto
it really is it's just this obsession
and I'm like look like it's that really
forwarding our our discourse at all I
don't think that it is no the woke the
woke is actually really regressive it's
really Terry it's like backwards and um
it is it really is it's interesting
isn't it because it is like the sort of
it's it's it's a reactionary regressive
like moral fanaticism yeah right that
that's like again it's it's this kind of
moral fanaticism that is really
unfortunate and don't like their to be
clear and I think it's important to be
fair to some people there are people who
are progressive who are perfectly
reasonable right
yes and and they I have progressive
friends probably probably most but yeah
exactly probably most of that and I have
I have protracted debates with them and
it's fun and they disagree with me and I
disagree with them and that's fine
that's that's how we should do things
that's legitimate online debate what we
shouldn't be doing is daxing people
right getting them suspended in fine
calling people names calling for their
jobs you how many people I've had say
how do you have a job at a college how
does a college employee you and I'm just
worried that they're gonna send an email
and that's gonna be that you know what I
mean yeah right and that that's not how
we hit that's not how we should handle
things right no well of course it sort
of reveals the fundamental contradiction
and then diversity arguments which is
they did know diversity of opinion
notably aunt right right diversity is
cool if we all agree on like
progressivism right which is the deep
deep deep irony of the whole thing
because the overall and or the hypocrisy
really the overall intent of diversity
right is to they say to surface the best
right to serve for perspectives right
get different ideas to like I have a
competition of ideas but but actually no
the one stated goal isn't is the one
thing that they're actually throwing out
immediately so right I mean I think it
seems pretty clear that that's not what
they mean right I mean it's just for
what is it though what is it is its
power it's right it's about power I
think most things are about status and
power so I don't even mean that as a bad
thing right you know what I mean like I
my own motives I'm sure are to gain
prestige and status I mean that's what
we do but we can judge the the is it
good or bad right so like for example I
want to write a good science paper
approximately like in my head I'm like I
just loved the truth and I'm trying to
figure out what's true but I'm sure it's
because I also want status I want people
to like me of course right and I want
people to read my article and think this
person is really smart look at this good
idea you know but there at least it's
leading to a good outcome so when it's
about power and the way you're saying
and what I think is destructive about it
is your your I think these people a lot
of them really do believe they care
about minorities and that's what they're
trying to do but a lot of their
behaviors undermine their cause because
they alienate people
and also I've thought about this like
when this push for diversity at all
costs starts to cost them they'll stop
pushing for it you know what I mean like
when their kids are losing out positions
because somebody else got it who is less
qualified they're gonna start to care
yeah well look at the Harvard admissions
scandal and the in the like the s8 the
Asian like yes right that that's already
happening it's already happening and of
course there was like a selective school
in New York I can't remember the name of
it now too but just didn't have as many
of the right minorities I hate going
right right right you know there's
somehow that somehow the Asian
minorities aren't included in them they
don't copy no minorities right right
because they're there in this also it's
interesting right because the Asians of
the the North East Asians always cause
problem to the white supremacy argument
because totally these people want to
make the argument the u.s. is a white
supremacist Society but then when you
look at who has the highest median
income is Indians and North East Asians
right no and it's like well how did that
work we're doing a bad job of making a
white supremacist Society right yeah
well this is triggering a couple of
thoughts in my head I'm gonna change
topics here but it's probably within the
same thing and also moves the agenda
down to one of the other items that you
said we could talk for about two doors
on in my in my this is gonna be a tough
one okay in my experience as an educator
and I have looked at standardized test
scores from cities schools nations all
over the place mm-hmm and track them
over time and looked at them there is a
very clear separation between the
performance of the Asians
whites african-americans and Latinos
actually goes in the other direction
Asian white Latino African American
correct and and and the even as the
there was a closing of the achievement
gap as they call it but then it sort of
stopped
and then when you look at the scores
from every different state rural versus
urban whichever whichever you want to
slice it the sort of separations are all
very similar even even in a way that you
would think would account for cultural
influences and such - yeah and so to me
I was looking at that and wondering like
how to how to deal with that as an
educator and how to deal with this
notion of closing the achievement gap if
it is even possibly closeable correct
and so it just I'm looking at my notes
here I've got Collette I've gotten the
seem to love I've got hierarchies and IQ
I got all this stuff so I was just
thinking about it all together
what is would in your research or in
your writings or discussions you know do
you have what are your thoughts on on
that subject particular and yeah yeah I
am a open hereditary and and what that
means is I think that there are at least
partially partially genetically caused
cognitive ability differences between
racial groups and it's pretty clear you
find a pretty clear pattern such that
Asians are on the top followed by
Caucasians followed by Hispanics but
Hispanics sort of interesting mixture
right but following by african-americans
and you get African American IQ
somewhere around 85 Caucasian about a
hundred East Asian depending on what you
look at somewhere between a hundred and
three and hundred and five but
interesting as well Ashkenazi Jew
somewhere between a hundred and eight
and a hundred and fifteen maybe and
these patterns are pretty consistent
they're global and MICEX planation for
them is some some mixture of genetics
and environment but I tend to lean
toward more genetic which means
achievement gaps probably will never
close now I'm open to evidence otherwise
I take this seriously of course I'm not
just like spouting off I've read the
litter
very carefully I've thought about it for
a long time and I think that it's it's
not it's I don't think it's good to
perpetuate like some kind of noble lie
here
we've tried I mean it's interesting
because Arthur Jensen who's one of my
intellectual heroes wrote his Harvard
Education Review article on what was
what's the name of it let me check the
name of it
IQ and scholastic achievement right
there you go okay and that was about and
it was looking at like compensatory
education and this is 69 and he's
writing compensatory education zuv
failure that's in 1969 it's even more
clearly a failure in 2019 and these
group differences still show up and at
least on G loaded tasks the differences
are the same as they've ever been as far
as we can tell maybe you had some
closure in the like 1922 1960s but I
think on G voted items it's fair to say
there hasn't been a lot of closure
achievement gap you've got a little bit
more and then it slowed down and appears
to be pretty large still and I doubt
that it's gonna shrink much more and the
reason I think this is important for
people to understand and talk about
honestly is because when we don't
grapple with this honestly we end up
wasting lots of money on programs that
don't do anything and also we perpetuate
what I think is a very dangerous myth
that our society is horrific ly racist
right because think about it this way if
every right if racial groups are
actually equal then our society is
terrible it's an immoral Society right
it's a heinous Society but I don't think
the evidence supports that and so yeah
that that's my my and I think also I
mean III know you had Talab on their IQ
look like IQ is one of the best
psychological constructs we've ever come
with its that good now does it predict
socioeconomic status with a point eight
no but nothing does it does predict a
lot of things in life pretty well it's
it's them if you wanted to if I had to
figure out something about a person
I mean maybe like race or sex or
something would tell me a lot but if you
if I would ask for IQ I would say just
tell me the person's IQ and I can tell
you a lot about the person now having
said that I think that we shouldn't have
a society that is functional for people
who have 80 IQs and for people who have
140 right I don't think I think that we
need a Y pardon but why why should we do
that yeah because I say is that eugenic
or a dis genic I don't actually care too
much one way or the other because that's
interesting because I don't I just don't
care about eugenic or dis genic what I
care about is people people today in the
next generation that's what I can be
certain of and I want people even if
they have 80 IQs I want them to have a
good life you know what I mean like I
care about that and I care about people
and so I think that we right well I
think I was trying to think more sore
like theoretically okay like like is is
our society benefited by having people
with AD IQ in it are are collected I
think we should I think we have to well
okay so I guess I would say that's a
good question I would say a couple of
things about I would say this is where I
I'm guessing you're an atheist I am the
least skeptical of religion that I've
ever been in my life today but I'm not
non-religious okay so I'm an atheist but
I think that the Crick I was just
actually thinking about this yesterday I
was talking to somebody about it I think
the Christian emphasis on the sanctity
of life even though it leads to some
policies that I don't like I think it's
actually really important and I think
look like I guess I don't want to get
too much into does society benefit or
not from having people with AD IQ we
have people
atiq and what I want to do is make the
world a good place for them if we can
and I think we need to harness their
talents whatever they are they are and
they have talents they have meaning they
have dignity they have subjective
experience I think I want it I want my
dog to have a good life you know like my
criterion is do you have subjective
experience and if you do then I think
you you're a living organism that I care
about and that I want you to have a
dignified life so I okay and so yeah I'm
not suggesting you don't I think it's a
fair question but that's my answer to it
and now but having said that dole it's
like set that aside and note like this
sort of Talib argument or Talib Harper
you say it's name that IQ is
that's just ridiculous it's it's
completely ridiculous IQs important it's
it's it tells us something about a
person's ability to succeed especially
on in education and and high cognitively
demanding jobs and so we I think we have
to accept group differences and deal
with them more maturely than we have for
the past 50 60 years right I think what
we've done has been an incredible
embarrassment it maybe has made white
liberals feel better about themselves
but it actually hasn't improved anything
in society right right so that I mean to
me that's the the real rub is like what
do we do with the data the information
when finally one day somebody is like
okay it's proven there are IQ
differences by race and all these things
what do we do then and how do we use
this information to help people well I
mean and and then you know again and I
keep coming back to this like where is
my loyalty is my loyalty to like me and
my specific set of genes or like the
gene pool at large
Oh what is the most important thing and
I'm throwing a bunch of things yeah I
think this most
were to me the most important thing the
thing that I take the most meaning in is
sort of like culture English altar and I
want to be clear again about Anglo
culture I don't mean Denzel Washington's
a member of Anglo culture right it
doesn't mean you have to be pasty white
right but I mean that's what means
something to me and I want to preserve
that and I want to make sure that it's
it's been a very successful culture and
that that's important to me do you think
that that same culture is best and would
be as important to all peoples of the
world even the ones that evolved in
their isolated no comments exactly so I
don't think like I don't want the hot I
don't think the hodza in in Africa need
to be members of Anglo societies right I
think that are doing fine on with their
own culture and that's okay yeah I'm a
Collins yeah okay okay cultural
pluralist but yet Western Anglo is the
one that you want to possess the one
that I like and that I care about yeah
so like yeah that's a good way to
explain it is to think about I mean this
is not a perfect analogy but think of
like cuisines for example so like I like
a lot of different cuisines but maybe
I'm more attached to one kind of cuisine
but that doesn't mean I want other
cuisines to disappear I suppose but if
those are other cuisines I made you sick
and killed you yeah well that's
different so if we're talking about
culture is like I have no problem
attempting to obliterate than the Nazi
regime right that's a culture that I
don't want to thrive or a Soviet
Communism that's a culture I don't want
to thrive well I I think it's what about
what about contemporary China you know
what like that the honest truth is I
don't know enough about it to comment
terribly intelligently I've attempted to
like go over Chinese history and I
basically and on the weekend
yeah well it's because I think like I
think to myself I'm like you know it's
really important China's becoming a
major player right
and so I want to understand right like
the history of China and their culture
but tell you the truth I basically end
at the Mao era because it's the most
interesting to me and I honestly just
don't know enough about it to comment
intelligently right but you know let's
just make a sweeping generalization to
say that they're open to more of
collective thinking in action than we
are and inclined to use totalitarian
tactics to get there and at the same
time have been responsible for like
eliminating the you know greatest number
of people out of poverty in the last
like 40 years yeah so right so it's kind
of a mixed bag right and it's hard
because I talked to Chinese exchange
students who are I mean certainly their
attitudes are different from mine so I
remember one of the Chinese exchange
students I talked to she defended
Internet censorship she just thought it
was perfectly reasonable to censor the
internet right and you know what like if
enough people are kind of okay with that
that I'm okay with that but I want to be
clear that I just don't know enough I'd
have to know more to comment and tell
you that I do think however that
whatever society they create will likely
be more collectivistic than a European
society and that probably is fine and
that's probably more tailored to the
traits that they have right it's just
that I personally care about Anglo
culture so that's what I like and what
I'd like to preserve so about the gene
pool I guess what I would say is I hope
that Anglo the future of Anglo culture
is consistent with a Christian ethic
about the importance of all life and we
don't have to talk about like gene genes
in that way I'm Pro embryo selection and
genetic enhancement but I'm not Pro any
coercive you know anything discouraging
people from breeding if they want to or
obviously sterilization etc I would
oppose that with a lot of money I don't
think that that's a very productive
route to take right but I do think I
mean
I think immigration restriction ISM is
probably an important component of
preserving the culture and that's
something that makes me sympathetic to
you know the Steven Millers of the world
right the sort of trunk view of
immigration I'm pretty on board with and
it also alienates me from a lot of
people who would otherwise defend me who
don't like that right and what what is
it about what is it about restricted
immigration that appeals to your sense
as a evolutionary psychologist
psychologist somebody who's interested
in preserving Western values and ideals
and Christian based you know faith in
life and you call it you call it Anglo
society I mean truly it's really like
Christian society and I'm not a
Christian yeah absolutely live in a
Christian society like there's no
question about it so what about
restrictive immigration appeals to that
sense well I think I think that there
are a couple of things so first is that
people are different all right it's just
it's clearly the case that people are
different now again that doesn't mean
that people can't participate in English
or who aren't anglo-saxon right they can
and I'm a hundred percent for that and
the people who are here we have to treat
with a hundred percent citizenship equal
rights and never even threaten like
deporting or getting rid of anybody but
that doesn't mean we need to let more
people in who might not share the
cultural values that we have or might
have slight personality differences that
don't promote that culture I I don't
think there's anything wrong with I mean
immigration law I don't know I'm gonna
want to challenge you on that right okay
all right i I I think you're making
qualitative quality have no subjective
whatever you're determining good or bad
oh of culture you're saying this is good
and this is bad in some degree and
you're attributing the culture to
people's innate characteristics and then
saying I like to preserve my culture
good and I don't want it to be changed
with the bad so we're gonna keep those
people out is that I mean it's a very
pithy way of saying complex and nuanced
argument but it's
pity way that makes it sound bad right
well right well ya know it makes it and
this is this is sort of why I brought it
up and I'm struggling with this as well
- it's like why is it bad well I have
perceived as been it's perceived as
being bad for sure right so what I I
mean why is it bad I'm not I'm not
actually honestly I'm not sure that it's
necessarily bad it's certainly perceived
as bad and I guess what I would say is
you know I'm sympathetic to worries
about like casual talk about these
things I understand like look they're
there people have done horrible things
in the name of tribe and race and I
understand that and I think it's
perfectly reasonable to be cautious
about that on the other hand however the
Japanese like Japan isn't clamoring for
more non Japanese immigrants right they
have a sort of understanding about
demographics in preservation of their
society that they care about and I think
that's perfectly reasonable I think it's
reasonable to have this conversation and
to and to say like look like we want
people who share who have a cultural
affinity for the culture here right and
likely as a me wax said that means more
European people and I think that's
perfectly reasonable I I don't think
that there's anything I and what I don't
understand about this kind of a
conversation is that that claim is
called racist by a lot of people and I
don't understand is it racist for
Norwegians to want Norway to be
Norwegian I don't think it is I don't
understand why that would be it's it's a
perfectly legitimate thing and it's not
saying you people are worse it's saying
we have the kind of culture and we would
like to add to that culture and that's
what we're trying to do yeah and and you
can handle it good yeah so I don't I
don't understand that I think it's it's
unfortunate
it's just unfortunate is the consequence
of the of this power struggle that's
what it is it's the power struggle so
we've all been selected with these ideas
this yeah wanting to preserve your thing
that you like is bad so Lynette and
we've been infected with that idea as a
way to degrade our abilities to defend
those ideas I think you know we're yeah
so I I think I would but let's I think I
would agree with most of that but let's
try to be like as charitable as we can
so like I guess the charitable you know
what I mean those like the charitable
take would be look like people did some
nasty things the Nazis really were nasty
and they did take racial ideas and use
them in an incredibly destructive way
and I understand concerns about that in
fact the history of Nazi Germany is one
of my interest precisely so I can
understand how that goes wrong and and
like we need to understand that and and
so that's important to me but I would
urge these people to understand that
there's a huge distinction between what
we're saying and what Nazis were saying
right right and incorrect yes correct
and so yeah so but the charitable
reading is look some of these people
actually do have legitimate concerns and
I think that's perfectly fine let's have
a conversation about it though don't
shut it down by calling somebody who
wants to restrict immigration to 500,000
and who think that we should be allowing
in immigrants who are highly educated
and who share cultural affinity with our
culture don't call that racist cuz it's
not right it's pragmatic it's like and
reasonable I think I think it's
perfectly reasonable as well yeah and
again you know I personally have been
infected with this self doubt about
those issues and it's and it's part of
the propaganda war ongoing information
war that to even consider these notions
you're automatically a bad person
automatically can't deal with you you're
alright Nazi you don't deserve to work
you don't deserve to have a career in
some cases you don't deserve to
you have access to financial
institutions or to be a little conductor
I mean in sections yeah speak in the
public or speak in the public square and
all these things I think this is this is
where the real divide is gonna be
politically speaking I think it's gonna
be people that are not blankly a blank
slate at least the people that use a
blank slate to their own ends on one
side right and then people who are have
a commitment to just the truth and
reality and leading and going where the
data leads you and Steven Pinker once
wrote about his version of feminism
which is it believes in an equality of
opportunity for everybody but also is
open to going to where the the data
takes you you know and right and I think
that that's this is this is the new
political divide which hasn't fully
shaken itself out just yet because
people Democrats who aren't fully aware
of what's happening in academia in the
media all over the place
haven't haven't processed or even just
begin to grapple with the sort of
bedrock notions that the radical wing of
the Democratic Party is based on which
is also now dragging the whole party
whole party to the left and the one last
thing I wanted to talk about here in
this it was about hierarchies and
because the the divide is like there's
no hierarchies right the the on the left
no hierarchies on the right as
hierarchies right like we believe
there's I think Jordan Peterson used to
talk about dominance hierarchies which I
thought was bold but then he changed it
so like competence hierarchies I said I
think he he sort of got a little soft on
that actually but well you know what I
would defend competence hierarchy yeah
versus versus dominance heart yeah
because I think well it depends or are
we saying that these things are good or
something well I think that their
natural natural yeah yeah and and we all
operate within within a hierarchy sure
and that yes hierarchies hierarchies
hierarchies are not only good but
essential because
is out of hierarchy how do we how do we
know what's best and if we don't know
what's best out of we evolve yeah so
like a hierarchy hierarchy I don't I'm
not a geneticist but like to me a
hierarchy is a precondition for natural
selection I don't know like I'm not
exactly sure what that maybe I'll set
that one out because I'm not sure what
that means exactly but I do I agree with
everything that you've said and you know
it's interesting I've thought about this
a lot and this is related so like I
don't know if this is good or bad but
there's sort of like a I don't want to
put it this I don't know exact the best
way to put it but like sort of hatred of
excellence or something so like the the
fact that like very very beautiful women
like a lot of people have a problem if
you advertise with a very very beautiful
woman because that's kind of like not
egalitarian and there are people who
aren't beautiful who are sort of
excluded from that and I don't know what
the best way of dealing with that is
because the fact of the matter is I
think hierarchies are important I think
excellent should be celebrated and we
should know what's better and we should
be willing to deal with it we should be
okay with that I'm not as good at LeBron
James at basketball I never will be and
I just admire him for it right and right
but how do you get somebody how do you
get somebody with an 80 85 IQ who's
oppressed in all these
intersectional ways to say I admire
somebody with 120 I crying oh that's
just great and oh this I admire that I'm
using their words here am i er that
privilege like this is their perspective
there's no way to yeah but you know why
you get people to accept their place in
the hierarchy it's not about playing
basketball that's like an easy one yeah
that's true that's fair I think one
thing is you have to I will say there is
partially a failure of our society I
think is that we need those people to
have a dignified place in the hierarchy
and another thing that I will criticize
elite progressives for is they ridicule
the kind of jobs that actually give me
mean to somebody's life like that they
ridicule construction workers and
Walmart workers in the factory pre-poll
yes and so there's like this elitism
that actually contradicts their stated
goal of helping the downtrodden right at
least old-school socialists really did
care about the union workers right and
they did care about like these sort of
factory workers the new progressives are
actually like basically leading is to
look down their noses at them and I
think that's too bad because I think we
should celebrate somebody who's working
at Walmart and in trying to take care of
his or her business and we need those
people and we should be thankful for
them to some degree and I think it's
important to recognize that and to value
that and I think if we did some of this
feeling of the some of this oppression
Olympics would dissipate at least a bit
because if you feel as though you're a
valued member of the community it's
easier to look up to people on the in
the hierarchy right it's easier to look
up to somebody who's above you as long
as you feel as though you're making a
meaningful contribution and say yeah
that person's above me but I'm a part of
this coalition and they need me there's
a certain lack of empathy I think in
built into progressivism which is which
is kind of ironic and I think that
people who are aware of hierarchies
appreciate them operate within them
understand their place in the hierarchy
like I'm generally the biggest guy
around I'm six for 250 yeah naturally
sort of dominant and when I'm in a when
I'm I don't even ask for leadership and
such in group settings it's just like a
task gets laid before the group and
everyone's head just kind of turns to me
right cuz right cuz I'm the tallest and
I'm the biggest and whatever and I have
a big beard but I also know when I'm in
the presence of people that have more
more power and like deserve it and it's
like I admire and respect those people
right and it's easy for me to say that
because I am sort of higher up in
hierarchy yourself but like there has to
be an appreciation for all those around
you above you and understanding that
you're operating within a system yeah I
mean I think this is something I think
about a lot honestly and and like I
think one of the reason this sounds kind
of silly but one of the reasons am be
apocalyptic me is because you can kind
of see you get this meaningful group in
which people will defer to the person
who's better because their lives depend
on it
and that gives people meaning you know
they don't McCann stitchy CIL's a way
that envy people would feel right and so
I think to be fair we should think about
what we were saying about sexual
redistribution and economic
redistribution it's understandable that
if you're at the bottom of a hierarchy
you would be a little bit bitter and
envious I totally get that but when you
feel as though you're in a hierarchy
that's accomplishing something and
you're working together with the
hierarchy then you can get rid of that
and that's why I like nationalism
that's why nationalism appeals to me
because you can have this sense that you
know what I'm not a billionaire I
haven't I didn't make the iPhone I'm not
writing articles but I'm an American and
I'm contributing to America and I love
my country and that's meaningful and and
this is why I the progressive attack on
nationalism bothers me because you
you're taking away the meaning from
these people but you're making fun of
them essentially you're making fun of
them by making fun of the nationalism
and taking pride in your country you
know what I mean right right well and
that that attack is coming from all
fronts I mean New York Times just
recently sort of restating American
history back to all slavery everything
Americans I saw I saw that right
like we should be ashamed of our country
yeah yeah well if you're proud of it
well then you're now a Nazi how it all
wraps up together just like that well
listen Bo we have covered just a million
different topics but I I feel like
they're all threaded together in a way
that sort of provides sort of a coherent
worldview and and in talking to you it
only confirmed the fact that we see just
a tremendous amount of these key
subjects the same way and I really
respect and admire the work that you've
done and I really look forward to
reading more and talking with you more I
it's interesting to me that I and the
people my audience we really like
evolutionary psych psychologists we
really like that field because because
it seems to make a lot of sense and it
also seems to be a political and outside
of the fray even though just by paying
attention to evopsych gear basically
it's a political it's not politicized
thing anyway because the left obviously
is issuing all of this this actual
reality and evolution and stuff but I
really just want to say thanks I mean
it's been two hours and I'm gonna I'm
gonna let you go there are whole
subjects that we didn't get to which I
would love to talk to you about again
especially when it comes to your writing
on masculinity and dominance hierarchies
and and the mating markets and such like
that because that's really where I got
my start writing was understanding and
learning about the dating markets from
the ground up and then I got I started
this whole journey learning about dating
and then all the way up to these
concepts that we're talking about now
and and how they're all related so very
cool um both thank you very very very
much for coming ups where can where can
people find you what's the best way to
see your work like give a little shout
out here you can find me on Twitter I
think I'm a PO 187 is my handle okay and
then 84.87
yeah I think so and then if you want
peer-reviewed articles my research gate
is the best place to go I've also
written order research games yeah and
then I've written maybe 10 articles that
Cola or something okay so if you if you
if you search well there's a lot
there's a lot of good stuff there yeah
there's also other good articles but
minor of course the best right and no
doubt about it that's why you wrote them
but it get dake thank you so much man we
covered a lot of great stuff I know
everybody is gonna really enjoy this one
also and I will follow up with you again
hopefully we can do this again I would I
would love to any time thank you very
much