[Music]
you
[Music]
welcome back to awakening from the
meaning crisis so last time we finished
up our look at what was going on in
Buddhism and then we moved back to the
west and we started to take a look at
what was coming after the actual
revolution and we saw that Aristotle's
disciple Alexander assured in a period
of turmoil and cultural anxiety a period
when many people were expecting or were
experiencing dama side a very wide wide
manner a deep and profound sense of loss
of home not of having a house or
dwelling but that connectedness that
rootedness to one's culture one's place
one's history one's language group one's
religion one's community etc and we saw
that what happens is a change in the
cultivation of wisdom notice again the
deep connection between the cultivation
of wisdom and the attempt to deal with
enhancement of meaning or the response
to a meaning crisis what happens is a
change in the notion of wisdom and that
wisdom now takes on a therapeutic
dimension in which the philosopher is
the physician of the soul and has to
learn to hear anxiety and then we
learned how the Epicureans responded to
this how they diagnosed the problem like
a physician and prescribed
a response they are they diagnosed the
anxiety of the period of the Hellenistic
homicide as being caused by an anxiety
about one's own mortality and we took a
look at that and we took a look at how
they responded to that they advocated
giving up I would argue the quixotic
attempt to achieve immortality and
instead trying to come to
and acceptance a lived acceptance of
one's mortality and they did that by
getting you to realize by slowly getting
to you to realize getting clear about
your nebulous anxiety that it's not
about non-existence it's not about
experiencing total loss it's about
experiencing partial loss and then
there's a remedy to experiencing partial
loss which is to write set yourself upon
those things that are actually
constitutive of meaning full happiness
and then realizing deeply realizing and
structuring your lives so that you will
have those up until the moment of your
death which is philosophically informed
friendship meaningful relationships in
which we are afforded the cultivation of
wisdom and self transcendence now well I
think mortality salience is definitely a
part of the hellenistic crisis I don't
think the Epicureans have a
comprehensive understanding and to get a
more comprehensive understanding and
diagnosis we turn to the Stoics but in
order to understand the Stoics we have
to understand the group that they
developed out of those were the cynics
and the cynics were not as impressed by
Socrates as argumentation as Plato was
they were much more impressed by
Socrates capacity for confrontation and
provocatively inducing aporia and people
and they started to practice this and in
doing so they started to force people to
realize the distinction between moral
codes and purity codes and to thereby
pay more careful attention to what
they're actually setting their hearts
upon so that their hearts would not be
broken by being set on man-made
impermanent cultural systems and values
xeno cynic was deeply impressed by this
but he was also impressed by plato's
argumentation he wanted to integrate the
two together and he also had the
fundamental insight that although
particular cultures and historical
institutions are contingent being social
is not we are inherently social in the
depths of our humanity so leaving the
polis was not actually an option
according to Zeno instead what we have
to do is realize that our issue isn't
what we're setting our hearts upon but
how we're setting our hearts pay more
much more attention to the process than
the product so you can see how the
Stoics are even picking up on something
that's implicit in the Epicureans the
Epicureans aren't trying to change the
world and eradicate death by bringing
about immortality the Epicureans are
trying to get you to refrain have an
insight not just an intellectual insight
but an existential insight that changes
the meaning of your mortality and this
was this that the core of the stoic
insight pay attention to how that
existential meaning is being made pay
attention to how that process of Co
identification the way we're assuming
and I sent assigning identities is
occurring because that's where yourself
and your identity and your agency are
being forged the problem is most of us
let that process go by mindlessly
automatically and reactively and so we
Mar this process we make it susceptible
to distortion and that distortion is
going to be a distortion that affects
the very machinery of our self of our
being in the world so what did the
Stoics advocate that we need to do well
we need to bring this process of CO
identification
of assuming various roles of our agency
assuming various identities and
assigning various identities in the
arena we need to bring this whole right
co-determination co-creation of agency
and arena into our awareness so they
advocated pro saj and pro Chiron and
you're going to see similarities here to
what we saw in Buddhism but also some
differences so pro sasch is to pay
attention now obviously we're always
paying attention so that's useful
useless advice what they meant is pay
attention to how you're paying attention
pay attention to how you're judging pay
attention to this process learn right
learn to see there's a difference
between the meaning and what I mean here
the modal meaning the existential mode
you're in I don't mean semantic meaning
learn to distinguish between the meaning
and the event let's stop here let's stop
here this is the core I would argue of
all of our current psycho therapies that
are cognitive
psychotherapy 'he's learning to
distinguish between the event and the
meaning you give the event because this
is happening this is like when I talked
before about your glasses they're
normally transparent because we almost
always unconsciously framing events the
meaning and the event are fused together
but here's the issue they're not
identical events are events the meaning
is the co identification process that is
taking place in response to the event
that could be a process of parasitic
processing that's not intrinsic to the
event at all in fact the meaning isn't
part of the event at all and this is
important because if you keep them fused
you will be confused if the meaning and
the event are fused the only way you can
alter the meaning is by altering the
event the problem with that is sometimes
you can but here's the thing here's the
thing that the Stoics are doing it is
very much like what the buddha was doing
with trying to make you realize how
threatened you are you do not have as
much control as you think you do
a pictus is one of the great stoic
philosophers starts his manual for
living basically his instruction manual
of how to try and live a stomach life
was saying you know the core of wisdom
the core of wisdom is knowing what's in
your control and what's not in your
control and stop pretending that things
are in your control that aren't because
most of the time we do not exercise as
much control over events as we like to
believe and we delude ourselves that we
do precisely because if we lose control
of the event we will of course lose
control of the meaning because we have
fused the meaning and the event together
we are con fused existentially confused
how can such a confusion occur to us
we've already talked about this I
mentioned Erich Fromm when we talked
about the being and the having mode I
mentioned at that time and we would come
back to it that Fromm was directly
influenced by the Stoics it's the Stoics
who got us right to realize right to use
fermion language the distinction between
the having mode and the being mode the
having mode is met by controlling things
and there are some things we literally
have to control water food air shelter
but most of our more most pertinent
needs are not meet needs that are met by
exercising control they are needs that
are met by enhancing meaning we have to
become look the being mode is met by
developing the agent arena relationship
by becoming mature which isn't just
something that happens inside of me look
when I become mature it isn't just that
I'm changed inside I also inhabit a
different arena and we recognize that
socially that's why we don't let little
kids get married or drive cars or own
guns
they're not allowed to move in a certain
arena maturity is a agent arena
relationship it is a particular
existential meaning but if you do not
know how to separate the meaning from
the events you're liable to be very
seriously modally confused such that you
pursue maturity by trying to have a car
you pursue being in love by having sex
and controlling and manipulating but it
doesn't work because you really can't
exercise as much control
over the world as you need in order to
stabilize the meaning do you see how
this is like the cynics still write
you're trying to control the world that
largely is beyond your control you're
setting your hearts on things and your
hearts going to be broken but it's not
just about man making anything anything
can fall prey to this you have to
practice bringing into your awareness in
a way that is transformative and
developmental the distinction between
events and the meaning of events and
realizing this you often act as if you
have no control over the meaning because
you're ignorant and of the processes and
it's transparent to you and you focus on
trying to control the event in which you
often often have much less control than
you realize
this is what you should do pull the two
apart
the meaning and the event and
recalibrate your sense of control and
identity because you have actually way
more control over this then you realize
or practice and you have way less
control over this then you realize or
practice that's why the court of wisdom
is knowing what's in our control versus
what's not in our control
so how do you practice that and how does
your identity change as you do
well the practice is Pro Chiron
this means sort of ready to hand it
means remembering but in the sense of
sati like mindfulness it means
remembering in a way that brings things
brings skills and sensitivities and
sensibilities to bear in an appropriate
and effective manner
it means remembering in a modally
existential sense so you practice a
bunch of psycho technologies to try and
get them so internalized that you can
not know that there's a distinct I know
that I should go outside the nine dots
but I need to know how to actually
separate these things so what do you do
well you engage in moment to moment
practices you can see this a book where
you can see somebody doing this and the
book has to be read properly because
many people miss read the book this is
the meditations by Marcus Aurelius
people read this book and they often
think the point of the book is to
believe the propositions he is proposing
the book is not written to you it is not
an attempt to create beliefs in you
therefore using it as creating beliefs
is mistaken the book is written to whom
book is written to himself Marcus
Aurelius is practicing what Pierre hodo
called spiritual exercises he is
practicing psycho technologies that are
attempting to bring into awareness the
Co identification process and Co
transform the meaning of the world and
the meaning of himself as distinct from
attempting to control and manipulate the
world by accruing power and fame and
this was a spurt ich Euler a difficult
problem for Marcus Aurelius precisely
because he had power and fame
he was the Emperor many people
considered him I do as well the greatest
of the Roman emperors he was and the
Roman Empire of the Roman Empire when it
was still in ascendance generally he's
considered the last great emperor of
that ascendant and the beginning of the
decline is marked when his son assumes
the throne the movie well in many ways a
fine movie Gladiator does not represent
Marcus Aurelius well at all
Marcus Aurelius said something that is
that really brings out both of these
points the challenge he faced and not
getting a meshed and power and fame
because of the way power and fame fused
the meaning with the event he famously
said this it is possible to be happy
even in a palace and now you can think
of the Buddha leaving the palace Marcus
Aurelius unlike to the Buddha unlike the
cynics doesn't leave the palace he
learns how to be happy even in a palace
because he does not want to shirk his
moral responsibilities so what are some
of these practices you see him engaging
in one is a practice that hadou calls
objective seeing we're not quite happy
with that terms because of the some of
the associations with the word objective
but let us let us let us go on
Aurelius says conceive of sex as the
friction of two patches of skin and the
production of a sticky fluid and you go
ooh that's kind of like Diogenes in the
marketplace it's ooh well what's he
doing there
what's he doing well and why is he doing
it he's married he's has children so
he's not approved right in fact he loved
his wife quite quite deeply what's he
doing he's trying to get you to reel
the event of sex as distinct from all of
the meaning we pour into it the event is
friction between some patches of skin
and the production of a sticky fluid but
we pour all of this into it and there's
all of this meaning and he's not saying
that meanings wrong that's not the point
anymore then the being mode is good and
the having mode is bad he's not saying
that he's getting you too he's getting
himself to realize to enact wait there's
a difference between the event and all
of this meaning that I'm identifying
with all of this rule all this rules on
assuming all of the rules on the signing
right the cilix would reccommend get a
cup that you really attached to the cup
you really like start using it on a
daily basis so that you really like it
until it becomes very familiar and then
smash it because then you'll remember
the distinction between the meaning and
the thing and if you can practice it
with something that ultimately isn't
that much of an event with little things
then you can learn to do it with larger
things this leads to a practice that
many people find distasteful for the
Stoics it's called premeditative
when you're kissing your child goodnight
say to yourself I may lose them to death
tonight because you have to learn to
distinguish the meaning from the physics
you have tremendous control over the
meaning that you and your son are making
together you have very little control
over the physics of his mortality yes
you can do things to protect him and you
should but you can't move the universe
look we have got to remember this better
sati we have entire genres that distort
and refuse to gather the meaning and the
event they are pervasive in our culture
and I think they're much more pernicious
than we realize the ubiquitous evil
lives is always the most dangerous right
these are romantic comedies because
romantic comedies teach us that the
narrative meaning we are assigning two
things is aligned with consonant with in
concert with the way the world is
unfolding so events will conspire to
bring two people together there will be
difficulties but the world will help
them to realize until they finally end
up together now of course we have
tragedies to try and compensate that but
the romantic comedy teaches us the wrong
that the wrong that's not how it works I
I'm in love with an amazing woman I
admire her a zipper four times I admire
as a person I'm just so deeply grateful
to be in this relationship and it's
growing and growing right right and you
know this is fantastic and I step out
into the street and I don't notice the
truck coming and it kills me it doesn't
care about my happiness it doesn't care
about my narrative it doesn't care about
all of that meaning that I'm making with
her it's real that we're making this
meaning it's part of our being mode but
it's not the same as the events that I'm
experiencing
see this leads to the Stoics diagnosis
it's not mortality that makes us anxious
it's fatality now here's another
instance and this I would recommend
visors book beyond fate where we've
we've lost the meaning of a word because
we associate that with mortality
something that's fatal is something that
has caused death but that's not the root
of the death is not the root of this
word the root of this word is fate
now there's two meanings to this one is
some sort of magical things are
predestined by some supernatural force
I'm not talking about that meaning of
fate I'm talking about the way things
are just go our fated to happen they're
just rolling from their own causal
necessity and here's the point when we
fuse these together we become subject to
the fatality of all things
everything is fatal in that the meaning
and the thing are not identical and if
we forget that we will suffer when they
come apart now I can explain to you the
Association why is this associated with
death because death is where those come
apart death is where the events of the
universe and all of your meaning and all
of your narrative and all of your
identity radically become unglued death
is fatal it reveals to you in the
ultimate loss of agency that meaning and
event are not identical
what's another practice that the Stoics
engage in practice they engaged in is
called the view from the BA the view
from above you can see marcus aurelius
doing it in the meditations he says
imagine that instead of and think about
the Soliman effect that we talked about
moving from the first-person perspective
to a third-person perspective and
there's all kinds of evidence about
altering your level of construal having
these very powerful effects on your
cognition in your sense of self and so
you're viewing you're viewing some
situation and you're a meshed in it now
view it higher up in space and time and
then higher up still it's so not just
here but oh but what's situate this
event situate this event within all of
Toronto
oh no situate it with an all of Canada
within the whole world within not just
the whole world now but the whole world
through all of time what happens when
you do that don't just say it try it
sometime visualize it imagine yourself
doing it what happens is the agent arena
is being altered and all of this
machinery is coming into your awareness
and your sense of self and your sense of
what matters and what's important what
things mean is being radically
transformed you'll become more liable to
pursuing more long term goals you'll
become more flexible you become more
capable of rational reflection self
transformation this is all evidenced
from control level theory see a bunch of
practices that are designed to get you
to bring into awareness this process of
meaning making and to give you the
discernment
to pull apart the meaning from the event
most therapy is about getting people to
see this perspectival change prospective
of knowing and then to identify with it
change their sense of self their sense
of control so that they move off trying
to so much change the events that they
can't control as much as they does
deeply desperately want to to
cognitively reframing the meaning and
and again this isn't just semantic
meaning this is the identity your
participatory meaning your existential
mode and this takes tremendous practice
the last thing you'll see marcus
aurelius doing and even more a pictus is
the practice of actually internalizing
Socrates like intestine ease talked
about at the very beginning of this
whole tradition it means trying to do
with yourself what Socrates had done
with you you can see this again in
modern cognitive behavioral practices
you get people to you you get people to
stop and be Socratic with themselves so
the person is depressed remember I said
when intestine is was talking about
conversing with himself he wasn't
talking about the way you ruminate
because when we ruminate we're running
things for a head like everything I do
is a failure
the therapist doesn't try and console
the person and says like well no go out
and get more successful he doesn't give
the American commercial response well go
out and succeed more conquer the world
good luck with that okay he says well
she says everything you do everything
was you stating to me that that's a
failure itself a failure
well no not everything did you get here
successfully today well yes I did
what about clothing yourself yes so what
do you mean by everything I don't mean
everything what do you mean
okay and you realize a lot of this is
because I'm letting this go by without
having my own internal Socrates that
stops me and says oh wow you're making
such powerful claims you must know and
understand but you see you're
bullshitting yourself because this is
very salient to you but it's way beyond
your understanding because what it's not
representing what you actually mean this
may be what you believe that it can't be
what you mean everybody everybody hates
me everybody so everybody is out to get
you well no not most people which people
well this person they hate you how do
you know they hate you well they said
that is that enough for hate you can see
Socrates here is that what you mean by
hate tell me what you mean by it
you've got all these things salient in
your mind and you're running them round
and round and round but you don't really
understand the meaning and you're
bullshitting yourself your motivation
and your arousal is way ahead of your
understanding and most importantly
because of that the meaning and the
event are confused together and again
this is not just in your beliefs this is
in your very identity by doing all of
this you're going to transform your
capacity for interacting with the world
you're going to not fall prey to the
absurdity and we're going to come back
to absurdity again right that's
inflicted on you by the fatality of all
things because if you can discern and
this is one of the key things of wisdom
is discerning not just in thought
but in perspective and in identity the
difference between the meaning and the
events and properly identify by meaning
properly sensing and calibrating your
sense of control then you will alter
your sense of identity how and how could
this possibly give an answer to the
mortality of things that the Epicureans
gave a direct answer to well let's play
with that a little bit a kind of a bit a
bit of a view from above let's say I
gave you a mortality you got it what
would you do with it well I do all the
things I'd like to do okay great what
would you do well you know I'd have lots
of sex and eat lots of chocolate okay
how long well probably not very long get
bored then when we do I'd pursue more
meaningful things
well what like I've always I've always
wanted to learn archery I'd take up our
tree and I don't give ok and I get
really good at archery great then what
well really good at basketball yeah and
then one really good hmm there's a
really good story by well it's a chapter
in a book the history of the world and I
now have chapters by Julian Barnes where
people go to heaven and what they're
doing in heaven is they're very given
what they think is immortality and they
practice is one guy he practices golf
until he's getting a score of 18 right
and then he's sort of like okay what do
I do now what are we doing and then he
comes to sort of st. Peter and he says
okay like what's going on like and he
says what's wrong your aren't you doing
everything you want I am but like I get
great at it I get great at everything
and then he ends 10 Peter says what was
yeah so what he says well I I'm kind of
done and then st. Peter says ah now you
get the point of Heather the point
heaven isn't to live out immortality it
is to make you accept death no that's
not classic Christian doctrine by any
means it's a great story and it amazes
the stoic idea as long as you are
formulating your identity horizontally
in terms of a narrative of achieving an
unending duration to your life you're
gonna fail but even if I gave it to you
and this is what people need to stop and
think about it would fail what you want
is that moment that that guy in heaven
has right you want not a length of life
but a fullness a depth you want to have
lived life as fully as possible this is
why Marcus Aurelius says you know
everybody dies but not everybody has
lived people quote that and they think
it's about sort of gusto or something
like this right that's not what it's
meant this is the access of fame and
fortune the having mode there's nothing
wrong with it but this is the axis of
self transcendence the being mode
what do you identify with is your
identity here or do you identify here
and if you identify here and you
practice Pro Chiron and Pro sasch you
can get this fullness of being remember
if that's what Plato promised you could
come to a complete fullness and even if
it lasts a moment that's enough because
it's not based on duration it's based on
quality if I have if I can achieve that
in this moment right here right now then
I'm done
I'm done
so the Stoics have an answer an answer
that in a somewhat watered-down form is
still very powerfully effective at least
in our therapeutic endeavors which are
becoming more and more central to many
people's lives because of the meaning
crisis but a less watered down version
is also existentially pertinent and
relevant we can come to realize that I
can exercise much more control over the
meaning making such that I get the one
thing that is always good to have which
is wisdom that can afford me an identity
in the depth an ontological identity
rather than a merely historical identity
and that would be a fulfilled life and
that is actually what I want
I'll speak personally now for a moment I
mean a physiological level of course I
avoid death I like I don't step into
traffic and I mean I'm enjoying my life
so I don't mean this in any morbid or
depressive way but I do not want to live
forever right I do not want to I do not
think that John Verve a key should exist
for all time I think that would be an
ontological mistake of astronomical
proportions
in some ways I'm tired of life
I'm tired of the ways in which I've been
foolish the ways of which they're in
ways I have been immoral that myself and
other people down and I have a strong
sense of the inevitability of that and
extending that through all of eternity
strikes me as a horrible evil to inflict
on reality and something that when I
myself do not want to bear but have I
seen glimpses of this yes
I have and we know from when people have
awakening experiences that give them
this that they lose their fear of their
mortality they lose that existential
anxiety and if that's coupled to a
fullness of being that would be a way of
responding to not only our mental health
issues but our existential distress
about our own individual mortality so
you can see with both the Epicureans and
the Stoics that we have things analogous
different but analogous to the kinds of
things we saw at work within Buddhism
and we can see that the West is building
up this very powerful tradition in its
own right and one of the great things
about Pierhead owes work and I recommend
it very strongly to you like what is
ancient philosophy or philosophy as a
way of life is to remind us that we do
not have to look to Asian history Asia
not ancient we do not have to look to
the East for the psycho technologies of
self transcendence and self
transformation we there's no reason not
to we should
but we should not do that because we
believe there is nothing within the
Western heritage that offers us a
profound response to the quest for
meaning wisdom self transcendence and a
response to existential anxiety we have
those things now one of the things that
has been happening and I think it is a
good thing although is it is indicative
of the increase of the meaning crisis in
the West is there has been a rediscovery
of stoicism platonism etc part of what
we need to do and that's what I've been
trying to do with you is integrate that
with our current cognitive science so
that once again we can learn how to and
I mean this in a deeply spiritually deep
way salvaged from our own tradition the
psycho technologies and practices of
wisdom and meaning making that we are
going to need but in a way that we can
live within a scientific worldview so
the Hellenistic period comes to an end
with the advent of a return to a world
empire which in very many ways right is
going to be informed by the axial
revolution but in very many ways also
represents a return to a pre axial world
namely a world in which eventually a man
can be considered a God because He
willed so much power the Roman emperors
and power and prosperity are the primary
ways in which wisdom is understood but
within that Empire all of these
philosophies will find home and
eventually as we noted with Marcus
Aurelius even the Emperor himself will
be a proponent and an exemplar of the
legacy of the Aqsa revolution but
something else is also happening with
the advent of this Empire in the
Mediterranean and we return back now as
I promised we
would - one of the areas in which the
axial revolution had taken place and
this of course is ancient Israel because
what's happening is of course Israel is
now been conquered by a sequence of
empires and the most recent of course is
the Roman Empire and I want to now speak
of a religion that emerges at this time
it's not an axial religion but it is
deeply informed by the axial legacy
particularly the ancient Israel legacy
where the two worlds were understood if
you remember in terms of moving from the
land of slavery to the promised land
where the the the real world is the
future and God is this open creator and
we are trying to sense the off have
faith in participatory knowing of
involvement in the course of history and
sometimes we're distorted in that and we
trespass we fall off course and we have
to agree get we have to be redeemed if
you've you brought back on course by
prophets who speak God's attempt to get
us back on track with making the future
this whole idea of co-creating with God
the open future such that we can bring
about a promised land for human beings
now there is a person a Jewish person
who is born into that tradition and is
responsible in ways that are very hard
to determine historically for a radical
transformation right and of course this
is Jesus of Nazareth and probably the
most pretentious thing I'm going to do
is try to speak about Jesus of Nazareth
I mean literally many millions of people
believe he was God not metaphorically
not symbolically but literally
metaphysically I am respectful of this
fact
don't agree with it at least in very
standard interpretations my endeavor is
to not try and give some final complete
version of this that would be hubris and
arrogance on my part my endeavor is to
try and explain what Jesus via
Christianity did to that Israelite axial
legacy because that is what is relevant
to what we are discussing here and now
the battles the interminable and I think
ultimately undecidable battles even
though many people claim to have reached
the final conclusion about hue Jesus was
and what Jesus did are not something I'm
going to try and resolve here we're even
going to see when we take a look at the
Gnostics that there is right from the
beginning multiple competing
interpretations and how that has had
deep historical influence so if you
remember we used a Greek term from Paul
Tillich because the New Testament the
part of the Bible that talks about Jesus
and the advent of Christianity was
actually written in Greek so Tillich the
same Paul Tillich who wrote the courage
to be talked about Kairos about that
perspectival participatory knowing
knowing the fullness of time knowing
exactly the right time so some right
that are going to that the right timing
to shift the course of events what
Pascal when we come to Pascal will talk
about is the spirit of finesse the right
you know there's you're not yet in a
romantic relationship with Susan and you
kiss her and if it is it the right time
if you get the timing right if the
Kairos is right then the course of your
relationship is altered transform and
your identity and her identity changed
now the Israelite conception was that
was this for it was for the whole nation
and God would intervene karateka Lee at
moments in history Christianity is going
to propose this radical idea that God's
creative logos the word he speaks
through the prophets that it's the same
word by which he speaks things into
existence the the word that helps to
create history the word that causes
Kairos makes Kairos possible for us so
logos doesn't mean just spoken words it
means like the intelligibility the
formative principle the underlying
structure Christianity it's in the
Gospel of John on rkn logos in the
beginning was the logos passage actually
probably lifted from stoicism but what
is John appropriating it to say he's
saying that God's capacity for producing
Kairos through logos has been identified
or to use an older term incarnated in a
particular individual that Jesus of
Nazareth is actually the ultimate Kairos
that all the other Kairos is were
pointing to him and are summed up in him
that he represents the ultimate turning
point and he represents it not only
historically he represents it personally
because he is a person you can identify
with him and that Kairos can come to
take place in
you personally just like Socrates
personalizes the axial revolution and
brings it into a direct personal
confrontation the encounter with Jesus
means that you too can experience a
profoundly personal Kairos which Jesus
seems to have spoken about using a
metaphor of being born again about such
a radical Metanoia a radical shifting
this is often translated as conversion
until you read about that right but this
word is much closer to awakening Noah
means noticing this is your perspectival
awareness and meta means a beyond this
means a radical transformation in your
salience landscape a radical
transformation of right what it's like
to be you it's this deeply perspectival
and participatory transformation and
Jesus is saying he incarnate the
principle by which you can intervene in
your own personal history or by which
maybe you want to say intervention can
occur in your own personal history such
that this metanoia you will have a new
mind a new heart a new modal existence
you will be born again what what's going
on there what was what does this Kairos
look like what could possibly so
radically transform my salience
landscape my sense of self my processes
of Ko identification what could bring
that about and now I'm going to say the
word and then you're going to laugh
because it sounds like a Hallmark card
the Christian answer is love and now we
all titter ha ha that's so that's so
quaint
oh love sounds like oh ok the problem
with that as you've seen many times is
that this word is trivialized for
we use one word to talk about so many
different things like I love peanut
butter cookies I love Canada I love
Sarah I love my son I love a really good
right
game of tennis are those the same we're
even confused about this we think that
love is an emotion no it's not love is a
modal way of being love isn't a feeling
and it is not an emotion how do I know
this because loving someone can be
expressed by being sad when they're
opposite being happy when they're
present being jealous when there's
somebody else around being angry when
they're neglecting you love isn't a
feeling it isn't an emotion it is a
modal way of being it is an agent arena
relationship and what Jesus seemed to be
incarnated as a Kairos to change the
history of the world and to offer you to
change your own personal history is a
different kind of love this is agape we
have to distinguish between three kinds
of love eros by Leah and agape see eros
is the love that seeks to be one with
something and that can be spiritual like
being one with nature or it can be being
one with a cookie by eating it of course
we come to think of eros erotic Lee
right being one with somebody by having
sex with them remember Socrates knew
Tata which wasn't just sex
Socrates knew what to care about this is
Phi Lea so this is the love that is
satisfied through consummation by Lea
this is the love that seeks cooperation
this is the love in which
we experience reciprocity we love the
cookie because we can consume it we love
our friends because we are in
reciprocity with them what kind of love
is this and this is what Jesus claimed
was how God loved individuals this is
the love that a parent has for a child
this is not the love of consummation
you're not trying to consume the child
that's evil and it's not friendship
you're not like when you bring a child
home from the hospital I've done this
twice right it's not your friend it's
not even a person you can't it's like
it's basically a slug but here's the
astonishing thing you you love it not
because of any way you can consume it or
be one with it ooh ooh you don't love it
because hey what you know great
friendship you love it and we write you
love it because by loving it you turn a
non person into a person it's the
closest thing to a miracle and that
sounds hackneyed I know but stop that
and think about this you would depend on
agape it's because people loved you
before you a person that you have become
the person you are
love turns non person animals into moral
agent persons it's like like I guess I
could somehow if I could just care about
right my sofa enough it would turn into
a Ferrari or something it's that
powerful and here's what Jesus was
offering that love is can be made it can
be accepted and made available for all
here's what is on offer here's why
Christianity will take the
an empire culturally with agape
Christianity can say to all of the non
persons of the Roman Empire all the
women all the children all the non male
citizens all the sick all the poor all
the widowed can take all of those non
persons and say we will turn you into
persons persons that belong to the
kingdom of God we'll take another look
at this in more detail next time thank
you very much for your time and
attention
[Music]
you
[Music]