the perfect revolution I tell my
daughter that she is perfect all of the
time which is not great parenting style
but I am sure to follow that up
regularly with what I mean about perfect
and under read you Google's definition
of perfect because it applies having all
the required or desirable elements
qualities or characteristics as good as
as it is possible to be and my kid is
perfect she's perfect at being her at
beam six at me exactly who she is in
that moment including when her emotions
are all over the place and in lugging
her exactly as she is her challenges her
talents just all of her I was able to
also love myself exactly as I am and see
the I to that perfect I am NOT a perfect
human being I make mistakes all over
this time but I'm perfect at being me
I'm exactly who I am supposed to be and
because I have all of the desirable
elements and qualities and
characteristics that make me me in this
moment in time in this place and with my
brain challenges acquired and born into
I can see how they combined to make me
me and the perfect me in 2019 to be able
to launch this perfect revolution which
will not be called the perfect
resolution they call it the peaceful
revolution both of which are horrible
aims for it it's literally just the
revolution the conversation that is the
revolution a platform that we are going
to create through conversation designed
for the conversation and I am starting
from this premise because I keep trying
to start from the logic side from the
brain side instead of from the other
side which is we are all perfect we are
all exactly who we are supposed to be as
individuals you do not need to learn
more
you currently know you do not need to be
more than you currently know all you
need to do is show up at the table and
have a conversation as you exactly as
you are because nobody can be you you
are the perfect you to come and be part
of the revolution and so I'm gonna show
up as my perfect imperfect self on here
on YouTube much more often to do this
piece of it because I didn't know what
YouTube was supposed to be for and so
I've been neglecting my channel largely
I don't really think like doing it post
even more on periscope when I want to go
live posting on Twitter or posting on
Facebook
and this here on YouTube is how I how
I'm gonna now utilize YouTube is to show
up as my imperfect self and start the
perfect revolution which is still
working out the kinks this is what I
mean by it's not in any way perfect and
it's perfect it's perfect exactly as it
is because the right people will come on
board at the right time and I've been
shown for that to be true and I still go
through spirals I'm up and down like why
am i entrusted with saving the world I'm
not I just have the the spark the idea
and I have to figure out how to like
hold that spark until enough people come
and make it a flame and I have to hold
it to the best of my ability and it is
imperfect and it's perfectly imperfect
so I'm not gonna commit to anything I'm
gonna try to do particular video I'm not
even because I know me it falls apart as
soon as it's not perfect but I do things
like that so today is my kids last day
of school so we'll see how well this
goes when she's at home being her
perfect imperfect self in our perfect
imperfect house how this goes I'm gonna
try to keep the videos under 5 minutes
and have this the personal development
side which is honestly you don't need to
develop this person you're perfect
exactly as you are which flies in the
face of all of the self-help stuff I've
been doing for decades but it needed to
because all of it was changed yourself
people are positive surround yourself
with positive people be more do more and
I know all of that that
 we don't need that in our lives
we need to understand that exactly as we
are right now on this planet we are
perfect and nobody else can judge you
because they're not in your life and you
cannot judge another person it's not in
their life and I'm sure that will be a
whole other video by itself but today I
just wanted to launch the perfect
revolution we are going to create a
revolution of authenticity a revolution
of people being able to come together as
their unique selves and we're gonna
figure it out as we go as there's
conflict we're gonna figure that out
as things are hard gonna make them
easier we're just gonna keep on the road
to perfection without ever getting there
and being there the whole time so if you
understand that please come join me and
if you didn't that's perfect
take care