howdy this is Jim rut and this is the
Jim rut show listeners have asked us to
provide pointers some of the resources
we talked about on the show we now have
links to books and articles referenced
in recent podcasts that are available on
our website
we also offer full transcripts go to jim
rut show com that's Jim ruts show com
today's guest is Greg Henry kiss
professor and core faculty member in
James Madison University's combined
integrative clinical and school
psychology doctoral program hey Jim
great to be here hey great to have you
we had a nice little chat I don't know
what a month or two ago and I'm glad to
have you on the show and go into your
work in more detail Greg is currently
engaged in developing a systematic
evaluation of character functioning and
well being called the well-being checkup
and researching the college student
mental health crisis which a lot of us
have heard about what might be done
about it
but today we're mostly going to focus on
his work on a unified theory of
psychology you can find out more about
his work on unified theory on his
website
WWE our IQ is calm and his book a new
unified theory of psychology available
on Amazon as always links to references
mentioned on the show will be on the
guest episode homepage at Jim recho calm
before hop in I'm gonna mention the book
while covers an unbelievable amount of
ground from history to philosophy to
many details of many different fields of
psychology it is actually surprisingly
readable so don't be afraid of it if you
really want to understand
Greg's work get the book I actually
enjoyed reading it so I give a thumbs up
on that
well thank you so much that's good to
hear yeah you obviously put a lot of
work into it I was it was like wow this
thing covers tremendous amount of ground
and yet it coheres which the two are
hard to do at the same time to say the
least
amen so let's jump into it let's start
with kind of an obvious question what is
psychology
that's a great question Jim and that's
certainly one of the questions that
launched me on this entire journey you
know I took 60 credits of psychology as
an undergrad actually went to James
Madison as an undergrad but I didn't
really realize that people didn't really
know what psychology was until I got
into graduate school what do I mean by
that well you're told as an
undergraduate that psychology is the
science of behavior and mental processes
and then what you're told is hey the
real key thing is that were a science
and we asked scientific questions and
employ the scientific method but then if
you go back in your look and say well
what do we actually mean by behavior and
mental processes like what does that
actually refer to in the world and do we
have a shared language for that well
then you realize that actually no we
don't and we actually really never have
the field has never been able to really
define what its subject matter is okay
and I think that seemed to be your
starting point so where do you get to
what is your definition of psychology
right so basically it's a results in a
bit of a switch in the simple way my
definition of basic psychology and
you'll hear me make a distinction
between what I call basic psychology
which is the science of mental behavior
what do I mean by mental behavior mental
behavior refers to the behavior of
animals as whole as a whole mediated by
a neuro cognitive system okay so anytime
you would see an animal engaged in a
particular kind of activity that's being
coordinated by the brain that involves
sort of a dynamic complex adaptive
feedback loop that is what I would
consider to be mental behavior and get
into it and there's a thing I've
developed called the tree of knowledge
system which specifies or argues that we
should think about nature
the cosmic evolution the sort of the
universe at large from our human
perspective as existing in these planes
of existence or dimensions of complexity
their label matter that's the base that
comes out of the Big Bang and is our
familiar dimensions of space and time
and energy and matter intermingling on
the physical dimension and then nested
inside of that is the emergence of a
complex adaptive dimension called life
which refers to cellular behaviors
regulated by genetic and epigenetic
processes then what we get certainly
following say the Cambrian explosion
which is the currents and evolution
where we see really the animal kingdom
come into being that's when we get the
emergence of what I call mental behavior
and like I said it's really it's the
behavior of complex animal bodies being
regulated mediated by neuro cognitive
processes and then that's a dimension of
complexity and then ultimately the key
to realize is that's above life or we
can talk about what I mean by above and
then what also happens later down the
road about a hundred thousand years ago
we see the emergence of another
dimension of complexity what I call the
person culture plane of complexity and
that involves the evolution of language
and what I call processes of
justification and that gives rise to a
whole nother complex adaptive plane and
the real important thing to realize then
is is that the mental corresponds to the
animal yet there's a whole nother
dimension and so what that means is is
that psychology with its definitional
system has really spanned the animal
dimension and the person culture
dimension and has not clarified at all
the distinction between those and so
that's part of it's really confusing
language systems so we need a basic
psychology that corresponds to the world
of the animal in fact we used to have
that and what's called comparative
psychology that should be the
foundational base of the discipline and
then there should be a unique sub
discipline called human psychology which
applies our understanding of mental
behavior to human persons but they
behave so differently than other animals
we need additional explanatory systems
things like sociology anthropology and
really understanding how language and
justification
changes our behavior so radically from
other animals great that's a good start
we will get into the Tree of Life in
some detail I expect along with the
other parts of your unified theory I
think that gives the people a flavor of
where you're heading
another thing you talk about which is
that you compare and contrast scientific
psychology as it exists with folk
psychology and you don't necessarily
denigrate the folk psychology can you
say a little bit more about that yeah
that's a great point some actually many
sort of scientific psychological
approaches whether certainly Freud
Skinner a number of sort of the
eliminative material approach is really
just respect folk psychology or really
dismiss it as having any causal
relevance I actually think that's deeply
wrong and argue that actually we
couldn't get along with our in our lives
with our children there are families if
it wasn't the case that's something not
just at the phenomenal but real was
happening in our conversations and in
our dialogue now common folk psychology
is surrounded is really framed by what's
called belief desire it's kind of
language and understanding it means that
there are people we presume other people
have beliefs and we presume they have
desires and we operate in relationship
to those essentially what the unified
theory does is it says it translates
those concepts into more scientific
concepts like we are investors in fact I
argue that the essence of what an animal
is as a behavioral investor that seeks
particular affordances tries to avoid
stressors indeed the brilliant work of
complex theorists and complex adaptive
systems provides us excellent scientific
models for how things will approach and
avoid certain states and I see animals
then as as investors that then in some
ways that would correspond to desires
motives things to approach and they also
try to influence other individuals I
have a model called the influence matrix
which relates to how we relate to others
and then ultimately there's a
self-awareness self-justifying recursive
part of our mind
that's called justification that
corresponds the dimension of sort of
propositional beliefs and so if you
translate propositional beliefs into
justifications and you translate desires
into our basic motives
our relational motives in terms of
influence that you get a translation of
belief desire psychology into
justification investment in influence
psychology and the correspondence
actually is quite close in many regards
that's actually interesting right and
obviously while we know there are some
errors in our folk psychology some
famous logical operational fallacies but
our folk psychology can't be that bad if
we've gotten through two hundred
thousand years where they're right that
some people have made that it's sort of
an epiphenomenon as though as though
somehow our brains are communicating
independent of what we say and what we
you know that seems to me to be kind of
silly actually so I absolutely there's a
real dynamic going on a lot of it is
constructed and so how constructed
dynamics actually influenced this is a
great question it's one of the things
that the unified theory attempts to deal
with actually our next question will
actually get into the unified theory
before we do that let's frame a little
bit about where psychology sits in the
academic disciplines you talk about the
fact that psychology has historically
and even today kind of had up almost
gets a frederic two points of view one
people who think it's no different than
biology or physics two people who think
it's almost entirely socially
constructed with very little content of
its own where do you come out on this
and where do you place psychology with
respect to other academic disciplines
that are they're relatively close
neighbors ya know that's a great
question and certainly there is a view I
think an appropriate view that when you
look at the span of what psychology is I
think you call this schizophrenic it is
smeared I sometimes say it's smeared
across the Academy there was a 24
chapter three volume book all sat
psychology and it's allied disciplines
it linked psychology into 23 different
disciplines starting with physics
getting all the way up to literature so
psychologies relations in the academy is
very it's sort of central and also
diffuse and confusing so I'll offer that
for me what I wanted to understand was
you know it seemed like the Natural
Science did pretty well certainly they
did brilliantly with physics and then
chemistry is very well aligned and then
biology gets placed on top of chemistry
in a particular way that has coherence
what was really fascinating to me is
then that coherence breaks down so you
get the problem of psychology I have
always seen psychology as sort of the
next in line following say biology and
then into neuroscience and that's my
version of Natural Science psychology
which corresponds to that animal mental
behavioral aspects however it's also the
case then that psychology moves up into
the human social sciences it serves us
in my model serves as the base of the
human social sciences so human
psychology would then be placed in
relationship to the other classic social
sciences like for example sociology and
anthropology on the one hand and there's
political science doing its thing and
Europe of course
economics it's the science of markets
and monetary flow but those would then
represent the macro level sociological
and cultural processes with psychology
human psychology really being the
science of the individual and
small-group creating that bridge the
other thing that's confusing about very
interesting about psychology and
relationship to the sciences is that it
also has a very very powerful at least
in terms of its institutional influence
an applied side and professional side in
fact as a clinical psychologist licensed
clinical psychological practitioner I
train psychological doctors and as you
might guess the problem of actually
entering people's spaces meaning their
psychological spaces and dealing with
their suffering and working to help them
and create adaptive lives that are
fulfilling well it's a radically
different set of problems of course then
trying to describe and explain animal
and human behavior so we have this issue
of this whole other set which really
deals with the issues of suffering
issues of human value really fundamental
humanist and concerns that really blend
right up into the humanities and if you
really like often say if you really want
to understand people I probably go to
Shakespeare first so there is this
juxtaposition in relationship to the to
the field that's funny you should
mention Shakespeare this morning my wife
and I were discussing our kind of
intrigue but repo
reaction to watching the first season of
The Sopranos ah I pointed out there the
Sopranos are very Shakespearean right
humans get themselves into jams and then
act very badly to get themselves back
out of them right particularly the
tragedies it's he agreed you're right
that you can learn a shitload about
human nature by reading Shakespeare and
as we both know since we both live not
too far from Stanton Virginia you know
we can both enjoy one of the world's
great Shakespeare Theatre is right there
at the American Shakespeare Center I
don't know how if you take an advantage
of that but if you haven't I highly
recommend it I have indeed I've been
there twice it's a beautiful and really
gives you the rich full-blooded
experience all right let's hop back in
the distinction you made I will simplify
it a little bit between the scientific
and the clinical aspects of psychology
and we know when I go and visit
psychology departments I often see that
distinction sometimes it's real clear
sometimes it's less clear is your
unified theory gonna try to address both
sides or just the scientific side of
that fork no actually it does it's
directly related to both sides of it in
fact the original impetus so I'm getting
trained as a clinician I'm learning a
number of different approaches which I
think when they're done very well all
have value so the updated Freudian
approach the modern ones that are
sophistical aground in relationships and
underlying motivation and how humans
rationalize those provide very very
powerful models I was always learned and
oriented towards more of a social
cognitive view so if I learned back
approach or Albert Ellis these are major
figures who want to call cognitive
therapy I've had an appreciation for the
behavioral approach and its scientific
analysis of learning I have an
appreciation for the humanistic approach
especially when we're actually talking
about real people encountering each
other and try to create an authentic
relationship that actually is conducive
to healing
I've got appreciation for family systems
use and for multicultural systems use
the
Orientis tissues of justice and fairness
and those can empower so what you see in
all of these different approaches are a
lot of really good key insight
my mind the way my you know I'm sort of
a coherent estat you might have gotten
some something like I really seek big
picture of coherence and it bothered me
it really just bothered me that you had
all these different paradigms that had
key insights but there were to me
they're like different instruments
playing important parts of the tune but
there was no orchestra there was no real
music and then I said well if it is the
case that there are these key insights
then why shouldn't they actually be
anchored to our scientific understanding
which should at least be able to
elucidate those insights and so it was
the problems psychotherapy that got me
then wondering whether or not there was
we shouldn't this all be anchored to
human psychology and then when I sort of
asked that question that's what I really
I returned at graduate school to this
issue about what is psychology and
that's when it really dawned on me know
psychology can't provide it because it's
a fragmented mess there is no singular
psychology it's really a bunch of
empirical enterprises on different
slices of the human condition but it has
no position to provide an overarching
understanding either so then I was like
oh well that and that drew my attention
and I got into that we can talk some
about that history but it was always in
the surface of coming back to generate a
picture of understanding that could
inform what I call psychological doctors
just so people can be clear about the
clinical side if you're gonna do a
psychological doctoring we want a good
model of human psychology for the
science so I'm always working thinking
about what's my model of the science and
then how do I apply that ethically and
effectively in the real world and so
that's what I actually twelve years I
was director of the combined integrated
doctoral program at JMU it's a primarily
practitioner oriented program so the
vast majority of my students are really
learned from me mostly how to do work in
the clinical room and the unified theory
services backdrop to inform us ways to
weave together the key insights so that
we could be the best practitioners that
we can be and be informed by
evidence-based principles that know how
to apply them because we have a
sophisticated understanding of the
science okay so the unified theory
itself is a me unifying the components
of the science but always with having in
mind the clinical potential is that a
fair way to say it or did I over say it
no that's exactly right and in fact I'll
say that what
happens once you sort of learn how to
speak the language of the unified theory
of psychology what gives rise to then is
the unified approach I'll give you a
really quick synopsis of exactly how
that bridge is made so one of the things
that or a unified theory oriented me
towards is how to build a model of human
mental systems and what emerged out of
that is that there actually we can look
at human mental systems in terms of
layered evolutionary layered systems of
adaptation and anybody thinks in terms
of complex adaptive systems should
appreciate the word adaptation here and
what we get actually is essentially what
I call the procedural habit system
basically gets laid down first then what
emerges out of that is really in a
perceptual emotional feeling system that
guides the the organ animal and learning
environments then what evolves out of
that is a relationship system that
really focuses on things like attachment
and your drives for power love and
freedom and then on the top of that you
get a first an imagining cortical system
that runs through various situations and
then finally a justification system on
top of that well if we then that's if
that's a unified theory approach then we
look at those different systems see the
behaviors were really basically focused
on how people formed habits and engaged
in sort of automatic responses given the
environmental contingencies the
humanists were actually focused and
indeed more modern humanists are called
emotion focus therapists they focus on
the core of your emotional experience
and how that organizes your psyche or if
you don't know how to process your
feelings how you get all tangled up
inside
thus modern psychodynamic people focus
on relationships like attachment and how
you get anxious in relationship to
attachment and then you start engaging
in psychological defenses and then
finally people like back the cognitive
therapist as well as the existential
philosophers they really focused on the
system of justification that language
based meaning making system so the
unified theory divides the human mental
system up into these systems of
adaptation and then it basically says
hey what has been focused on by the
paradigms in psychotherapy really are
these different systems of adaptation so
we can draw an analogy with modern
medicine modern medicine in Western
medicine is relatively well unified and
the reason is we have a basically decent
model
and I mean decent and a scientific sense
of human biology we recognize that it's
nested into these various hierarchies
you start it cells cells organize into
organ systems and all these organ
systems coordinate to create the
organism as a whole and and that's what
human biology does and if you go see a
generalist biological practitioner he
assesses your systems and then if you
have a specific deficit you might see a
specialist well the analogy in
psychology is we never would see a
cardiologist coming out and saying hey
the key to human health is cardiology
and no the anthropologist says no the
key is all of your hormones I mean
nobody thinks like that because we
recognize it's the whole system well the
same basic this analogy holds what I'm
arguing here in psychology is that what
the paradigms have done the behaviors
for the cognitivists the humanists they
have focused on domains of adaptation
without being able to see the whole the
unified theory sees the whole and then
it sees how these different key insights
can go together with a picture and that
creates that bridge between the unified
theory and at least a key aspect of
practice which is how do you actually
understand individuals problems and
entrapped in the maladaptive sight okay
that's a very good introduction so and
you started to answer this but I'll give
you a chance to go into a little bit
more detail on it why do we need a
unified theory of psychology
you mentioned biology and it's an area I
know more about the night well I
probably know more psychology these days
in biology but I used to know more
biology and one of the things about
biology is they're still not really a
deep theory of biology and the many
biology departments don't even have any
theorists though they're starting to get
them and they're often ostracized and
made fun of by the by other biologists
who the course the theorists refer to
them as the but encounter so even in
biology it's it's not so far along as as
you might think so first why do you
think we need a unified theory
psychology and what are possible risks
or why not go after a unified theory you
know maybe it's too early maybe it could
have some bad effects etc one take on
both of those questions kind of together
sure so the first thing I'll say is
absolutely I don't I don't really there
isn't it complete by any
right unified theory of biology however
if you go to the history of biology you
see a dramatic emergence that happened
in the 1920s and 30s what was that it's
called the modern evolutionary synthesis
where biologists put together natural
selection
with genetics in particular population
genetics to give rise to the idea that
natural suction operated on genetic
combinations over generations to give
rise to the complexity we see emerging
through the evolutionary process that
modern evolutionary synthesis the
transition from when you had sort of
macro mutation genetics and gradualist
natural selection is working in that in
the in naturalistic settings there was
this chaos between those systems well
that modern unification happened and
there was an enormous amount of advances
now I believe that there's a lot more
advances to occur I don't believe that
really cell physiology
I think epidemics is going to teach us a
lot about biology and I think that there
were still and some major discoveries to
give rise to we and we still don't
really understand what gave rise to the
actual origin of life so don't get me
wrong there's a lot of confusion still
to be had but if you put together cell
physiology genetics and natural
selection and you think about the
concept of life corresponding to biology
what you see is a lot more consensus
coherence and organizing around the core
of the discipline and in fact sociology
of scientific knowledge will tell you
actually consensual core is a really
really important thing in terms of what
science actually produces periodic table
of the elements unbelievably powerful in
terms of it's consensual for natural
selection genetics cell theory very very
powerful and I call it's a unified
partially unified framework we'll call
it that way the modern synthesis then
you get into a psychology and you see
basically chaos at the level of very
little that se10 psychologists would
agree on us the core now what's actually
happened your point about the concern
about this okay
is actually rampant in psychology there
was actually a study that did in terms
of people's disposition on how much they
hated Authority how independent they
were how autonomous and psychologists
actually
scored the highest of any discipline in
their resistance to Authority and I
certainly can relate to that I'm pretty
resistant to Authority so what do I
actually mean well why do I bring this
up is because everybody's afraid in fact
this has been the primary reaction to my
theories
oh no there will be a dominant hegemony
that pit that will create a sort of an
insistence that anybody that questions
it or if you don't use the language you
will be controlled and so there's a real
concern that this hegemony would emerge
and then that we would everyone would
have to be submitting to some Authority
that gets institutionalized with power
and that's a very real concern listen I
you know I think it happened someone in
economics I think economics and their
desire for mathematize ation hooked onto
rational economic man and created
mathematical models that actually then
became the core of the discipline that
were but that was problematic in some
ways because it's sort of its idealized
a thing that actually wasn't true and
then forced individuals into a
particular model is potentially
problematic anyway the point is is that
psychologists argue for a lot of concern
about unification they're terrified that
created totalitarians were
institutionalized top-down he'll my
reaction to that should well just look
around
clearly you're always going to have
issues of you know everywhere you look
as anybody from a complexity background
would know you have the dialectical
tension between order and chaos and
certainly we don't want so much order
that everybody has to submit to some
unified theory that's obviously
antithetical to all the principles of
science but at the same time if there's
so much chaos and so much fragmentation
that there's no consensual core of the
discipline well then we got a problem on
the chaos side and I think that there's
really a thrust a warranted thrust to
look for more integrated unifying
proposals okay I make a little sidebar
topic that regular listeners to this
show know that I'm interested in is well
it's less infiltrated than some other
disciplines particularly those before
they're into the social science and
humanities there's a non-trivial post
modernist group in psychology as well
who are you know in principle highly
skeptical of foundational type theories
could you talk about that a little bit
yeah actually they've completely info
traded the practice side of the house in
many ways I would argue that the that
the dominant mentality on the of
individuals in the practice world that
is individuals inside of academia
there's what's called the clinical
science mentality the clinical science
and mentality remains a modernist and
purists view of the world but you get
outside of that and you get into the
practice domains and the amount of
emphasis on social justice issues the
amount of emphasis on diversity of
approaches in terms of the way
meditation models for how the world
works the idea that this is a cultural
construction indigenous psychology the
entire actually real thrust of what's
called theoretical philosophical
psychology is essentially committed to a
critical theory postmodern view so in
the field of practice and in the field
of sort of outside of the Academy the
dominant view I would say is a
postmodern Sensibility
yeah well you know people listen to my
show know that I am highly skeptical of
post-modernism particularly if one tries
to put it into practice as a critical
stance it has some benefit I mean there
are certainly some things wrong with
modernism that need to be corrected but
to my mind trying to turn post-modernism
into a way of behaving would be like
hiring a academic literary critic to run
a movie studio it's just like what the
 right you and I have very similar
views on that in the sense that I'm
actually I do really found my learned
and I know you've had Ponzi Fry knocked
on your show now I think several times I
actually you're you're so ago I
discovered the meta modern version of
reality that spoke to me very very
deeply at least in the sense that when I
use what I call my system was integrated
and I realized I was essentially
transcending what I thought was a strict
empiricism which really was a at least
in psychology and modernist sensibility
on the science side of the house and
then you had this massive critical view
which was very important to have believe
me on I can articulate a lot of good
reasons to be critical and I think you
sure you say that but as a constructed
vantage point it breaks down really
quick exactly you know what we need is
an
a greater holistic view that takes the
criticism associated with postmodern
view but also anchors it to some
coherent view that says hey know there's
an accurate way to build reality models
of reality which is of course the
essential feature of a scientific view
is that yes there's reality out there we
can build models and we make them better
through the empirical methodologies that
we construct sounds exactly right to me
I mean you know my objection is
particularly to the extreme post
modernists who will tell you astrology
and astronomy there are both points of
view right which doctors and Johns
Hopkins yeah which ones difference no
matter which one's better a matter of
opinion and perspective right and how
people can get such I don't know what
you'd call it syphilis of the brain I
don't know but there are actually people
out there that believe such things right
all right let me get off my hobby horse
they're bashing post-modernism a little
bit let's get back to your to your
theory now one of the things I thought
was very interesting is you're talking
about how you came up with the theory I
think I called it my notes signs of the
utility of a unified theory maybe that
was your words I don't remember though
you actually started seeing that these
different perspectives started seeing
similar things if you could get their
verbiage out of the way right could you
talk a little bit about this how you
started seeing the fact that these
perspectives were actually saying a lot
of things that overlapped yeah I started
to feel that way in relationship
although they were singing different
tunes I started to feel that way when I
was doing the psychotherapy kind of
angle and experiencing this in the room
and saying well okay I can emphasize
this in this a little bit but man they
really do say a lot of the similar
things just using different verbage
so that set me up to be seeking and then
the other thing which by the way this
connects to the postmodern dynamic the
really transformational moment that
happened to me was so then I've now
moved over and asked what psychology
really might be my first love in this
when I was in this quest was for an out
with an evolutionary psychological view
which I was very fascinated about and
then I started to read lots of big
picture thinkers Steve Pinker and other
individuals that were you know blending
evolutionary and neo-darwinian and
cognitive science are used together but
I started to feel that they didn't quite
have the whole picture and then I had a
my first real lightbulb moment late 1996
into 1997 which would become what I call
now justification systems theory so
justification systems theory is an idea
which helps us understand how we went
from primates which we basically work I
mean we use tools all right but say a
million years ago we're basically very
similar to other primates and even up to
a front maybe 150 thousand years ago
were very similar and really over the
last 50 thousand years we have seen just
a dramatic change in both are in our
mentation and our tool use and what
we're doing to the planet and of course
every year that change seems to
accelerate but what I realized with the
justification hypothesis would and we
can get into some of the details but
basically the idea it was oh my gosh
language gives rise to this problem of
justification and then inside of that
there's an even more important problem
or really very relevant problem for our
human psychology called the problem of
social justification which basically
refers to how do you explain to
important others why you're doing what
you're doing and that sets up all sorts
of different interesting both problems
and what I thought were very profound
selection pressures on our self
consciousness system and I believe I
argue that the problem of social
justification really shapes our self
consciousness system both in terms of
evolution and actually in terms of how
we learn to be who we are but what that
did that language this idea of
justification systems actually all of a
sudden what that does is when you start
to think about what humans produce in
these different paradigms as different
systems of justification that gives rise
to a way of thinking about things that
allows us to see parallels and and so
for if we go back to post-modernism not
to get on back on the hobbyhorse there
but what actually what I tell everybody
is yes there are different systems of
justification that's what you're
identifying and people are embedded in
different systems of justification now
the idea that we can then not judge
whether or not certain systems of
justification have better coherence and
correspondence accuracy relative to
reality well that's where I would differ
dramatically but I would say that yes we
are all operating under different
systems of justification and I argued my
unified theory and indeed scientific
knowledge can be thought of as a system
of justification it just has a different
epistemology and ontology
in terms of how it bill but once you
introduce this language of justification
systems then you actually move to a meta
level around human belief that I find to
be very useful in juxtaposing and
corresponding different belief systems
together to see how they both overlap
and to see where the real differences
are as well very good we'll get into
justification I polished this a little
bit more detail but before we go there
let's go with with for my reading of it
appears to be the foundation that you
can apply to nonhumans and again I
thought some things I liked about your
theory is that it relatively seamlessly
applied to both nonhumans and humans but
without trivializing the gigantic gulf
between them right this is one things
i've argued fair amount at Santa Fe
Institute that there is a bright line
between advanced Homo sapiens whatever
that means exactly and everything that
came before that while there are a
number of people who say that's
horseshit that's more or less
continuously variable but I don't think
so you know there's something that
happened when we got the full symbolic
maybe recursive if you take Chomsky your
point of view and before and after are
just different universes no by the way
the ruddy and hypothesis I've I think
I've actually narrowed down the time
when it must have happened a little bit
better than some okay you know I say it
happened no later than sixty-five
thousand years ago no Earl I should say
no earlier than sixty-five thousand
years ago some people say forty thousand
and here's my argument for sixty-five
the 67 thousand as the earliest that
could have occurred which is that's when
the Out of Africa event occurred at
least the last out of africa event
occurred when almost all non African
people are descended when a single group
probably an extended family crossed down
at the bottom of Saudi Arabia from
Somalia and then moved along the coast
populate the whole world well guess what
people on both sides of that divide
appear to have fully modern brains with
full language and syntax so therefore I
don't know why this theory hadn't been
figured out by somebody knows more than
I do
my view is therefore wherever this
king of the modern mind occurred it had
to happen before the out of africa event
which is around sixty five sixty seven
thousand years ago depending on on who
you talk to so that's a sort of an FYI
so anyway let's jump into your
behavioral investment theory and then
we'll come back and talk some more about
justification hypothesis perfect yeah so
this is a behavioral vestment theory so
and all of this sits in the architecture
of what's called the the tree of
knowledge which will do two but anyway
the the argument is here is that there's
a fundamental difference in the kind of
behavior that we see exhibited by
animals relative to the rest of the
living world so animals are radically
different they are of course organisms
so they carry all of what we see in
plants and cells but they do this other
thing
aristotle identified it a long time ago
as you know in terms of sun sensorimotor
functional awareness and response
basically that animals engage in and so
i argue that what happened then we can
really see it in the evolution of this
we see the Cambrian explosion so then
the issue is well what really is going
on in relationship to this and i go
straight back into things like energy
economics and movement and argue
basically what you see with animals is
that they're heterotrophs heterotrophs
means that they have to actually eat
other things they don't get their energy
directly and that makes them motile they
have to move around and this problem of
movement is enormous and ultimately what
you get is you get the nervous system
and muscular control system in a complex
body system that is good for approaching
that which is good and avoiding that
which is bad to put it in the most
simple terms and what behavioral
investment theory is then is this
actually it's a meta theory and what a
meta theory i mean it has a set of six
principles principles of energy
economics the principle of evolution
meaning that it happens to be a natural
selection principle of behavioral
genetics meaning that just genetic
inference influences or individual
differences the principle of
computational control which is that the
nervous system operates as an
information system the principle of
learning and adaptation which is
basically how the organism adjusts based
on feedback and contingency over time
and then finally the principle of
development which is what is it
life stage history and adolescents are
going to have different patterns of
investment than adults and youth so
depending on where you are in your
developmental stage so you put those six
principles together and then you
organize that you say well what actually
is the nervous system trying to do the
nervous system evolves as an investment
value system that's trying to predict
contingencies and guide the system for
particular kinds of outcomes that's
basically what it says so it's called
behavioral investment theory and that
basically emphasizes that the behavior
the animal as a whole is an investment
and what you're trying to do is you're
trying to control resources control the
flow of resources and then you're
regulating investment and what that
means is we should see the patterns of
animal investment really understood as a
function of phylogeny meaning the
evolutionary history of the species the
unique genetic predispositions that that
particular animal has and then it's
epigenetic and I mean that the broad
sense epigenetic life history and
relationships of contingencies and cost
benefits and then has it makes a
decision in the moment based on rewards
cost opportunity costs things along
those lines and that creates a meta
theoretical framework for IR view
ethology sociobiology behavioral ecology
comparative psychology and the like and
it provides a framework for us to really
think about what I would like to call
the animal mind sciences let me give you
an example and let you apply the theory
happen today my wife and I were going
out to eat lunch on our beautiful front
porch here at the farm and I've been
trying to get a beat on a goddamn
groundhog that's been hitting the edges
of our garden and over the last few
years the wife and I basically wiped out
the groundhogs out to a distance of at
least 250 yards from our core homestead
but they inevitably sneak back in yeah
and so I saw one a few days ago and so
I've been on the on the warpath trying
to catch them so I go out to sit down
outside for get my lunch ago damn it
house get my rifle and crank around in
into the magazine get out there and it
doesn't see me I get out slowly my wife
comes from the other side the damn grad
hog sees it flies off deep into the
woods so this is something I've put in
some of my own models of cognition and
even models of consciousness that
animals have this very interesting
trade-off of wariness versus eating
right you know what was the groundhog
doing it was munching on some plants
right and if you run off every time you
see anything move you're not going to
eat enough you're gonna starve to death
on the other hand if you don't run off
with the man with the gun shows up
you're gonna die right so and there's a
balance and individuals vary on where
they are I mean some groundhogs just sit
there you shoot a boom yep
though I imagine we cleaned up that part
of the gene pool with our multi-year war
on groundhogs right and but this guy
seemed to be pretty pretty well balanced
right he didn't react to the first
signal of me opening the door slowly so
I could come out with my rifle
yeah but they did react to my wife
coming around from the other side so
just for fun see if you can apply your
behavioral investment theory to this
groundhog absolutely so what it
basically when the groundhog is going to
have it's got a perceptual system okay
that's detecting affordances all right
and a drive system that then identifies
those as affordances so fortin's is
something the environment that grants
you some resource some benefit okay and
then it's tracking stressors a stressor
is something that's going to injure you
threaten you damage you in particular
ways okay and what it's got basically in
response to what it sees as a possible
approach system that's a perception
relative to its motion it then Prime's
that it's emotional reaction so an
emotion is an energized motivational set
a response set and basically what's
going to get as it goes off to hunt
something say especially if it also
feels like it then can become a prey it
will have both a positive effect system
of desire that moves towards the food
and the seeking and consumption is
trying to optimally forage and it's also
then activating a potential threat so
you're going to see I said as it moves
out it's moving toward an acting
approach however what's going to happen
is it's also going to be tracking
potential threats so it's going to be
skittish little move and then it'll stop
hunt around get the negative effects
system activated and then it will move
around and be - in that dialectic and
then if it has you know something like a
groundhog probably has pretty decent
especially may be able to identify
individuals who
died maybe I'll identify an association
with gunshot things like that in other
words it would potentially be able to
identify a gun as a threat pretty tickle
and certainly humans in general which of
course their size and other kinds of
history so it's scanning and I would
actually argue if we if we measured its
brain activity its right brain ok would
be more on their negative emotion and
avoidance I'd it would be scanning its
place and Gestalt and be more oriented
to predation and it's left brain would
be more oriented to honing in on figures
in its relationship to what it might eat
and oriented towards approach so you
could probably actually see the
orchestra of its brain in terms of
approach avoidance of Gestalt and note
opening in but when it picked you up
then all of a sudden it could become
prey it's gonna go obviously forego the
food immediately once it identifies a
particular risk and then seek safety and
you know virtually in all costs
as I mentioned interestingly my
experience is the individuals vary right
in how weary they are yeah which makes
sense for a population that's exposure
because frankly there's a lot of houses
you can afford day you go to the suburbs
you can hang out and eat the eat the
vegetables all day no one's gonna shoot
you come out here to the farm well it's
a different story entirely right and
there's places that are near the edge of
the farm that are more like suburbia so
yeah so that that's kind of interesting
yeah and in fact we know that actually
the and the Unified Theory actually cut
lines directly up with this so if you'd
look at mammals and you can go further
and down the if you want to use that
term down the phylogenetic train then
mammals but definitely with mammals you
see extraversion neuroticism and
agreeableness with social animals and I
don't know exactly how sociable
groundhogs are but you would certainly
see extraversion that's the that's gonna
align with its positive effect system
it's risk-taking and its energy directed
to toward and then neuroticism is its
negative effect sensitivity so the
skittish ones are going to be basically
translated into higher otta system and
low extraversion will be high
particularly skittish whereas high
extraversion low neuroticism would be
the ones that are casual and you're
absolutely right you would expect a
frequency distribution along those lines
because the cost/benefit lineup depends
tremendously on the situation and that
can
so nature's gonna basically give rise to
a wide variety of different behavioral
genetic tendencies and different
environments and indeed different
changes of environment will make one
advantageous in one context and another
advantageous in another makes perfect
sense to me let's move on a little bit
you know you take your behavioral
investment theory and then you add on to
it for humans what you call the
influence matrix that's right did you
talk about that a little bit yeah so
essentially so now you have this
push-pull perception motivation emotion
system as you're managing things like
prey and predation and building
territory and then you get into the
social mammals and I certainly did
organize the influence matrix based on
humans because it's actually
particularly relevant for a lot of the
clinical work we do and understanding
human social motivation so it is a map
of that I also want to say that the
influence matrix does correspond to a
lot of the social motives that we see
especially in our primate cousins so
there's an enormous amount of overlap so
what is the influence matrix
well the influence matrix basically is
the idea that we have an architecture
for the social world that is that we
become born seeking attachment what is
attachment attachment we're very very
dependent creatures and attachment
refers to the the dance and the cycle
that an individual a dependent has with
their caregivers and what we look for
from a light now say a clinical
perspective is what ideally what you
want is a secure attachment what does
that mean it means that the infant is
tracking the caregiver and the caregiver
is tracking the infant in the court and
relationship to a dance of reciprocity
so if the infant has a need how quickly
does the caregiver respond to that need
what's the eye contact how much cuddling
and holding is the need how well does
the caretaker track distress signals and
meet those needs or conversely how
neglected or even abuse might the infant
be indeed we learned about the
attachment system from John Bowlby who
was the psychiatrist who saw orphaned
infants basically get fed and protected
physically from like you know
temperature and other kinds of things
but many many of these orphans infants
basically
golde enormous ly they had failure to
thrive they weren't and we realized that
actually crucial to the human condition
is a need for socio emotional attachment
okay so that's an articulation of
attachment there is a great articulation
of animals and/or mammals in general and
certainly humans in particular have a
relationship system the influence matrix
combines attachment theory and what and
what's called the interpersonal
circumplex this was actually developed
mostly by Timothy Leary he was informed
by some of the psychodynamic work by
Harry stack Sullivan Timothy Leary
argued that this is before he went on to
his LSD world he was a Harvard professor
argued that really we could see
relationships along these two axes
there's a vertical axis of competition
dominance and Submission where there's a
power rank social status dynamic and
then there's a horizontal axis
associated would be in affiliative and
connected and giving and more or being
cold and distant and moving away and
this interpersonal circumplex really is
has been a foundation and a subset of
psychology for a long time called
interpersonal psychology and it's a it's
a whole set of organized arguments that
says hey how do we understand human
behavior through this all right so the
the influence matrix basically takes
behavioral investment theory and then it
places us in a relational context and
then uses attachment theory sort of in
some ways as a foundation and the
interpersonal circumplex it blends those
and then says okay now we have a
framework for understanding this
relationship system okay and it's a
diagram the first thing that you I
highlight to people is what's called a
black line on the diagram but basically
what it suggests is that there is a
template that we have for high social
influence that is hey do what am i able
to get other people to work for me and
relationship to resources compared to
how I've been in the past and how I
would and how other people are and to
what extent am I do I feel known and
valued by important others so we call
this social influence and relational
value or SAR vsi so your experience of
relational value that's being known and
valued by important others and to what
extent do you have social influence what
the argument is is that we have
intuitive temp
for when we have high relational value
and social influence and we're
constantly regulating and guiding our
behavior toward that so that's one of
the things we try to approach and when
we achieve it we get positive emotion
you know so when we we set up a podcast
and I get to say hey I'm gonna be on Jim
Rupp's podcast how's that for social
influence and relational value that's
great right or if we get rejected we get
ignored nobody pays attention to us and
we see this of course when kids are
three four or five years old they have a
real sense about what their status is
whether they're cared for and to be
rejected to be ignored to be criticized
to put down all of these are signals of
low relational values low social
influence and they're very aversive and
what the influence matrix says is that
we're tracking our dimensions of power
that's that vertical dimension our
dimensions of love that's the horizontal
dimension from the circumflex it also
adds an autonomy and freedom dimension
which actually other people have noted
like Pincus and others but anyway and it
says hey what we're trying to do is
we're engaged in relational processes of
power love and freedom around this need
for social influence and relational
value and the influence matrix maps that
it also shows how some of the real
powerful emotions that we have like
shame and guilt and hate and pride can
all be understood and relationships to
changes in our self other dynamics so
for example if we achieve a higher rank
we feel pride if we get defeated and are
forced into an involuntary submissive
stance we then often feel weak and
shameful or humiliated so it provides a
framework for understanding social
emotions which again are energized
motivational responses out of the goals
that we have and this emphasizes the
fundamental goal state in terms of
relational goal State in terms of our
need for relational value and social
influence mmm that's really good now
it's actually it's more clear to me now
that you described it than when I read
it so I'm gonna run a really stupid
analogy by you and tell me if I hit it
one could say that for humans the
interactive social and higher value
realm is not that different than eating
grass and getting shot by me is for the
groundhog
in the case of the poor Schmo out in the
world doing his job the man with the gun
is the asshole boss yes absolutely
so so if you understand our
hunter-gatherer past Jim we lived in
these very very tight-knit groups okay
where we were highly under dependent on
one another they emphasize both
affiliation and autonomy and your place
in the group was central especially in
terms of famine or difficulty and it's
always the case that you're you're a
higher social influences be associated
more survival more reproductive success
more success of your offspring so it's
fundamentally related to our core
biological needs that's why nature built
it in to us and then we carry this
around with us
you know kids intuitively learn they
want the highest status position or
verse and reverse to be damaged to be
degraded to compare yourself to all the
people in Hollywood that you know have 6
million followers and now get all this
attention well these are all
social-comparison dynamics that make us
feel weak unfortunately we've created an
environment or one of the complexities
of our environment is we create all
these potential signals that aren't
really there novel signals that aren't
really corresponding to what our genuine
survival and reproductive needs and more
core needs for happiness are but people
will chase them like people will chase
likes on Facebook because look it paired
with this jolt feeling of status and
achievement even though they're actually
sort of like empty social calories they
don't really translate into something
that be fundamentally nourishing so a
lot of people are tasting that but
you're absolutely right to make that
connection it's a core aspect of what
we're working on in terms of our basic
relational system machinery and how we
perceive the world and our selves in
relationship to others in it that makes
a lot of sense actually how light is
coming on for me this would be very
helpful for my own work in thinking
about alternative social operating
systems we may talk about that later
offline right well it actually just has
lots of implications for game be exactly
that was the a was a high in the game B
we'll talk about it why not people are
interested in game B it's a hypothesized
alternative social operating system that
emphasizes human wellbeing over time and
long-term survival of humanity in the
ecosystem without wrecking it
and you know one of the things that's
becoming clear as we explore what is
game being it's not yet clear what it is
we're still exploring it is that
navigating in these human value spaces
is really important
and in particular I kind of lept to one
particular point which now your theory
may allow me to pull back into a more
systematic explanation which is when I
look at our game a the way we live today
one of the cores of its rottenness that
and that drives it continuously is that
status is determined by possessions and
so that puts people on this strange
treadmill of having to work harder and
harder get deeper in debt
put both parents to work so there's no
social capital creation and the family
etc just so they can move up from a
toyota to a lexus which was basically a
same goddamn thing but with fancier trim
and some leather on the seats right and
that is just bizarre to me and you know
a huge amount of the badness of our
society flows from that and your theory
with a little leap I had little small
leap I had was that oh yeah wait a
minute this is really just the human
extension of all the things mr.
groundhog or mr. white-tailed deer which
is actually the model animal I use for
most of my actual cognitive science AI
work that is our environment that's our
woods and water and Hunter and salt
block right yeah and I suppose I should
have known that but this conversation
kind of connected the two hmm cool so
thank you for that
yeah well I'm happy to do so and so yeah
let's think about so the issue is what
we get here is young u2 of capitalism
and I and what I mean by that is
basically okay people gonna drive build
capital capital isn't done an
unbelievable number of good things in my
opinion but it also you know it's
created this machine wherever is seeking
more and more capital and then more and
more consumerism all right and it's also
the Enlightenment also built on a
massively individualistic and
self-interested model which is valid at
some level but if you take the influence
matrix seriously you realize that
actually you know
Aristotle gets it right we're an
unbelievably social animal
we are unbelievably defined by our
relational systems and our place and so
what I argue is essentially the
modernist thing what it did was it
emphasized the blueline individualism of
rank and achievement and it connected it
to consumerism just as you said and it's
that value system that we're feeding
people off network
we're basically prepared to seek those
because of them influence matrix but
it's actually the case we're also
prepared if we cultivated it right and
this is why I do believe game B if it's
done right from a developmental
standpoint an educational developmental
standpoint we can develop the care the
universal care element and we can
emphasize with the relational value you
mentioned the word social capital in
fact this is what I call it if we
understood that what we actually really
seek is to be known and valued by
important others and realize that that
is the ultimate status and if we do that
with integrity man we can create
different kinds of social systems we are
pointing the power of the capitalistic
engine at consumerism and the rank the
blue line the climbing if we point it
actually at social capital defined in
terms of mutual relational value and
really that's actually where we should
grant status in other words hey are you
committed to the communal good are you
doing so in a way that is creative and
true to yourself if you look at
hunter-gatherers what they actually did
so the hunter-gatherers there are anti
dominant systems all right 100 gatherer
is a really really keen on regulating
that blue line and we humans have it
that's why there's so many anti
dominance what they emphasize is
autonomy and Communion and so what we
did the capitalists trajectory is
basically the reverse we basically said
here's your materialistic capital run
out and get it compare yourself to your
neighbors and the more you have the
higher up the rank you have it
so we inverted the hunter-gatherer
strategy and certainly did have a lot of
good but as you and so many other people
that understand the game be system man
that train is heading for a wall or a
cliff and if we don't turn it around
it's just gonna chew everything up and
then we'll fall right off and and you
know collapse it whatever level of
disaster that would be hold yep indeed
in fact essentially you touch on the
hunter-gatherers one of my favorite bits
of anthropology's by crisp
a book called hierarchy in the forest it
really should have been called anti
hierarchy in the forest because what it
really talks about is how forager level
Homo sapiens were able to defeat their
probable Genetic Programming he went
back a lot of care and made some
estimates on you know what came from
chimps what came from bonobos and the
level of dominance hierarchies both have
and even bonobos usually thought of as
the good guys of our ancestors were way
more dominance hierarchy oriented than
foragers were and our so our forager
hunter-gatherer people developed a
social operating system and it's
actually one of the surprisingly one of
the antecedents to our game be thinking
we're attempts for strongmen to bully
the other folks were defeated by a whole
series of social agreements yeah and
some of them were actually
technologically enabled you know his
view is for instance the development of
weapons made a big difference because in
chimp world even a bunch of betas can't
beat up the alpha typically but two guys
with even wooden Spears can kill the
alpha human so even small sub
coalition's could could expel the people
who tried to dictate so it's
extraordinarily interesting that humans
at the earliest stage we're able to
throw off you know oppressive hierarchy
but then once we invalid developed
agriculture we fairly soon thereafter
fell into a trap of institution and
hierarchy which is oppressed people for
you know for 10,000 years and you know
game B is an attempt to end that ten
thousand year of oppression and return
us to something that's much better right
without the stupidities of things like
Marxist Leonard is Amit just make you
know completely absurd at multiple
levels both mathematically and anything
you know about human nature so anyway
that's quite a little sidebar there but
you know people are interested in game B
I should check it out at the game B
group on Facebook and there's about
fifteen other associated groups on
things like game B parenting upgrading
sovereignty game B community building
etc yeah I'm hopeful for game be part of
the hope is that actually if we if you
really want to hack the human
psychological system it's good to have a
theory about how it works
so in fact I'm going to promote this in
game B I'm going to promote this episode
in the game B group and I'm gonna
encourage people to take a look into it
and see if people can find more touch
points than my one little one that I
just found that I'm going to do some
thing about it too but anyway let's get
back to you this this episode is really
about your theory I was gonna hop over
to justification hypothesis which is to
my mind one of the most interesting
parts here of the theory but but before
we do that I know you've been kind of
tugging to do that a couple of times
let's talk about the tree of knowledge
there's actually a full chapter of it
late in the book but there's also a
little introduction to it in the
beginning so why don't we kind of match
those two things together and talk about
the tree of knowledge system before we
jump back and talk about the
justification hypothesis yeah well this
is great and I appreciate this stuff
this is really helpful in terms of if
you really want to understand the theory
it is the juxtaposition of these two
ideas we've laid the groundwork for it
but a lot of the groundwork that we've
been dialoguing really about is actually
after the fact that these chooses ideas
emerge in fact the tree of knowledge
popped out of my head in 1997 in a night
and you know under just a moment of
insight what is it if you look at it
you'll see it's basically four
upside-down cones identified on the
dimension of time that starts with the
beginning the Big Bang the cosmic
singularity or whatever primordial atom
is you want to call it in terms of and
out of that I call that the pure energy
singularity and we can get into the
metaphysics of that physical claim but
anyway we'll say that and then out of
that whatever at the level of the
inflationary Big Bang moment that then
Trent started a chain reaction in the
energy singularity so that energy began
to freeze into chunks of matter and we
get the explosion of what we've mapped
in the standard model of elementary
particle physics in terms of quarks and
leptons and for fermions as those and
then you know photons and all and all of
that but essentially what you get then
is the emergence of what I call the
matter or material dimension of
complexity that's our three dimensions
of space in our normal size of course
obviously quantum and mechanics and
general relativity
turn out to make that more complicated
at least in non-euclidean sense and then
in on time and then you know the
evolution then of material complexity
emergence of different kinds of
properties that happen through time and
arranger so we get stars we get galaxies
we get different chemicals then as stars
produce more and more different kinds of
atoms we then get the periodic table of
the elements and lo and behold on our
little branch of the Milky Way on a
medium-sized planet on a medium-sized
star and one of the little arms in the
Milky Way we get the emergence of life
that happens approximately 3.8 7 billion
years ago and the tree of knowledge
shows sort of the evolution of the
material universe up to say four billion
years ago and then over the last from
four billion to 700 million years we see
the evolution of life now what gave rise
to the actual spark of life I like lanes
alkaline vent hypothesis but that's a
real mystery
you get lipids you get a membrane the
inside outside but exactly how you get a
coding system and and how that actually
creates an RNA protein system all sorts
of good questions we could dialogue
about that but really the argument is
that life really represents a strong
emergence what do I mean by strong
emerges I mean that if we go back and
think about how we understand things and
actually you know from a justification
hypothesis the idea is that we humans
they build these systems of
justification and a lot of our
understanding then is defined in against
other systems so actually modern science
is understanding of matter is many ways
to find against Aristotle's
understanding and I would argue that
what what Galileo and then Newton did
was really took Aristotle's metaphysics
and tried to make it as empirical as
possible and they basically took
substance and kinetic calls and argued
hey here's your material dimension and
you don't need formal or final causation
you just look at matter in motion and
you can describe it you can experiment
on that and actually I do believe that
that forms a pretty good articulation of
how matter actually behaves but what
Galileo or others really haven't
realized is we act
we need formal and final causation to
understand the way cells behave in fact
Jessica Flacco was you know talking
about this in relationship to you know
what what who cells do cells actually
process information they detect
particular kinds of informational forms
they use that information to guide their
actions certainly a trees do this all
sorts of living organisms are processing
information and what are they doing
they're guiding their responses toward
particular kinds of outcomes and of
course we know this has been emergent as
a function of the least the basic
ingredients natural selection operating
on genetic combinations gives us a an
idea about how these complex adaptive
systems emerge but the argument is is
that actually now on top of substance
and kinetic causation descriptively and
I mean that just in terms of to describe
the behavior of living systems we
actually formal and final causation and
what the tree of balance shows is that
actually what you're getting is a novel
emergent complex adaptive plane of
existence so you get the biological
landscape with its organisms navigating
the Fitness landscape in a way that's
radically different than we see at the
chemistry level at the behavior of
planets in other words of the material
dimensions so the tree of knowledge then
depicts the emergence of that dimension
of complexity and then what it does is
says hey 700 million years ago we had
seen now the emergence of cellular life
and plant life and then somewhere
between 700 million years and over the
last time spans to say up to five
million years ago we see the explosion
and the emergence of the evolution mind
what I call mind which is really the set
of mental behavior which we can observe
through the way animals engage in
sensory motor activity mediated by the
nervous system and of course we talked
about behavioral investment theory so
you see the emergence of the animal
kingdom and then over the last hundred
thousand years of psycho we see the
emergence of the fourth dimension of
complexity culture and that is how
language and justification and other
aspects of human tool-making and whatnot
but really give rise to the way in which
humans build what I call inter
subjective systems of justification in
other words how we're talking right now
how we build those knowledge systems
that's the person culture plane of
existence and the tree of knowledge also
said then trails that system of
justification and argues that over the
last 400 years a really unique system of
justification has emerged which we call
science science not only had a
philosophy but it has an empirical
method in a particular way then of
mapping the emergence of evolution of
complexity and out of culture emerges
science and scientific knowledge to then
proceed to give us an ontological
epistemological map of the Antec reality
so that then you see science emerging
out of culture and the few get the
physical sciences mapping matter the
material dimension you get the
biological sciences mapping life you get
what I want to call the basic
psychological sciences or just call them
the mind and brain behavior sciences if
you'd want the mapping the dimension of
animal behavior what I call mind and you
get the Social Sciences then mapping the
emergence of the person culture
dimension and so the Tree of Knowledge
then gives us a picture of reality on
the one hand in a new view light in
terms of these different frequencies of
behavioral complexity and then it also
tells us these are the dimensions of
science and one other thing I want to
connect to because this is your you know
they're complex adaptive systems people
are unbelievable emotion to me in
thinking about the way that works but
one of the things the tree of knowledge
says is these different landscapes
emerge as a function of different
information processing systems and
communication between complex adaptive
agents so you get cell communicating
with each other as genes store and
process information across time and then
you get nervous systems which are
processing information and animals
communicating with each other that gives
that mind dimension then you get
linguistic cognition and of course human
language where humans are Camille
coordinating with each other so each
system each dimension has given rise to
as a function of information processing
and communication systems of the genetic
neuronal and linguistic level and that
is what gives rise to these different
dimensions and that that's the Tree of
Knowledge most obvious feature when you
look at it these four upside-down cones
and that's a corner
the Purple's yeah very good it's a very
interesting theory it corresponds
relatively well to how I might cut it of
course there are many levels of
emergence my good friend
rest in peace Harold Moritz wrote a
great book on emergence I think it's
called
emergence and he laid out twenty seven
levels of emergence from the Big Bang to
let's say advanced economics or somesuch
and of course you can cut it lots of
different ways into lots more than 27
though probably not too many less than
these four these four are pretty close
to my bright lines you know I've always
said there's a bright line between
matter and life between life and mind
and I suppose I have not been so clear
about between mind and culture but that
makes good sense too so as long as we
keep in mind that this is just one cut
of the emergent stack but it seems to be
one that's particularly useful for
developing theory well with that very
good description of the of the Tree of
Life system let's now go on to the
fairly purely human aspect and you can
talk about how it happened to be that
this would be emergent in humans but not
in other levels your theory of the
justification hypothesis and your whole
justification systems thinking great yes
actually the picture model is the tree
of knowledge as opposed to tree of life
so just make that comment I'm sorry did
I say 300 I stood about tree of
knowledge yeah brain fart that's fine
right and it is an allusion to the tree
of knowledge in Genesis and I could
explain why I am trying to connect our
scientific models to our mythopoetic
novels but that's a whole other story
let me talk about the justification
hypothesis and what I now what my friend
Jo Mikulski convinced me I should really
have called
justified systems theory which is a
broader idea so it's a multi-layered
ideas a lot of mine tend to be but I'm
going to start with the justification
hypothesis what is that the
justification hypothesis is the an idea
that connects the evolution of language
to our human ego our self-consciousness
what I call the ego or the mental organ
of justification which if you use the
model so the idea is is if you know of
we go straight to say neuropsychological
research with Michael Gazzaniga and
others we know that the left hemisphere
at least in most people really can be a
thought of as an interpretive system and
fascinating research on split brain
individuals has shown that that left
hemisphere system left on its own device
will simply generate socially acceptable
rationales for what's going on even if
it has been sort of isolated because the
corpus callosum getting cut even if it's
been isolated from having access to
information okay so if we see what
Gazzaniga called the interpreter
function which is that we have a
tendency all things being equal when
we're sort of on automatic pilot to
generate socially acceptable rationales
for our behavior now let's go back in
time and let's start to imagine what
changes you talked about sort of a real
speciation maybe event and language
let's talk about that okay because I
believe that human language is a game
changer so and here's how I you're the
basics phases of evolution of language
so I think that you're getting big
changes in terms of our brain size I
think you're getting big changes in
relationship to our social coordination
you are seeing tool use the evolution of
fire makes a big difference how we hunt
so there are a lot of social
coordination changes and I think that
what initially is happening is all sorts
of memetic
processes and intuition of aspects of
pre verbal inter subjective coordination
punting and and the gut gesturing and
what I would get I would say pre
language systems that are not full but
partial okay if you read Merlyn Donald's
origin of the human mind he has a really
really the modern mind I think it is a
really brilliant articulation what he
called mimetics which is basically my
mean each other and coordinating around
broken language so here you'd have a
situation where you'd say things like
antelope there and make a gesture and
other people would gesture and I have an
intuitive understanding
what the intent was and what the meaning
was okay what I argue here is what you
have going on with the cognitive system
you have the system being able to really
represent objects like antelope and
their position in space and how they
might change that's gonna give rise to
things like verbs and adjectives and you
start to have a symbolic tagging
capacity and then there's some sort of
miracle of grammar that happens and
whether this is a something that happens
sort of with a fox 2 gene and happens
immediately or something that happens
over a long period of time you know this
got a very difficult question to answer
but I do believe that very dramatic
changes happen although I really find
animal language and communication
research interesting I see a gulf a
major Gulf and most people then say well
if you get this communication capacity
you have this higher cognitive capacity
we're already engaged in some tool
making now you add language to it we can
build these cognitive gadgets through
language in a way that other animals
can't we can feedback and dialogue with
each other man isn't that an
unbelievable advantage and the answer to
me is yes however here's my big insight
and that is is that language and we deal
with this everyday all the time is
language gives rise to the problem what
I call the problem of justification okay
and that is if I'm gonna once you get
full language you have a propositional
statement so now I can say the antelope
are over there all right when I just say
antelope and there I can't engage that
but now I have a statement which now can
correspond or not propositional e in
terms of its meeting to the actual state
of affairs and this gives rise to the
question capacity well how the hell do
you know that okay how do you know that
that's over there
all right and that's the problem of
justification where you actually start
to legitimize and this gives rise to
reason giving and reason analysis all
right there's actually been a recent
book the Enigma reason who actually
seems to draw many of the same ideas
that I developed by Sperber and Hugo
Mercier and they try to argue that
actually generating statements and then
justifying reasoning and arguing played
a big role I agree with that and I build
off of that further so I also articulate
not only do
the problem of justification which by
the way this concept of justification
becomes a central idea and how we think
about human knowledge the least
propositional knowledge in fact I always
translate propositional knowledge into
justification because it's actually much
more socially relevant you talk about
propositions you know we can debate them
but what do they actually mean you get
into justifications and you say well
what am i a JIT amaizing about what is
and what ought to be well that's
actually now you're engaged in the
actual you know is it legitimate to vote
for Trump I mean that's a justification
and that's really the way we live in the
world okay so now you have the language
you get this emerging problem of
justification this gives rise to
question-and-answer dynamics and
reasoning and reason giving and then you
take a little deeper and then you get
into what I call the problem of social
justification now social justification
is this issue about how the hell do you
explain your actions to other people in
a way that manages your social
influences remember are the influence
matrix says hey your social influence is
really important okay right and so now
so here's the example I always use it's
sort of like okay let's say I'm
pair-bonded with somebody and I'm fairly
big and strong all right and let's say
you're really interested in my mate all
right and I go off on a hunt and you
start hanging around okay and then I
come back and I notice you're around I
say hey Jim what are you doing you the
last thing you want to say is actually I
want to separate the two of you and take
her as my mate but that's actually
inside your knowledge system okay so
what do you actually say so actually hey
she's just cheating me teaching me to
plant seeds you know I'm just hanging
around here so in other words what this
says is that actually our core motives
to the extent that they're socially
unacceptable to the extent that they
would cost us courage to be Creed
conflict make us judge other people be
the kinds of things that would be
outside of convention to the extent that
those things we are actually not going
to have nearly as good access to that
and our mental organ of justification is
actually going to be organized so to
have a lot of press secretary Mike
functions in it so that we legitimize
ourselves and give ourselves the benefit
that a doubt when goes bad we
look for external explanations when
goes well it's yeah because I'm
confident when our friends do good stuff
hey it's cuz they're confident when our
friends do lousy stuff flip it around
our enemies they're always to blame for
anything that bad happens okay so we
have this natural social justification
tendency that ties our reason giving to
social influence dynamics and I actually
generated this hypothesis when I was
learning about Freudian therapy in
theory okay and if you put it in this
term you basically get a evolutionary
reverse engineering explanation for
Freud meaning that what for each
observation what fundamentally did he
say now straights had a lot of crazy
 but what he is a brilliant observer
of human behavior and what he saw is
that people had these core bio
Psychological drives they lived in a
social environment that told them and
dictated them what was appropriate of
what was not and they operated off of a
social reality principle that tried to
rationalize what it is that they did as
they regulated the drives that were
threatening to the social environment
that's that's what Freud observed and he
built the whole theory around well this
says that's exactly right it's the
actual dilemma of being a self-conscious
being that lives in a culture of
justification and you have your selfish
primitive desires and you have to figure
out how to tell a story about what's
happening in a way that doesn't cost you
and so this creates this idea that
there's a real self conscious design
feature towards justifying that's the
justification hypothesis and ultimately
that's part of justification Systems
Theory I'll pause there and see if that
makes sense to you but the hypothesis is
is that we have a mental organ of
justification that evolved in response
to the problem of social justification
that comes along with propositional
language well one could cook it down is
that we have once we realize that we can
create false statements we can navigate
in strategy space by lying right right
there's a buzz a movie on the invention
of lying and this is the this is the
affirmative side so I often talk about
people feeling vulnerable and sort of
defensive and then of course now you
have the strategic
side of this equation to which you just
alluded to which you can now engage in
misinformation disinformation actual
line and of course that's what all part
of the absolutely the landscape now of
deceit deception whether it's active or
subconsciously biased but that's all
part of the game absolutely yeah lying
to yourself lying to others to different
sets right yeah you give the example of
you know the dude hanging around the
sweet chick while the bulky husband is
off hunting and then saying yeah I was
just here to learn about her planting of
seed I wasn't actually thinking about
planting my own seed haha you know is
that you know is that self-deception or
lying or can you not tell the difference
or doesn't even matter right I think
perhaps on there right at the broadest
level of justification hypothesis one
might say well does it really matter
there are a way to embed in a cultural
matrix that doesn't upset the matrix too
much and yet you're essentially
navigating a personal trajectory you're
building a personal story I'm just
thinking out loud here so this might be
ridiculous that's right you're you're
you're navigating a personal journey in
a social context with stakes both low
and high you have this thing called
language which you both consciously and
unconsciously know can be misleading or
outright false and so part of this
navigation is using that capability to
your best advantage absolutely
absolutely and it does say certainly
that we have that there are certain
domains of mind that we will have much
more readily access to and there are
good reasons to actually so the idea of
self-deception my self-consciousness may
be have ready access to certain kinds of
domains of knowledge that are embedded
in my you know more subconscious systems
in ways that I don't have access to so
all of that is true absolutely in fact
actually getting back to our game be
world one of the things we Porsche is
called sovereignty which is to be able
to get a level of view on our own
psychological machinery so that at least
with other people that are in
sovereignty we can all agree to operate
with honesty and good faith at all times
and that that's kind of a hack on some
of the the misuses of our capability
of navigating in the justification space
absolutely hundred percent and what this
says is in fact I I label in one of the
other parts of the justification of the
overall justification system series it
gives what's called the updated
tripartite model of human consciousness
and it identifies the core nonverbal
phenomenological experience portion of
consciousness then the self conscious
narrator the internal private part and
then the public what do you publicly
justify to others okay and then when we
when it what it says is that there's
there's a what I call the Freudian
filter the Freudian filter is that space
in between your phenomenological in your
private narrator and what have you
filter out will add a personal dynamic
we also filter out all your narcissistic
nasty that you don't want to allow
other people to know we call that the
personal shadow in the clinical world
you know in terms of like Carl Jung and
other people with what is your shadow so
if you want to examine Dee you got to do
your shadow work you got to know where
do you think you're all that and
where are you actually really vulnerable
that you try to hide him from yourself
and how do you actually manipulate
people even while you're trying to say
you're being helpful
that's shadow dynamic if you want to get
a group of individuals that have
sovereignty you got to get each of them
working through their shadow and part of
the justification hypothesis tells you
yeah you're actually gonna you're
designed to have a shadow and we ready
to shine the light on that and if you
want to have authentic communication
through your heart through your head and
into the public sphere understand that
filtering process mmm yeah it's very
good point just for my benefit I your
people talk about shadow and shadow work
and frankly it sounds like you know just
I have no idea what they're
talking about sounds like horseshit
right it sounds like you actually have a
pretty clear definition of what is
shadow and what is shadow work just for
my benefit could you give us a minute or
two on that sure so basically what this
argues is that you have a self
consciousness system that wants to see
yourself as good wants to see yourself
as useful wants to see yourself as
strong that's it's a tractor state okay
so if you start what if you start acting
in a particular way so that here's the
classic the classic shadow is a
narcissist or one classic there's lots
of them one would be an individual to go
around bragging all the time
hey I did this because I'm super good
and I did this because I'm super you
know hey come hang with me
well what's underneath that is and this
is there's a subtype of narcissus that
clearly have this dynamic and what's
underneath that at the phenomenological
level in other words the subconscious
experience level is a fear an insecurity
that there really have low social
influence low relational value and if
the other persons knew who they really
were they would abandon them so they're
constantly justifying why they deserve
attention all right well if you get him
into therapy and what you try to do is
you shine the light and you realize that
okay this important person classically
the father you know ignored me and I
felt weak in relationship to this and
I've been compensating for that
underlying weakness by trying to prove
to myself and others that I'm actually
valuable well underneath all that is
that the shitty feeling that I'm
actually a low relational value low
self-worth person and that's the shadow
side of the advanced pride that
everybody sees and really can see a sort
of shallow admit and you know and
ineffective in a classic portrayal of
that so the underlying shame would be
hidden from this person's initial
consciousness and then in the therapy
room what you do in fact there's a whole
I can share with you a very classic
that's called the male on trial of
conflict what happens is people get
initial impulses and then they have what
are called secondary anxiety inhibitor
responses to that initial impulse and
then they develop rationalizing
basically mechanisms so they
don't attend to the original impulse and
what will happen is it's organized by
emotion and image and it will build
inside of people and so that you could
see that there's actually of their sub
personality that doesn't have ready
access they have intuitive access
because it makes them really anxious and
the whole of much of the therapy work is
shining the light on that shadow which
they've blocked off based on cognitive
dissonance I mean Connie this is a very
very documental phenomenon of the
interpreter function of the left
hemisphere the therapy process is
figuring out ways in which you could
integrate those senses of vulnerability
and make them whole and
and if you actually do that then we can
achieve sovereignty within ourselves and
between ourselves because we're not
trying to anymore we actually
have a holistic picture of what our
heart wants and what our what we believe
and what we say to other people that's
that's what we want we don't want a
bunch of bull shooters to themselves and
other people
that makes sense and then those so the
shadow work is then getting those things
out of the shadow so you can see them
and do something about them is that
right that's right exactly then you try
to have corrective emotional experiences
where you help people
both empathize why they blocked them off
originally and and sort of deconstruct
their beliefs about why they had to and
then what does it mean make them feel a
little less defensive integrate the pain
which is always painful when it happens
but if you're able to hold that pain and
be aware and it tuned to it and then
recognize that you can adaptively grow
from it well then you integrate that
weakness and then ultimately do this
that's doing the shadow work and you
become a whole or stronger person who's
actually able to learn and grow because
if you're not a lot of shadow you
actually can't learn and grow because
you're constantly defending pretending
of the way the world has to be because
you're afraid that if you discover what
really is then everything's gonna come
crashing down makes perfectly good sense
good visible clearest definition I've
ever heard about it now another question
I had when I was you know reading about
your justification hypothesis and how it
you know how and in this river I was
thinking about how it worked etc could
you describe how it works inter works
part is part of and is different somehow
then culture itself so the relationship
between the justification hypothesis and
culture great seems like they're very
similar concepts all right so the
hypothesis and then I wasn't always
super clear of my language I appreciate
that and especially back in 2011 I was
less clear so here's the deal the
hypothesis is the idea about what
happened with language that it reaches a
tipping point in propositions okay and
question and answer dynamics and then
all of a sudden that question answer
Dynamis gives rise to the social
justification problem then that shapes
the mental organ of the self
consciousness system into this mental
organ of justification that's the
hypothesis then what happens is that
this really shapes the model of human
consciousness which I was talking about
which is the
crime experiential the private narrator
and the public
okay those three domains and then this
is the third part of the idea of
justification systems which is and this
should be familiar to you this is idea
then that these belief systems can be
thought of as language based memes okay
that then start to grow and replicate as
ideas of what is legitimate and what is
not so then instruct to take off systems
of justification these become the
ideologies norms rules of a house rules
of a tribe rules of culture what then is
actually legitimate and so what culture
is with a capital seed I want to be
clear because you know I'm using a
technical definition some people say
well animals have culture and it really
depends on how you find it's like that's
true how I'm defining culture are these
large scale systems of justification
language based beliefs and values that
legitimize is an AW across a wide
variety of different contexts so they
organize our institutions to think about
the institutional law you think about
the institution you know of the
universities what is legitimate well how
are they fine then out of that core then
becomes a hierarchy of statements that
are more or less central and those
become organizing systems cultural codes
that give us the rules and regulations
and so culture then is those systems
higher order large-scale systems of
justification give up norms ideologies
networks of propositions that allow us
to make meaning out of the world things
along those lines
yeah then presumably our culture builds
in us some of our justifications right
exactly train is the little kid not to
spit on the sidewalk because it's rude
and you see somebody else spit on the
sidewalk do you have some rule why
they're you know they're bad right
essentially or or you don't do it
because you know that it sends a bad
signal about you being rude so there's a
feedback obviously between culture and
the justifications that one has built
into one's own system completely she's
completely iterative feedback loop so
normally we get born into the
large-scale systems of justification I
would say obviously if I are born in
Saudi Arabia before I'm born five
thousand years ago my belief value
system
different because my parents and the and
the civilization and cultures that we
were around would have given me
radically different ideologies and at
first we are social actors that's a term
that sort of absorbs the scripts the
rules the regulations as kids of what's
appropriate and then we just deploy
those and then we have become as
adolescents we've become agents where we
start to actually get some ways of
thinking about these rules that but it's
raised out a teenager's nose that
actually they could say hey mom and dad
fu you know you know you know gives you
the right and by that time they've got
you know maybe journalize the convention
and now starting to challenge where that
authority comes from and ultimately we
want individuals to you know reclaim and
full adulthood their own narrative and
see the narrative arc of our lives in
relationship to culture and of course
sophisticated people that do that that
then live lives a say of Martin Luther
King that then lives lies the feedback
on to the culture and says hey no this
justification system about you know Jim
Crow laws and black/white segregation
that's all that's horribly unfair and
here's an example are of a wonderful
human being and if what you said about
black people was true how is this
possible and here's another narrative
justification for how we can live and
it's a higher close to ethical more
Universal ethical principles well that
reasoning process kicks in and people
justify particular ways and voila you
get them individuals leading the edge of
culture and creating transformations
back into the system so it's a complete
process
kids get socialized into it and then
people start to challenge it some and
find their place in it and a couple
people end up really shooting into the
world and changing the systems of
justification radically very good well I
think we're getting kind of close on our
time here is there anything else you
want to say to wrap up your theory yeah
what I'd like to bring it back to Gabby
and and also let us think a little bit
about where we are at this moment a
number of the circles that I've been
listening to and hanging out and doing
podcasts and talk about the Kairos of
the moment of course with the co vid 19
crisis and I know you've been talking a
lot about as so many people thinking
about the global East act
interdependencies that make our system
very very fragile and what kinds of
stones can we hope for in terms of you
know achieving a better understanding so
we can move towards a much more
sustainable robust anti fragile future I
think the tree of knowledge and the
unified theory of psychology provides a
piece of this puzzle first
the unified theory psychology actually
tries to help us understand what kind of
creatures we are both in terms of our
primate natures and our cultural natures
so if we're going to hack the human
condition it's good to have a good map
of that and the other thing that the
tree of knowledge says which I think is
reasonable to take very very seriously
in the context of the 21st century and
what is happening to us is each one of
these complex adaptive planes life
mind culture is a function of an
information processing and communication
system ok so what it says is if a novel
information processing system word of
emerge if those things were to get
connected together and networked
together then all of a sudden you could
give rise to a whole new dimension of
complexity this is by the way what I
call the fifth joint point ok so the
fifth joint point is the idea that
actually we may be in the process of an
emergent evolution of a whole new
complex adaptive plane indeed the idea
that we're in the in the exists of a
shift into the world of the digital
whereby over the 20th century we built
these computers we build artificial
intelligent systems that were going to
interact with with increasing degrees of
interface that we connected in networks
the Internet of course the Internet of
Things
we are fusing with the digital and this
is an entirely new information
processing communication system a
futurist by the name of Oliver Reiser
called this of the world since aureum
and back in 1958 which have done notion
so here's my pitch is that I think we're
in a very very complicated phase where
our old institutional systems that were
built on different kinds of information
processing communication really are
getting deeply pressed in the world but
we live our is very complicated and
we're seeing a lot of chaotic flux with
a lot of fragility I think we need some
seriously new thinking I think you've
been leading the way
some of that thinking absolutely and I
think what we need essentially used to a
language like game be a language like
the fifth joint point and say hey this
21st century is going to be a massive
flux we have to think wisely about this
we can't expect the world just to
continue the way it's been going we have
to think seriously about how to
understand our natures understand the
environment the tech that we're in and
merge those together into a sustainable
wise ecology going forward and the Tree
of Knowledge provides an angle on that
as well wow I love it well I think we're
gonna wrap it up right there I don't
think we could we could go any further
or say much more thank you Greg for a
ordinarily deep interesting and fun
exercise hey man I really appreciate it
you're a wonderful interview I've
enjoyed your show production services
and audio editing by jarred Jane's
consulting music by Tom Muller at modern
space music