welcome to episode number 46 today on
the show we have Daniel 'shmock dan
burger again this time he's talking
about existential risks and how to avoid
them we've already done several other
episodes with Daniel before and they
were always some of our favorites a very
mind-expanding and inspirational but I
think this one is particularly important
because he talks about some of the most
pressing issues that we face on our
planet today and proposes some ways that
we can solve them if you want to check
out the previous episodes that we've
done with Daniel go to future thinkers
data work / Daniel to get all the books
resources and the other things that we
mentioned in this episode go to future
thinkers at work slash 46 this episode
is brought to you by BCD see they're
working on several blockchain based apps
to help save the environment one of them
is called eco chain and it's a
crowdfunding and investment platform for
renewable energy projects where people
can invest in new clean energy
installations and get an ROI so BCDC is
doing a token sale which is now
happening in November 2017 but the
presale is already happening now you can
see our report and listen to the
interview we did with them by going to
future thinkers org slash BC DC you can
also find all the links to their website
white paper and bounty campaign there as
well last but not least before we get
into the episode we want to thank our
recent patrons ray and Dean for
supporting us on patreon all right let's
get started
welcome to future thinkers org a podcast
about the evolution of technology
society and consciousness I'm Mike
Gilliland and I'm UV Ivanova to get
notified of new podcasts and videos go
to future thinkers org and subscribe to
our mailing list you can also find us on
iTunes stitcher and you tube if you like
what we do and you want to help us make
more podcasts and videos give us a like
or review share it with your friends and
consider becoming a patron go to
patreon.com/crashcourse org slash bap
last but not least if you want to get
access to more content hidden episodes
or if you just want to chat with us in
previous guests then check out our
community at community dark future
thinkers org Daniel welcome to the show
it's good to have you on again so today
we're talking about existential risks
which is a topic I know you're quite
familiar with that you know you've
brought up in past episodes with us so
this is something I've actually really
been looking forward to getting into
with you great so why don't we start
with the big questions what are some of
the biggest existential risks that we
are facing on the planet right now so
for those who aren't familiar the term
existential risk means some risks that
could stop us from existing so a species
threatening event there's also plenty of
catastrophic risks that would just
really suck even though we wouldn't be
completely wiped out as a species so
there are versions of world war three
that are existential kinds of nuclear
holocaust that nobody makes it through
there are kinds of world war three that
are catastrophic meaning some group of
people in remote areas make it through
but the atmosphere holds you rhenium and
you know most of the people did very
poorly so we're kind of interested in
preventing all of those things right so
what are the categories first there's
different ways of kind of chunking and
different ways of doing taxonomy one
thing we can look at is start by saying
there are kind of human-induced things
and then there's kind of natural
phenomena the natural phenomena are
things that either arise from within our
earth and biosphere or outside of it so
outside of it is things like solar
flares and Carrington events asteroids
that can be catastrophic or existential
and obviously
you know within our atmosphere most of
the natural phenomena that would occur
would not be existential but there are
some super caldera kinds of scenarios
that would be we're obviously interested
in any of them because you know if if
there was an event that we just couldn't
avoid here then Mars colony moves up on
the priority list right mm-hmm
but surprisingly most of these things if
we have more Intel about them many of
them can be avoided or at least
mitigated against so for instance if we
look at something like a Carrington
event or we're looking at solar flares
or coronal mass ejections that besides
the just effect that they would have on
biology directly would also have effects
on electrical circuitry as far as
biology goes there might be a impact on
one part of the planet people can go
underground it's not that big a deal but
as far as frying the circuitry goes if
we're talking about frying the circuitry
of nuclear cooling stations on the power
plant so then they turn into nuclear
volcanoes that's a pretty big deal now
we could of course do things to mitigate
against the sensitivity there like
hardening the nuclear cooling stations
and you know other forms of key
infrastructure so even with regard to
things that we can call natural
phenomena obviously you know there are
projects that are looking at asteroids
and other near-earth objects because
depending upon what we see they might
actually be movable and there are a
number of projects focused on that then
we move our attention to you know human
induced things and we can look at the
ones that go through environmental
pathways basically we either through
biodiversity loss or climate change
ocean acidification or other kinds of
effects on our biosphere we create a
biosphere that is uninhabitable to
humans but we don't even have to get to
full uninhabitable 'ti for partial
uninhabitable 'ti to lead to the
beginning of cascade effects you know
when we look at what happened in Syria
we see that a major part of what
happened in factoring there were many
many factors simultaneously but one part
of it was drought in an area that had
not had droughts led to subsistence
farmers moving into the cities the tax
to the resource capacity of those cities
beyond their limits
led to resource Wars that led to
factions and that whole kind of thing so
when we start looking at climate change
creating massive numbers of refugees and
the refugee dynamics leading to war
dynamics and resource footage Wars
economic collapse and then you know
cascading Wars you can have scenarios
where environmental phenomena are the
first step in a series of cascades that
can occur so you've got all of the
environmental phenomenon the effects of
on coral of ocean temperature ocean
acidification the loss of big fish in
the trophic cascades key species
collapse throughout many different
dynamics pollinators like there's a lot
there's a lot of things in there then we
can look at other reasons for just human
induced violence towards each other so
all of the reasons that something like a
World War three and we see right now the
United States leaving its position of
clear supremacy as a superpower
we see China moving up into that
position we have rarely seen transitions
of power go smoothly in the history of
civilization and we've never had
transitions of power be at this kind of
global level and with existential level
technologies and with over seven billion
people and with a biosphere near
collapse and near fragility points like
we're in a very different place but even
when just there was a local hegemony
where the power was moving from one kind
of local power to another those were
usually not easy transition so lots of
different scenarios and then there are
the exponential tech scenarios where
different kinds of exponential
technology exponential technology means
exponentially increased power to affect
stuff and whether we're talking about
through AI or through CRISPR and biotech
or through nanotech you know or through
robotics if we have exponentially
increasing ability to affect stuff
without exponentially increasing good
choice making that is just self
terminating no matter what and that is
the scenario we have right now so
exponential tech can lead to existential
scenarios on purpose or on accident
right you can have just much more
powerful kind of capacities military
capacities and much more powerful
capacity
that even smaller actors are able to get
nuclear bomb started off as such a
difficult thing that only huge date
actors could have it those state actors
could watch each other you could have a
mutually assured destruction system so
nobody can use it but as you start to
have exponential tech that becomes
distributed where smaller and smaller
actors have access to larger and larger
potential to affect things the ability
to avoid that happening gets harder and
harder and then you also have
exponential tech that leads to
existential scenarios accidentally so
most of the AI risks that bostr√∂m lays
out in super intelligence the gray goo
risks that Drexler lays out you know
these are mostly where we create in
autopoietic system we create a self
fueling system that has a faster
feedback loop is more adaptive than
biology and not commensurate with
biology and so we have to avoid
accidental extinction as well as on
purpose extinction you know that's kind
of a rough lay of the land of the
categories of existential risk now if we
take a step back from it we can say all
of these categories have some things in
common some deeper underlying drivers
that are actually the real existential
concerns because if at this level the
scenarios are basically countless but if
we go deeper one way of saying it is
that the real existential risk is a loss
of sense making loss of the ability to
actually make sense of the world around
us and what is worth doing what the
likely effects of things will be what
the effects of our actions are now and
so let me think about it
how long do we have with ocean
acidification before the coral die right
now the thoughts on that vary so widely
that it's either the most important
issue or we have quite a bit of time and
is Fukushima really close to releasing a
lot of radiation or not and can North
Korea's nuclear each certain places or
not and what are the real risks with AGI
parasitic AI etcetera like if we don't
have better ability to make sense of
these things then they just all fail
scenarios right because we don't know
how to prioritize what should actually
get attention paid to it and what could
be successful and what's not likely to
be successful
so we can say that a lack of information
coherence is one of the things that is
at the heart of driving them and now to
take us deeper step we say well within
capitalism and we can set even further
back in a moment but let's take that
step within capitalism where we're
playing a competitive game we're playing
a win-lose game usually zero-sum
sometimes small positive some but still
fundamentally win lose information is a
source of competitive advantage so we
are incented to both hoard information
and to create disinformation we actually
like if we succeed at that we will
actually do better within the system so
as you have exponential technologies the
ability to do more media spread more
different info through more channels etc
how do we have exponential information
tech with the incentive to
disinformation and actually be able to
have enough coherent information to have
any idea what the is going on well
basically we don't you know when you
think about like getting towards the
tipping point of climate change where if
we you know we get to a positive
feedback loop with warming or something
and if we don't stop a dynamic before a
certain point we won't be able to
afterwards we're actually pretty close
to the point of peak disk coherence
where if we get to that place we might
not actually be able to recover
coherence and so I would say that's one
way of thinking about what is actually
essential another way of theme about
what's essential is like we said
exponential technology it's very hard
for people's intuition to grasp what an
exponential curve is because most of the
things we experience don't feel like
exponential things but most of
technology that is exponential is
increasing our ability to affect
something with our choice but it's not
increasing the quality of our choice now
when you multiply these together
actually decreased information coherency
with increased impact that is a self
terminating scenario right so what are
some of the ways of avoiding that
especially I liked what you said about
our loss of sense making in the
exponential curve of that also that's a
really interesting factor that I think a
lot of people aren't talking about it
relates to one of the
questions I was going to ask what do we
do about the sort of institutionalized
ignorant of people - what is actually
going on and there's you mentioned the
corporate interests and producing
disinformation but there's also you know
bad educational systems that are
outdated or motivated by different
factors that have nothing to do with
actually giving people good information
and then there's research that serves
corporate needs and then there's media
propaganda and politics and all the
stuff so what kind of tools do we
actually have to change these systems in
a way that they serve the planet rather
than serving these individual interests
we could say well when you talk about
sense-making shouldn't that be science
shouldn't science be sense-making in the
same way that we shouldn't journalism be
sense-making ray aren't these shouldn't
the intelligence agencies of the world
be sense-making you know we've seen
scenarios where a scientist publishes a
scientific paper in a prestigious
scientific journal where the paper that
they wrote is complete gibberish they
made it up with technical sounding words
but it's actually gibberish and it goes
through the publication process because
they came from the right University or
whatever and they were doing that just
to show that the peer-review process is
broken
we've also seen where you know stats
like 50% of the articles posted in
places like Journal of American Medical
Association five years later the
findings are found to have been
misinterpreted or wrong or had bad
methodology etc 50% wrong means that if
I'm reading a cutting-edge medical
journal my chances of knowing what's
true are 50/50 right it's like pulling
teeth Yves would give me as much of a
sense of what's true it's unbelievable
yeah is a broken sense making system
within science if you want to think
about what the heart of science is like
what the essence of the philosophy of
sciences the essence of it is earnest
inquiry right like earnest desire to
understand the nature of reality and so
whatever the speed of sound actually is
I don't care if it is different than I
think it is I want to find out there's a
certain reverence for reality and
respect for the nature of what is beyond
my own idea
about it or how I can benefit from it
that is at the heart of the scientific
impulse but the scientists that need
paid and the equipment has to come from
somewhere and if there are some of the
answers that are more profitable than
other answers then it's easier to put
money into it because I'll be able to
get that money back and if an herb or a
plant has some medicinal property but I
will never be able to patent it and I
won't be able to recoup the money that I
get from you know the small margins that
I would put into the research how can we
afford to pay for it
but we will with say some synthetic
thing I can get a patent on and etc
right so what actually gets researched
within that structure and how it gets
researched so you have you have to
factor how deep those kind of perverse
incentives end up trickling through the
whole thing so then you ask a good
question which is within a system within
a fundamentally win-lose game-theoretic
system how do you prevent these issues
and be able to have real coherency when
we are incented to withhold information
and even you know like you'll you'll see
in soccer football whatever someone will
fake left to try and get the other
person to go left and then they'll
actually go right right like that's
disinformation intentional
disinformation so that you can throw the
opponent off so you can win this is not
different in corporations or nations
right and Intel and counter Intel and an
intentional disinformation same thing
but with global level consequence so
here's another good way of thinking
about it think about early tribes as
competitive teams almost like a sports
team where they have to work really well
together and be very coherent with each
other to be able to compete with other
teams and military conflicts when they
occur and compete with the other teams
for scarce resources in the shared
environment the shared Commons say they
they weren't military right they're just
doing their own thing there's plenty of
abundance but then if any of them
realize that they can do this military
thing go kill another tribe take their
stuff and get the riverfront that they
had or get whatever kinds of things they
had acquired and developed that actually
worked for them work better now everyone
else has to build defensive militaries
at least otherwise they lose by default
and so one of the things
get in the history of win-lose game
theory is that one it worked you could
actually go kill the other people take
their stuff and make stuff better for
you and you know your people and two if
you didn't play win lose game theory and
someone else did you lost by default
right which is why most of the more
peaceable less militaristic cultures got
wiped out so then we say you know one of
the tribes is just bigger and stronger
than us we're not going to be able to
compete with them but if two or three of
us smaller tribes band together we can
but then of course the other side has to
compete so they band together and so now
we move from tribes to villages right
and then we can move up two kingdoms
into nation-states into global economic
trading bloc's
I mean think about those evolutions of
what we think of as like civilization
structures as evolutions of competitive
teams within a win-lose game theoretic
structure that have more and more power
to be able to out-compete the other one
and that's both have more people that
can be coherent with each other against
the other one right so then where as a
nation where a team competing against
the other one we have a shared
military-industrial complex paid for by
taxes whatever or as a religion or a
race so we can have some overlapping
teams but once you get to the point
where all of the teams are stepping up
simultaneously that's the kind of
evolutionary driver they're stepping up
in their power once you get to the point
that you have exponential technological
power on multiple teams where the amount
of power that it would take to actually
win would require destroying the playing
field which becomes inevitable right
inevitably power will keep increasing
until it's actually bigger than the
playing field can tolerate and then
winning pretty much means losing because
there is nothing left to win right so
right now we're at a place where the
super powers of the world cannot win a
war against each other when you have
hundreds of times the nuclear capacity
necessary to kill all life on Earth
there is no winnable war but we keep
building more military capacity
we just spend you know a trillion and a
half dollars on the f-35 because we
didn't have badass enough jets with the
military that already has all the
technical capability that it has in the
u.s. right and and think about what a
trillion and a half dollars resources
means to other kinds of things and so
when you say why did we ever get more
than five times as many nukes as we
to kill all life on Earth like after
you've got enough nukes to kill life on
Earth five or ten times why do you keep
building more - well you have hundreds
of times was that ever a really just
strategically smart idea or was that
because we had a for-profit
military-industrial complex that makes
money when that happens where the people
who are in positions of decision-making
power also happened to be shareholders
or have vested interest in those
structures and this is not blaming the
people involved these are structural
right these are structural dynamics and
so can you have lasting peace and a
for-profit military-industrial complex
at the same time of course not right
like that's supplied in demand 101 that
if there is a massive capacity for
supply it has to protect the demand and
then you think about where those
perverse incentives go everywhere right
health care where if people weren't sick
then the system loses all of its
resource and so how could it ever really
invest in prevention deeply when its
profitability depends upon symptom
management if you even cured people
quickly that's not profitable but if you
manage symptoms ongoingly it's
profitable and if the symptom management
causes other issues that need more
symptom management ie more meds that's
just like an upsell or cross-sell
maximizing the lifetime revenue of a
customer that happens to be a patient so
when you think about you know win lose
game theory within that kind of
incentive structure where we can't win
at the wars anymore and yet we're moving
closer to the kinds of tensions where
war becomes more and more probable and
we also can't win at competing for
extracting the scarce resource when
we've already extracted so much scarce
resource we're almost at the biospheres
limits right we're almost at the limits
of what can be handled in the extraction
of oil or fish or grazing land for
cattle or so many things and so either
we continue with win lose game theory
and it becomes Omni lose-lose
catastrophic Lee or we have to figure
out how to have that power not turned
against the other power and figure out
what does Omni win-win mean where no one
has incentives that are misaligned with
the well-being of others in that system
that has that much power
and that's really the fork in the road
we're at as a species for the first time
ever now is we either figure out what on
nee win-win means
economically as a worldview governance
wise we either figure out what that
means or we continue with win-lose and
it becomes Omni lose-lose which pretty
much means we either step up into a
radically higher level of quality of
life existence for the new kind of
collective intelligence or we have a
catastrophic step down existential or
near existential but like in the next
not very long time that's really the
fork in the road and what evidence do
you see of us going down one path or the
other with more preference if we just
plot curves it doesn't look good right
if we just plot the curves of what has
happened so far with regard to how much
harm came from new power that we
developed and we look at how fast we are
developing new power on exponential
curves if we look at the population
curves and we look at you know biosphere
issues like it it all looks pretty bad
from that point of view and you can try
and take the technology minister out and
say but look at the rate at which we are
developing solutions but here's the
problem with that here's another way of
thinking about what the driver of the
existential risk and all the
catastrophic risks are so one way is of
thinking about it is that when lose game
theory is driving the whole thing right
when lose structures are driving the
whole thing with win lose game theory
multiplied by exponential power and
exponential populations another way of
looking at it is a lack of information
coherence I mean there's information
coherence and coherence as beings and
agents with each other another way of
thinking about it is a lack of coherence
around value measures and this is
actually a very deep and essential way
of thinking about it think about a tree
in an ecosystem and we say well what is
the value of that tree well it's
providing a home for a bunch of
pollinators and birds it's providing
food for them with flowers it's
stabilizing topsoil it's symbiotic with
the micro rui-zhi and the fungus and
bacteria in the soil it's providing
shade for all of these things it's you
know pulling out co2 and producing
oxygen and providing food for animals
and you know it might have
millions of value metrics as part of
this kind of complex ecosystem but then
we cut it down to make it ten thousand
dollars with the two-by-fours and its
value is ten thousand dollars and the
two by fours right like they're not
sequestering co2 and stabilizing top
soil they are serving as a structural
strut is this one really simple thing
right structural stress so we took this
very complex thing and we reduced the
complexity of it radically we made it a
very simple thing so we down cycled the
 out of it because what the metric
we were seeking to optimize was dollars
in my account and so like a dollar is a
value metric but I get the $10,000 from
that tree or I get $10,000 from the
elephant tusks right or I get 10,000
from this servicer well as I count how
do I relate the value of an elephant
tusks or a person's art or a tree like
these should not be fungible they should
not be inter exchangeable these are
fundamentally different things but
because I remove all of the information
from them and all of the contexts I want
them to be simply exchangeable in terms
of capital so I can maximize the ease of
transaction to grow pools of capital
that is an extinction area dynamic is
that we're taking complex value and
turning it into simple value that almost
sounds like a gray goo scenario of
itself it is we're taking all of these
super complex things and reducing them
to this homogenous goo that is monetary
value I actually just saw a really good
article that was called capitalism as a
paper clip Maximizer and it's actually a
really fun thought experiment paper clip
Maximizer if the people aren't familiar
was I don't remember who came up with it
first but it was in Nick Bostrom's book
on AI issues and just said you know we
could have an AI whose job was you know
working at a paperclip company to
maximize paperclip production and it
also had the capacity to upgrade its own
capacity and it ends up getting into a
place where it makes all these paper
clips and upgrades its own ability to
make more paper clips and then it starts
competing you know taking all of the
resource that humans needed to make
paper clips because that's its algorithm
and as its increasing its own capacity
it's being able to out-compete us and
then
realizes that we are made of atoms that
it can make paperclips out of it you
know that it's this kind of continuously
growing right this autopoietic capacity
that's just turning everything into
paperclips and so who they were saying
you know this paper capitalism is a
paperclip Maximizer because capital is
making more capital that's kind of the
gist of this distributed system rather
than as a central AI it's this
distributed kind of collective
intelligence system they uses these
distributed human bio processors within
it but because we've reduced the value
to capital and having more capital makes
it easier to get more capital the
capital gains interest faster than the
overall economy grows gives you access
to more financial services etc then you
know that's the goal so to say
capitalism as a paper clip Maximizer is
a reasonable thing and Drexler's model
of grey goo was based on another
exponential tech which was nanotech the
ability to rearrange things at a
molecular or atomic level if we do that
right it's pretty awesome right if we do
it right it's like the replicator from
Star Trek we can take trash and turn it
back into rad stuff at the level of just
atoms and that actually might be the
future of the materials economy is that
we have quantum computing that has
enough sophistication you know give or
take a million qubits to be able to
properly direct nano Tronics to take old
stuff and turn it back into new stuff at
an atomic level creating a closed-loop
materials economy that can upcycle
indefinitely but if we get it wrong then
you can have you know these machines
that are just turning everything into
gooks WebEx ler had this you know model
it's called grey goo and in a way UV
you're right capitalism as grey goo is
you know we take this tree with this
radical contextualized complex value and
take it out of its context and give it
this reduced abstracted simplified value
metric and we've done that to 80% of the
old-growth forests that the earth spent
billions of years developing you know
and 90% of the large fish species in the
ocean and then what is that capital
really do other than continue to do that
autopoietic thing and so when people
think about like what is capitalism and
honestly like we can say communism and
socialism were really actually subsets
of this kind of resource concentration
system
it's a process of abstracting value so
we go from complex value to abstracted
value and then extracting it and
accumulating it that particular model
came from colleague Forrest Landry and
you know capitalism does that but
socialism communism have other versions
of doing that but that's the core thing
that's the ring of power that has to be
broken is abstraction of value and
specifically a reductive abstraction
extraction so you remove the content
from its context and accumulation and
that's how you take a complex system
that is resilient and turn it into a
complicated system that's not resilient
that becoming progressively simpler in
kill it this brings up something I find
to be fascinating which is the use of
blockchain to tokenize abstract value do
you have thoughts about this and whether
it's actually possible to do this I can
get more specific if you need yeah
please do so we had an interview last
year with Vince means and he talked
about tokenizing these abstract values
actually he used the tree example so
what if you can tokenize all the the
extra abstract value that a tree
provides you know have a token for
oxygen converted that sort of thing and
what if you can optimize those different
tokens in the same way that capitalism
optimizes capital can we use these other
systems of value and use them as
currency as well I say that loosely and
optimize that using the existing
capitalist system I don't think so lazy
faire capitalism always kind of goes
there it says the tragedy of the Commons
is because if nobody owns it then
they'll it up but if someone owned
it they take responsibility for it so
really the answer is to have everyone
own everything every coral reef every
everything is owned and we have some way
of creating capitalists value in the
process of owning it this breaks down
for a number of reasons so why is a are
not worth anything in gold is worth so
much because in a win-lose game model
something that everyone has access to
and can't not have access to and I can't
get any more of doesn't give me
competitive advantage so everyone has
access to air so I don't need to value
it I don't need to pay attention to it
and now if I cut down this tree
course I'm cutting down something that
produces oxygen and sequester co2 but
I'm not cutting down enough to up
everything I'm not cutting down enough
to really affect my experience at all
now of course as you get seven billion
people with that mindset it becomes a
different story but distributed lis
they're all thinking about their own
action and that if if I cut this tree
down I have $10,000 worth of 2x4 s in my
pocket and I need to feed my family and
I don't have any measurably less oxygen
but multiply that by seven billion and
we all die right but if I don't cut this
tree down that tree in the Commons is
worth nothing to me in terms of
differential or competitive advantage
and I have a system where pre something
like basic income even before
competitive image I just need to live
right so if I can take something out of
the Commons to live like I'm gonna do
that
so gold or diamonds or whatever are
worth a lot because they were perceived
as scarce when we started the valuation
schema and if there wasn't enough for
everyone to have lots of it then some
people could have it and others wouldn't
and those who had it had something that
was unique where they had some
differential advantage but it's still
fiat right like whether it's just
printed dollars or gold that we ascribe
that value to that is not based on that
the actual material value of the gold
and we said it in bats it's still like
it's a value metric that we made up and
so we'll have gold worth you know
however much per ounce and because of
that if there's gold under some trees
we'll cut down a lot of trees to get the
gold out and burn up the oxygen or
damage it in the process because we have
a system that is valuing differential
value not systemic value that's if you
start saying well how do we actually
advance systemic value and you can't
really tokenize that because as long as
there are separate balance sheets and I
have some number of tokens and I'm
trying to advance the number of tokens
that I have in competition with other
members we're gonna keep getting all
these win-lose dynamics right so the
post-capitalist move is a deeper move in
that now does that mean that tokens and
blockchain can't serve a transitionary
role no of course they can right now we
make up the currency units you know
through a central bank well you can have
another group make up a different kind
of unit
and you can build some better structures
into that unit and that can be valuable
totally but as long as we still have
private ownership of those units that if
I have more of the units to begin with
it's easier to get more of them if I
have less to begin with it's harder to
get more of them so I have widening
wealth caps built in all of the other
shitty aspects of capitalism all of the
derivatives and complex financial
instruments and up markets will
end up arising from those competitive
structures those are just basically
inexorable ways to game the game so then
our so what do we do we do need a
completely new economics we do need a
completely new system of sense-making we
do need a completely new system of
choice making right governance add an
axiomatically redesigned level and you
know when most people when you ask them
what is economics they think well it's a
system of trade system of barter right
they're already assuming private
ownership and trade and barter that is
then mediated by some kind of currency
but you have systems that don't have
private ownership that don't have trade
right because I don't own to trade
to you we have some kind of systemic
value we just didn't like those ones
because for the most part we thought of
those as communist socialist systems
where if I didn't privately own stuff
then the state was giving me what I
needed but then the state was also
forcing me to do because as long as
there are shitty jobs that nobody wants
to do that we don't have intrinsic
motive to do but the society needs done
how do you get the people to do the
shitty jobs well if we kind of meet
everyone's needs throughout this thing
called like a state then the state has
to force some people to do the shitty
jobs so we call that imperialism and we
don't like communism because it's
imperialists so we say well let's let
the free market force them which is if
they can't be smarter and educate
themselves better to do a better job and
they get the shitty jobs and if they
don't the state isn't forcing them but
they will still be homeless and starve
it's just where do we where do we switch
the imperialism right we switch it from
the state to the to the market but where
basically we still have to have a system
of extrinsic incentive to control people
to do that they're not
intrinsically oriented to do well okay
so that's been part of
we've had to work with and Marx had
talks on it and Smith had its thoughts
on it but technological unemployment is
changing that whole story
where you can start to automate the
shittiest jobs so you can have a system
where the things that people actually
could have intrinsic incentive to do or
what are there for humans to do the
things that you had to extrinsically and
sent them for you don't have to like
that's a new thing that means an axiom
which is how do we deal with the labor
force an axiom is changing and so we
have to go back and rethink all of our
economic ideas and with regard to sense
making there's a lot of core things that
are changing in terms of our capacity
for sense making you know we have the
ability to have IOT sensors right
Internet of Things sensors that are
giving us real-time data about air
chemistry and water chemistry and soil
chemistry and Fisheries in the Commons
and etc and we have deep learning
systems it can be synthesizing that
information we like we never had sense
making systems like that like we didn't
even have the technological capacity for
things like that and choice making
systems so basically we are at the face
of deeper issues and we've ever been at
the face of before but also with deeper
capacities so the same increased
technological capacity that if we keep
using it to take complex things and make
them simple simple or complicated
instead of complex and we keep using it
to fight against each other and win in
competitive win-lose games if we keep
doing that with these increased
technologies that's existential but if
we use those technologies to actually
obsolete those core social structures
and create coherency based social
structures where that technology can be
used for not against then I mean we
really do have a fork between radically
better than anything we've ever
experienced or catastrophic well so now
my question is we talk about all these
different structures that we can create
for humanity to exist within but there's
also human nature and not just human
nature but the nature of something being
alive as essentially being a replicator
machine so we have some sort of
intrinsic tendencies that may be very
difficult to hack and no matter how
you structure the system we're going to
default to those tendencies for example
you know that's probably one of the
reasons why communism didn't work it
just in some ways it probably went
against human nature or the nature of
just a lot of things that are alive so
how do we deal with that in your opinion
that's not why communism didn't work
though yes there were things about the
way it was structured that did not
structure themselves well with humans
but it's important to get that it wasn't
like it wasn't a good structure and
 up human nature was the problem
if that it actually wasn't a good
structure there were good parts of it
but in trying to keep us from having
economic inequality because economic
inequality would continue to inexorably
widen it became a
lowest-common-denominator system and it
became a system of lack of freedom and
some really key ways so yes it was
against our nature but is actually
against good parts of our nature so then
the question is are there shitty parts
of our nature or inexorably problematic
parts of our nature this will be the
hardest part of the conversation so far
because I'm going to say that what we
call human nature is mostly human
conditioning that is actually quite
changeable and I don't even mean genetic
engineering or brain computer interface
are necessary let's unpack this the
question you asked is an essential
question when we look at Japan or
Denmark or I think there's a few Nordic
countries that have had decreasing
populations after they reach a certain
level of economics and education it is
not that the nature is to do exponential
population curves forever it that is the
nature within a certain set of
conditions when the conditions change
many of the deepest like even
procreation behavioral dynamics and
drives start to shift without externally
imposed things like birth caps at China
had it's really important to see that
when you look at some of the indigenous
cultures pre capitalism that didn't have
private ownership they had shared
structures and they had languages that
express that concept of sharing they had
radically de-emphasized words like mine
and radically increased words like ours
in any of those cultures we can see some
of that in some of the Fijian Polynesian
cultures the mas wah you know
wherever the mine language was less
emphasizing the nature of the language
also words like selfish and greedy and
jealous were less emphasized because
those are the results of memetic
structures of scarcity based value in a
competitive framework structures so when
we say what is human nature it does a
little bit that's definitely human
nature like an impulse to write oneself
when they start falling or to pull away
from heart right like of these autonomic
functions those are nature but so like
when you say we get what is essentially
human nature what was uniquely adaptive
about us is that our genetic selected
for memetics right our genetic selected
for a creature that could continue
evolving itself developing itself within
the course of its life pretty radically
which is why a baby horse can be up and
walking in minutes and it takes us a
year think about how many multiples of
the twenty minutes it takes a horse to
get up go into a year for a human how
useless we are for so long even a baby
gorilla can hold on to its mom's first
you moves around to the trees in the
first day we can't even move our head
for three months right and that's
because we're born jnanis were born
basically still embryos we're we're
imprinting the world were born into
because as complex tool makers and tool
evolvers with our capacity for
abstraction we evolved the environment
around us radically and so creatures
they evolved genetically to their
environmental niche but we're changing
our own environment so we have to be
able to adapt to new environments that
we create so we have to come in not
hardwired because it was super adaptive
to be able to throw a spear at one point
but today like you and me don't throw
Spears that much we text and we do other
 so we need to not just have really
good genetic orientation for spear throw
and we need to have the capacity to come
here with almost nothing not even move
our head and imprint the world that
we're in and so that memetics
is mediated largely through
neuroplasticity and the ability to have
a lot of our behavior not just bottom-up
genetically controlled but talk-down
regulated and the top-down systems are
highly influenceable and so we can say
humans genetic selected for plasticity
and plasticity has a pretty shoe
amount of variants and its capability
and so you know we can create
environments like in you know look at
the child shoulder situations in Sudan
or places like that where we can take
almost everyone through a process that
makes various degrees of psychopathy we
can also you know like look at Buddhist
culture where you had millions of people
all care about insects enough to not
harm them right beyond the Dunbar number
they had a something that developed
abstract empathy across the population
and so that doesn't mean humans are
naturally psychopaths or naturally
highly empathetic it means we are
naturally capable of being conditioned
in either of those ways or any of many
different ways we do have an innate
impulse towards agency towards
self-actualization within a win-lose
game structure that will look like a
competitive impulse but within other
structures and win-win structures that
will look like the desire to go beyond
my own previous capacity but not to
necessarily be better than or you know
consume somebody or something else and
so that's where there is an innate
impulse but it expresses itself through
context no let's take the next step
there's another really key step here
until very recently humans didn't have
any concept of what evolution was and we
only recently did and we're only right
now beginning to have a deep sense of
what it actually is not just biologic
natural selection but the process by
which subatomic particles come into
atoms come into molecules come into more
complex organic structures the dust
clouds turn into stars and spiral
galaxies that there is that evolution is
this process of increasing orderly
complexity in a way that has more and
more synergy so more and more emergent
property and the emergent properties
define the arrow of evolution and as
we're starting to understand this you
know like very few people but the
beginning of us starting to understand
this we can actually become conscious
agents of evolution we can like God say
holy universe is actually doing
something it's actually moving in this
direction of increasing orderly
complexity we can consciously
participate with that and we move from
just being a part of the whole where
evolution is just kind of this
unconscious algorithmic process so
thinking about feeling
identifying with and being an agent for
the whole and so then evolution itself
becomes an identically mediated process
that we actually say the whole
evolutionary process resulted in me I am
the result of this whole evolutionary
process - in a way the evolutionary
process is kind of awoke to itself in me
as I'm contemplating it and so then we
stopped needing pushed by evolutionary
pressure and pain to evolve and we start
being able to evolve consciously by what
tear de Chardin called the lure of
becoming because we actually identify as
evolutionary's right as as part of the
evolutionary impulse and in doing so
really obsolete the need for pain as an
evolutionary driver so I know I said a
number of things in there but human
nature has the capacity to transcend
much of what human behavior has been so
far so well said it's like we're the
tentacles of the universe or something
yeah sensors and the actuators right
yeah it's a quite a spiritual
proposition to that we are becoming
conscious of what we are and acting
based on that realization yeah and I
actually don't think anything less than
that is adequate for preventing
existential risk and that's a big deal
that really frames up what we're here to
talk about which is as we have
increasingly distributed exponential
ability for impact we really have to
have exponentially increasing good
choice making Omni considerate choice
making everywhere so as long as I when
we talk about win lose game theory at
the deepest level it starts with me
having a sense of self that's separate
from everything else even all the way
down to the semiotic stew the language
right I was told when I was a little kid
I mean Daniel and your mic and your UV
and that's a chair and that's a house
and that's a crow and but it's all this
just separate stuff in universe and I
can be a good boy or a bad boy
independent of what's happening for
anybody or anything else I can actually
win at the expense of someone else
losing and a baseball game whatever and
get a whole lot of praise and someone
else winning tonight right like I I am
not only a separate self but I am also a
separate self in competition for the
scarce things including scarce love
right and scarce attention so that's
imprinted that's the basis of the
win-lose structures at the level of
individual separate self-identity when
the reality is we go a little bit deeper
if we weren't playing silly games right
what the am i without all the
plants that make all the oxygen I don't
exist I can't breathe my mother wouldn't
have been able to breathe I wouldn't
have been born right without plants I am
not even a concept so how am i a
separate self if I am required the
plants but the plants required the
pollinators and the micro rui-zhi and
the soil and on and on and what would I
be without gravity
I'm not anything without gravity
or without electromagnetism what would I
be without the people that came before
me that made the language within which I
think all of my thoughts that has
actually patterned the way in which I
think and feel and structure the world
right and I started to say well I'm
actually I wouldn't exist without all of
it so that South African sang on Ubuntu
I am because we are is actually profound
meaning me as a separate self right okay
so take gravity away take
electromagnetism away take the plants
away I'm floating in the middle of a
universe with no I'm not even floating
there's nothing holding me together
right like the concept of me as a
separate self is nonsense it's a
misnomer really it's just like when you
take the tree out of the rain forest and
turn it into wood it's worth a whole lot
less the context had it was its value
right its value was the content within
the context which co-evolved I am within
a context and without that context I
don't even exist and so when I get that
I am a misnomer as a separate thing that
really I am an emergent property of the
whole I'm an emergent property of the
biosphere
but not just a biosphere because without
the Sun I wouldn't be very interesting
either and without the laws of universe
I wouldn't I'm an emergent property of
universe and so are you and we're
interconnected in this and that's waking
up at a cognitive level at a existential
at a spiritual level and
really we need new macroeconomics
economics is basically what do we value
don't value oxygen because we can't get
any competitive advantage off it even
though we'd all die without it but value
the gold because I'll get some
competitive advantage even though I'm
just gonna stick it in a safe not do
anything with it value the whale dead
because I can do stuff with it I don't
value it live right like what do we
value our value system is codified in a
value equation that then determines what
we confer power to that's economics
totally spiritual thing so we need new
macroeconomics that aligns the incentive
of every agent with the well-being of
every other agent and of the Commons
because any gap between your incentive
and my well-being or your incentive and
the well-being of the Commons then you
will do what you're intended to do and
you will externalize harm directly or
indirectly right and with exponential
increasing technology that harm will
always become catastrophic eventually so
we need new macroeconomics that
fundamentally align our well-beings with
each other and in doing so we have no
incentive for disinformation we only
have incentive for information so now
science become science actually right in
journalism actually come to journalism
we actually make sense of stuff
because I'm not trying to hide
information from you or lead you down
the wrong track so I get there first and
we need you know so like new
macroeconomics new sense make new
systems of choice making all the way
down to a new worldview where we
actually identify with the evolutionary
impulse so we don't need pain to push us
we are evolving right we're being and
becoming and doing at the same time for
ourselves and the whole at the same time
and all the way down to our personal
identity shifting from being a separate
self which is just nonsense to being a
unique emergent property of reality and
when I get that you are a unique
emergent property of reality and you
have had life experiences you've sensed
stuff that I haven't you have a
perspective on everything that I
couldn't possibly have you have the
ability to do stuff that I can't do if
you self actualize fully you will create
beauty in the world that I couldn't
write like no amount of michelangelo's
self-actualization would have done MC
Escher or Salvador Dali like their own

kinds of unique creation capacity and so
I can only compete with you when we
reduce you and me to very simple metrics
right how much money do we have or how
fast can you run or whatever right but
when we go back to the full metrics and
it's basically an indefinite number of
metrics and the synergistic combinatoric
of those they're incomparable so now the
competition thing is gone because I'm
I'm identified with this whole complex
thing not this little narrow thing that
in that narrow thing we can compete with
each other right when that's gone then
you self actualizing not only doesn't
take away from me you self actualizing
makes a more beautiful universe in a way
that I can't but I want to live in that
more beautiful universe so I'm incentive
to help you self actualize the gist of
the story as I see it is that we awaken
to that to everyone as a unique emergent
property of an interconnected whole who
needs to simultaneously self actualize
help everyone else self actualize with
the attendant economic systems
governance systems etc we're all
individual agentic activity is good for
the individual and the whole
simultaneously just like cells in your
body they're not competing against each
other for scarce resource even though
we've tried to retrofit that shitty
capitalist idea on biology as a weird
kind of confirmation bias they like when
you think of it in almost mythic terms
you have to think of it mythic terms
exponential technology is you know where
does an exponent scale to as we're
moving towards having the power of gods
like Barbara Marx Hubbard said this win
you know she watched the bomb be dropped
by her Godfather's who were you know the
generals that that were directing World
War two and she saw that mushroom cloud
from her Oshima and she's like none of
the depictions I ever heard of of Zeus's
lightning bolt were as big as that and
so she went asked and she asked
Eisenhower and you know the other
generals I think MacArthur and she said
I see this new power that we have and I
see the power of it that's bad what is
the power of it that's good and they had
no answer and so she set out on that
life quest to answer that question you
know but but this other part of it we
can ask is if we're scaling towards the
power of gods
you have to have the wisdom and the love
of gods were you self-destruct and so
you know when you do you think of it in
those mythic terms it's like that's
really that's really the story right now
and so the other part of that mythic
term is you know the coming of a
different age and an age that is not
categorized or characterized by like
fundamentally separate interest and
competition for scarce resources with
separate interests power over dynamics
but is characterized by this will sound
corny but characterized fundamentally by
the metric we are optimizing is love
which requires all the complex metrics
of everything the tree is it requires
recontextualizing things and
unobstructed them into their
instantiation rather and why I say love
is what brings the atoms together into
molecules is these attractive forces
right what brings the molecules gether
what probably two of you together to
make this thing what brought us together
there's these attractive forces that
bring anything together it leads to
synergy that leads to the emergent
properties that leads to evolution and
ultimately we become stewards of that
bringing reality together into higher
and higher order synergies it's funny
how this is such a repeated lesson to go
towards what attracts you instead of
avoiding what repels you like love is
something I've never cared to define as
well as you've defined I'm curious how
you've actually arrived at that being
dimetric like maybe can you unpack that
a little more it's not a metric because
you can't put a number on it so that was
kind of euphemistic language but it is
love is a very besides damaged word
unwell to find word in English but if we
if we want to borrow from another
language and take the eros an agape
model I think it's useful so the eros
model of love erotic love doesn't just
mean sex sex is one place that it
expresses itself but it is a passionate
desire yes you know energy it's an
attraction so we can think of things
being attracted together right people
being attracted together to procreate to
make new life as a special case example
of people being attracted together to
create anything or anything being
attracted together to create anything
right
subatomic particles being attracted
together to have this relationship that
is atoms and so we can think of the
evolutionary impulse right as kind of in
eros energy and the agape energy that's
a kind of love and so when we think
about participating with the
evolutionary impulse of universe
consciously participating with it then
we think about supporting things coming
together in right relationships that are
synergistic right that's what's a mning
at the you know there is no destination
it's an eternal process of becoming and
blossoming the agape love is actually
worth mentioning here it is often
thought of as an unconditional caring
for I think a decent way of thinking
about is you can't love something or
someone meaningfully if you don't
actually see them understand them right
otherwise it's just an abstract kind of
concept but for me to really love you
I've got to understand you I've got to
know you which means for me to really
love you have to seek to understand you
and know you and then as I understand
you and know you more unable to love the
unique being that you actually are and
in seeing your uniqueness and you're
irreplaceable 'ti in universe I want for
you everything that could help you enjoy
life self actualize contribute fully and
so the process of seeking to see and
know reality and wanting for it and
wanting to add to it is that impulsive
love and I think it's those two impulses
the becoming impulse in the being
impulse the evolving and the nourishing
impulses that become the deepest kind of
drivers of the both interstates and the
macro systems in the future so here's a
difficult question the people who are
creating the economic systems are not
very enlightened at the moment so how
can we and can we help people awaken to
this understanding so that we can create
the kinds of systems that will support
our evolution because we're kind of
running out of time well if you think
about you know within a current economic
system moving up in the ladder of
success in the economic system requires
things like justifying
externality the thing we're doing is
really good so it's worth all of that
mining damage or all of that waste
damage or the the you know poor
condition or workers are in or whatever
so someone whose empathy is really
intact can't do that and so if you don't
have the ability to shut your empathy
off which is kind of low-grade
psychopathy you're just not going to be
able to succeed and as you start to
succeed and get rewarded it's actually a
system that is not just attracting but
incenting and conditioning a kind of
abstract psychopathy and as you get into
financial services even more so because
you are not providing real goods or
services you're basically gain the more
you can game the system the better you
can do in that dynamic so when you have
a system that attracts in cents and
rewards pathological behavior so it's
important to understand that success in
the current system has required being at
minimum complicit with the the capacity
to and willingness to be complicit with
that system what we think of as power
even which is a power within a win-lose
structure power over is psychopath logic
right and so we're not creating new
power structures we're creating new
structures for shared activity but they
won't be power in the same sense of what
we have thought of as power anymore
there's a few aspects of how people who
are in positions of influence currently
can start to to tip one is as they
recognize near-term existential risks
that are inexorably within the current
system which means they will not win
right their attempt to win where when
lose becomes lose-lose because of the
power dynamics exceeding the playing
fields capacity if they understand that
which more and more people in positions
of influence are starting to and they
realize that they actually need to learn
a totally new kind of game and when they
realize that the new kind of game that
is possible isn't shitty communism it's
not like a lowest common denominator
it's a world where we can create a
Commonwealth economics that has a higher
level of material resource abundance for
everyone than any
including them currently has because
right now we can't make the best phone
or the best computer or the best
anything because that science knows how
to because the IP for how to make the
best one is held between ten different
companies that are competing against
each other so we don't get information
coherence we don't even research the
best things in medicine because some of
them aren't profitable so the wealthiest
people today don't have access to good
healthcare because we're not investing
in it the world that they have won in is
ending and that is unavoidable that's an
example so that game is not a game that
gets to keep being played in our what
the world that we can create is better
for even the people who are winning at
the current system at the highest level
the world that we can create we cantle
have a better system of medicine a
better system of sense making a you know
a healthier environment better
technological stuff better
transportation because of the coherence
leading to better resource allocation
and development of tech and etc so we
can build a world that is better for
everyone then building our quality of
life today in sustainable harmony with
the biosphere for everybody the only
thing that they would lose is the
differential of how much better it is
for them now than it is for everyone
else but they can't hold on to that
anyways I've actually seen many people
who you know have been in power
positions within the current system who
have been coming to these awarenesses
naturally so that's an in heartening
thing Daniel do you have any book
recommendations for our listeners if
they want to continue learning about
these subjects yeah well as we were just
talking about a game that's ending in
the new game the the book infinite and
finite games by James Carr says a really
great introduction to thinking about
what a world beyond game theory is and
it's short and it's actually like it is
both an interesting treatise on
economics and governance and social
systems and a really profound spiritual
book so I recommend that one infinite
and finite games and you know books like
the collapse of complex societies by
Tainter they go through all of the you
know civilizations of the past that
collapse and how and why they collapse
is a very sobering insight for people to
realize that you know existential
risk of the whole species in a whole
global level we've never faced before
but we have at the level of
civilizations and we almost always fail
and to kind of understand why so that we
can make sure you're not repeating that
that's actually very valuable very
insightful and if people want to read
you know about existential risk itself
you know going to the future of life
Institute or the Cambridge Center for
the Study of existential risk places
like that and reading their reports
those things have a lot of value going
even back to like limits of growth and
the world 3 model it's surprising how
many places the world 3 model was
accurate from you know when it was
started so there's still value and
limits of growth all of those are good
ones if I had to pick one for people to
start with from here I'd say infinite
and finite games it's a good start cool
thank you I'm gonna pick that up any
documentaries or movies or anything
multimedia esque that you can recommend
you know for people who are not already
familiar with Jacque Fresco's work in
the Venus Project they should get
familiar with it because you know there
are elements of what's necessary that
weren't included he didn't the world he
was coming up through he didn't get very
exposed to complex systems theory so the
distinction between needing to build a
world that's complex and self-organizing
rather than complicated it was not a
clear distinction and how since making
and how worldview happened he was you
know working from a pretty straight kind
of tecnico peon point of view and he
doesn't speak much to the transition of
how we get there but with all those
critiques in place there's a lot that he
spoke to been demonstrated regarding how
you could have a system beyond scarcity
based capital that worked radically
better than this and so I think the
documentaries one is called paradise or
oblivion one's called the choices ours
and also the the second in the zeitgeist
addendum the first half is about
fractional reserve banking the second
half is about his work I think for
people who haven't got into post
capitalism and much depth yet looking at
the resource-based economy that The
Venus Project proposed is a really good
entry point to some of the thought
daniel this has been a fantastic
conversation one of my favorites we've
ever done so thank you again for coming
on and sharing your insights and and
what you've studied this has just been
fantastic
for us yeah very inspirational I'm sure
listeners will love it these were fun
and important topics that we got to
cover today this was a blast and you
know when you ask how can we help people
in positions of influence shift I think
what y'all are doing is meaningful
towards that so I thank you for that
thank you thank you
alright Daniel take care bye that's all
for this episode thank you for listening
for all the books movies and other
things that we mentioned in this episode
go to future thinkers doric slash 46
alright we'll see you in the next
episode bye bye e thanks for listening
to the future thinkers podcast to get
notified of new podcasts and videos go
to future thinkers org and subscribe to
our mailing list you can also find us on
iTunes stitcher and you tube if you like
what we do and you want to help us make
more podcasts and videos give us a like
or you share it with your friends and
consider becoming a patron go to
patreon.com/crashcourse Chinnery org
slash out last but not least if you want
to get access to more content hidden
episodes or if you just want to chat
with us in previous guests then check
out our community at community future
thinkers org
[Music]
you
[Music]