so welcome everyone to another awakening
from the meeting crisis discord qat we
are here today with Christopher
mastropiero who is John's long-term
writing and research partner and the
co-author of his of his book on zombies
and we we've heard you know we hear your
name Chris come up all the time through
awakening through the meaning crisis and
through John's John's discussions and
seeing you talk but but we we I don't
think we know a lot about you you know
other other than through your work so so
could you tell us about yourself well
first of all thank you for being here
thank you thank you it nice to be here
and ya know it's a pleasure to have you
so could you tell us just about yourself
what's your story you know what's your
background and how did you meet John
well I think that was funny when I the
actual biography is probably pretty
scant on the detail and I'm novelty it's
pretty straightforward really
I was students um oh god what is it now
some 10 years ago when I was an
undergraduate at the University of
Toronto I encountered John at the time I
was sort of flitting from one discipline
to the next in search of a location
academically and and I was doing a major
in philosophy which I then I then ended
up downgrading at the time but I was
doing a major in philosophy and I was
trying to find I would she trying to
find an academic home trying to
understand where to pitch my tent and
that was not a straightforward task for
me
before during or since finding John was
a seminal event for me because it was
the beginning of finding it was the
beginning of finding a center around
which all of the other interests
I had could then be gathered and
arranged and organized and I think he
was that too a lot of people long before
I ever met and certainly as well so I
was neither the first nor have I been
the last person to be to fall under his
particular pedagogical spell it happened
pretty quickly
and thereafter it became it became a
kind of it was perhaps telling that it
fell right at the median of my studies
because I can pretty neatly divided my
time as a student into a before John
with a key and an advertiser and I have
a feeling that a lot of people who are
listening to this will intuitively know
what I mean by that because I think a
lot of people have since had the same
experience virtually that I did as a
student so there isn't really any now in
so far as the work with John is
concerned I've been doing it virtually
ever since then I think I met him as a
student in 2010 which is 10 years ago I
could and and very soon after that so I
mean so impress was I by this course not
only the content of the course but of
this particular pedagogical style that I
was I was I was possessed to the idea to
pursue him and to try and insinuate
myself into his work whatever way I
possibly could and that started
gradually started very slow and and
incrementally but over the course of
time we became we became for a while it
remained the students and teachers
dynamic I would say for a year or two
after that at the time he was working on
a phrase see to a book that would later
take many different forms and eventually
parts of it then were distilled and
became zombies in Western culture
eventually but at the time it was much
more inclusive I would say everything
that you've seen not everything because
a lot of those arguments have developed
since then but I would say the structure
of awakening from the meaning crisis was
originally going to be one massive
volume and so when I started to work
with John we really it was attending to
that project and that project soon
became so unwieldy that it became clear
that it wasn't something we were going
to be able to to eat in one bite and it
would have to be
dispersed among a series of projects
over the course of time and of course
those series of projects in and of
themselves start to elaborate and start
to unspool and so you know you can
imagine how they adopt that sort of the
the the whole way the whole way of a
project as you walk down is begins to
get farther and farther away as you
looked at it that's very much the
experience of working mothers
but anyway so virtually since then and
certainly long since long since leaving
school I've been working on and working
on working with virtually all the while
and that's sort of my my occupationally
and my attentions are a little bit
divided I work and I work in public
policy as as a day job but but I
moonlight as a something of an amateur
philosopher I suppose they wouldn't
think to call myself that but I suppose
this something like that yeah and your
degree is in semiotic srate the with the
study of symbols play mainly in some way
yeah now semiotic you know I say that
semiotics semiotics at least as as it
was taught at the U of T was I would say
more than a concentrated discipline of
study unto itself it was a convenient
receptacle in which to group a lot of
other attendant interests and discipline
so you know a lot of my work with John
for instance you know when it was still
when it still fell into the category of
course work or class work a lot of that
I was able to get under the semiotic
spanner
because semiotic sisimiut exhibition
from that so I found a bit of an
identity crisis
and and so that makes it pretty it's
pretty multifocal on that make sure that
convenient that makes it a convenient
placeholder for a lot of other things it
becomes a way of Co hearing studies
rather than their studies at least
that's what it did for me and then so so
you've been working on with John on on
on on the meaning crisis and and
particularly gets the the relation of
the symbol does homage to the meaning
crisis I want to get to the zombies but
what is the meaning crisis mean to you
what is what is meaning mean to you well
I think it's actually easier to say what
the meaning crisis means rather than
what meaning me at least to begin with I
think the meaning crisis phenomenally
for me the meaning crisis is about a
gradual recollection coming into
awareness of a feeling of black a
perceptible kind of absence that is that
it felt precisely as an absent it's it
is it it is the inkling that something
in virtue of which our beliefs were
organized and lived through is now no
longer available to it is the something
by which we knew that is gone and and in
the absence sort of imagine that at some
point a light faded and now that that
light has faded all of those structures
that were once made intelligible and
livable in virtue of that light
have lost a certain dimension and have
lost a certain texture and have lost a
certain geometry that something is no
longer livable now in the way that it
once was and even though speech still
refers to it speech no longer drives it
forward because there's a way in which
we no longer live in the speech that
refers to movement and that's what draws
it back into that linked semiotic right
because what I think among the things
that have been lost in the law in the
loss of meaning or what we might call
meta meaning like the organizing
structure of participation that bound us
to what was known part of what has been
lost is the capacity for speech to
embody and be possessed that which it
contemplates so when speaking of God
when speaking of love when speaking of
any number of virtues the virtues for
instance that tend to organize the
Platonic dialogues when speaking of
those virtues there's a sense in which
oftentimes they are not present by the
speech that attempts to invoke them
they're invoked but not invoke a tit so
what does this all mean what it means is
that it's not obvious that it's very
very difficult to recollect a source of
something that is no longer imminent to
us something that's no longer present
and it's only over the course of time
with a lot of secondary reading and
secondary discussions that it has become
clear to me that the way in which we
find things meaningful is not the way in
which we have always found that there is
a texture phenomenologically this
somehow been slacking in our
relationship to the world
and I think that has a lot to do with a
lots of symbolic thinking and literalism
as people like you and Paul Tillich have
has explained it so I think that for me
my particular experience of the meaning
crisis
I think centers on the loss of symbolic
thinking as a virtue by which to know
and in the absence of that that life
takes on a kind of aimless vacuous and
slackened sense that somehow sensibly
it's it's no longer it no longer holds
together totleigh and so that I suppose
that somewhere to begin where do we do
so what is it about symbols that you
think gives it gives them this this
ability to help us find that meaning to
find fill that gap
well symbols are sort of like I I think
it's helpful I think it's helpful to
understand symbols as participial that
participial patterns we tend to think of
symbols as though we would as we would
shines as things that denote meaning and
refer and indicate other phenomena but a
symbol is actually not that
fundamentally and a lot of people a lot
of people have done a lot of work
certainly standing on the shoulders of
eager observations when I say that over
the course of time I have tried to
observe and explain that properly that a
symbol effects of phenomenological
change in the way that you participate
in being in the world and a symbol
unconcealed series of patterns of
intelligibility that when embodied seem
to replace the world around you and
three situate in somewhere entirely
different
and though the the aspect of that symbol
might be as simple as an object for a
person right in the case of Tillich has
a famous example about the nation's flag
right or John and I have used the
example of a wedding ring or certainly
there are any number of percentages that
have taken the basic symbols of the
course of time but the important the
important property of the symbol is that
the literal denotation of that object or
that person cannot possibly capture the
meaning of the symbol because the
meaning of the symbol is a gesture of
participation that refers beyond it if I
can use that term there is a kind of
beyond miss to the world that is
accessed in the care of the symbols when
they are embodied and possess and when
we are possessed of that there's a kind
of interpenetrated quality so until it
uses the example of the nation's flag
that when be holding the nation's flag
and I'm not talking about the image that
appears on the slide I think those
things are often confused when I say a
nation's flag as a symbol for nationhood
I don't mean image the icons of
particular pictograph or whatever
appears on the surface of that flag
although that's certainly part of it I'm
talking about the entire motion of that
play when it's suspended at the top of
the cycle and growing in the width that
is the symbol there is a movement of a
symbol there's a motioning quality and
the motioning quality of a symbol is the
very thing I think that we introduct
and that by introjection a pattern that
seems to gesture away from itself we
become the gesture that refers ourselves
away to something that was no longer
that was not previously accessible to us
so when beholding the flag you are made
member and party to a nation you are
made into a patriot in claims or
something like that John and I were just
talking about that reason so that your
identity the way you are characterized
changes as a
and I think that's helpful to think of
it that way it helps it's helpful to
think of a symbol as implicating you in
a process of being recharacterize having
your identity replaced and in so doing
being a resituated in the world entirely
as to open access to experiences in the
world that were formerly not accessible
to you and that symbol prise opened the
cracks of intelligibility and allows the
more of the world to become known to you
and present to you in a very embodied
way right and that's the thing about
symbols that contra distinguishes them
from signs that they are they are
patterns to be embodied and not things
to be referred so so that there's a lot
of depth to to symbols and so you know
what one thing we're about we're focused
on here is the religion that's not a
religion and my instinct tells me that
that the religion that's not a religion
needs symbols and maybe its own symbols
but it raises the question can you
deliberately create symbols or do they
sort of a rise can you you know can you
come up with a I guess a sign that
becomes that has the potential to become
a symbol or is it just like can you sit
down and say I'm going to come up with a
symbol or is it something that has to
come out of some sort of instinct some
sort of insight and discovery process I
hope that makes sense think that
question it doesn't know that's a really
good question and it's a well I think
it's one of the one of the axiomatic
formulations of the symbol
definitionally that Tillich uses and um
this is this is a definition that he and
Union and Virgil it's precisely that you
cannot simply invent the symbol now
there's there's a little bit of
interpretive latitude I think that we
might take John and I are starting to
talk about the idea of reinvent EO as a
concept that is neither that is neither
that neither arises wholly within nor
wholly without that somehow somewhere
between invention and discovery that
there is a poetic agency on the part of
the
vidual but also a kind of ontological
request that it somehow emerges neither
from the world to the individual nor
from the individual to the world
somewhere on a shared horizon where
those two things meet so perhaps when
we're talking about the word invention
if we were to qualify the definition and
qualify it deeply then perhaps we could
find a way in which that might be true
but I think no fundamentally it's it's
one of the most significant properties
of the symbol that it can't simply be
conjured by the will of an individual
but it's something that emerges now how
and why and from what it emerges I
suppose is where we parcel this and this
could get quite difficult and and
technical depending on whose line of
thinking that we want to follow
I think obviously for someone like you
the symbols emerge as a way of mediating
the conscious with me with the
archetypal fundament of the unconscious
and that that's a way of integrating and
individuating the dimensions of the self
in its polar state that the symbol is a
is a power of mediation between what is
what is mysterious and and students to
do well outside the boundaries of zero
and then the shear in adjustability of
that mystery that somehow the symbol is
it's a spillway for the Oceanic of the
inexhaustible that allows it to possess
what is what remains within the
boundaries of a frame it influence it
but not overwhelm it so there's like
imagine the symbol as a kind of aperture
that helps to organize our visioning of
the world and depending on how it
organizes our visioning it will
ultimately determine what of the world
we see so that was a very long way of
saying no yeah you can't just you can't
simply conjure them and so then
obviously then the about servation that
I guess the
the corollary to that is well if we
can't simply invent a symbol and work
where we're living at a time when our
sacred symbols have been exhausted and
largely turns into idols for a lot of
people what then what kind of power of
intervention do we have to be able to
recover the kind of meta meaningfulness
that only symbols can provide and only
symbols can organize it is not an easy
question I knew the answer to that
question there would be no need for all
of this work so so just on a on a
practical level is it something we sort
of just have to just keep an eye out for
you know as we're going through you know
we're trying to come up with certain
certain rituals and ecology of practices
are there things we can look for that
you know will symbols just become
manifest and and we'll just will notice
them and say yeah that's it that's a
good question
I think I think that um I mean symbols
like certainly the symbols that we know
that have become epochal have not have
not risen in a single instant you know
they have done so imperceptibly and
gradually and they're dawning has been a
gradual dawn it's sort of like that
they're dawning has been of a high to
Gary in time whereby that you know
you're not aware that the symbol has
done until you become aware that the
thing in virtue of which you see and
know backs onto that symbol right and
that and that I mean become because of
that all of the platonic and neo
platonic metaphors of the Sun and of
life are so appropriate because if it's
the thing in virtue of which you see it
in and of itself cannot be seen saved
with the prosthesis of certain practices
that help to recollect and to I mean
that's the whole idea of I think
whole idea tonic an agave the whole idea
latronnik assent is precisely to come to
know to come into the knowing by that
which you know and and in so doing
recollect what is most fundamental to
you what is most fundamental to your
phenomenology I think though and this is
some of the work that John and I are
doing right now is that Villalobos will
recall via logos which isn't precisely
dialogue to say that is a certain
emergent praxis and symbolic ritual
process that involves dialogue seems to
be emerging and I say this with all due
caution and and you know because
especially because these states because
symbols are so complex and mysterious
it's difficult to pronounce upon them
and it's very difficult to pronounce
upon them prematurely and you know I
would never want to do that but it seems
to be one of the properties of the
symbol and this is inclusive in its
etymology is that it is combinative it
combines things together it is a bridge
right it directs bridges from one domain
of experience or category of experience
into another right which is precisely
how it can mediate what is bounded and
conscious with what is unbounded and
unconscious is precisely because it is a
kind of phenomenal bridge and an
ontological grip to those domains of to
those to those domains that are not
imminent to us practically so via logos
what it seems to do is many things right
it seems to combine well in this in this
particular medium whereas it seems to
combine something like a public
performance or almost like a public
dramaturgy with private intimate
intimacy and information now that's a
really really powerful combination right
so there's something about the way
dialogue diet looks I supposed to use it
technically exacts the function and the
phenomenology of
to personal relating and all of this
intimacy all of this particular virtues
and vulnerability and and exacts it
within a psycho technology of dialectic
to leaven the soul eleven that part of
us which mediates what is in frame state
will be mysterious that were not
completely and utterly overwhelmed in a
way that we're you know we're not
completely destroyed by right that's one
of the things that the dialogic practice
does is it's not simply a good time with
your buddies it's not community for
community safe certainly I'm not
interested in anything that's community
for its own sake for me the community of
via logos is such that knew it it
presents you with the aspect of your own
mystery and in the care and the carriage
of your interlocutor of the vows that
you're corresponding with more of
yourself is alluded to you just as more
of the world as a looted to you so
there's a kind of coupling with
collapsing together and that's also what
makes it to use johnstrom
transgender rights neither subject them
our objective it's neither a revelation
solely a personal ministry nor a
revelation solely of extrinsic mystery
or external mystery it is precisely a
combination of those two things that
seems to build a relation between
everything about oneself that is
undisclosed and everything about the
world that is undisclosed and seems to
pair the revelation together in such a
way that it seems to move you closer to
the center of what is real and that
happens in the care of community what
happens in the care of conversation so
it does seem that the Ilocos and in ways
that are allowed by the
the prosthesis of this kind of forum for
instance does seem to be a process that
affords some of those some of those
virtues and features that were afforded
by religious ritual and now is dia logos
a symbol per se I don't know I don't
know that I'm ready yet to pronounce on
via logos and understand its nature
fully but there seems to be something of
symbolic value and nature in Villalobos
and so perhaps and it seems to be
emerging quite or re-emerging I should
say quite naturally but with but
certainly it seems to be a freight
aflame that sprung of its own accord
that certainly sand and stoked by
communal attention and it's precisely
that combination I think that that that
seems to hold some promise we've been
experimenting with the Ilocos here in
the discord as well so we're trying to
to tap into that ourselves I like to
bring in some questions so so yeah
please if you have a question just queue
it up in the event text Channel
so the first question from mark LaFave
who who isn't here today but he gave a
question in advance I was hoping you
could expand on your comput your concept
of Dom aside and how you believe that it
is currently impacting our societies
also what is the connection between
religio and Dom aside with respect to
the meaning crisis okay well Dom aside
the reference is probably the only
assume it's accepted from either John
series or from zombies and Western
cultures and there's a case study
there's a case study in zombies unless
one culture a couple of them paint the
definition of downsides fundamentally
the loss of home
and the loss of home to understand the
significance of downside as the loss of
home we have to understand first the
significance of home which is obviously
not the edifice of a particular space
but a but a but a world that has two
fundamental features and this comes also
from here to his idea of worldview tune
in the meta meeting system of religion
that it both tells us what the world is
to us and prescribes a normativity
for how to interact with and those are
two things that the eclipsing I would
say at least if we're talking about
let's confine this observation to the
West for a moment that the Eclipse the
gradual eclipsing of the Christian world
has left us unmoored
because we no longer have a consistent
reliable and renewable idea of both what
the world is at any given moment how to
gain a purchase on it and what acts it
scribes from us how to cohere ourselves
in relation to it it is the loss of a
certain form of being in relation
because we're always in relation like
we're always subsisting in relation it
is just a question of how that relation
is characterized and Dhamma sizes the
recharacterization of that fundamental
relation as one of the stranger as one
that is no longer intimate right again
if we take that once again fall back to
the analog of the personal relation as a
way of understanding this dhamma site is
what happens when the relation we have
of the world as though it is the
relation we have with our partner and
conversation is no longer coherent we
can no longer converse with the same
vocabulary we can no longer gain or read
a legible read and what the other person
is thinking we don't know who we are
to them anymore we don't know what
they're about to say and when they do
speak it is it's in it it's in a an
indistinguishable language that somehow
that but that there's no longer a
feedback loop in that relation that
tells us who we are to that other person
what is expected from us and how we
might intervene to deepen the relation
even further so if we take that analog
of personal relationship and imagine
when the relationship begins grow
diffident and fractured and when it
becomes cold to the touch and and then
transplant that analogy onto the world
itself and that's just precisely what
the zombie metaphor does right because
the world of the zombie apocalypse is
cold to the touch right it's it's
decadent without being rich it's
lifeless it's kourt's fundamentally it
doesn't offer any kind of sustained
vitality and so Dom aside it is really
the law if I had to put it perhaps in a
picky way I would say it is the loss of
intimacy in our fundamental relation to
the world do you see something like the
religion that's not a religion as a way
back home I don't know . I'm afraid I
don't know I think I think it's a it's
an incredibly ambitious project I should
say that it's a part of John I mean I'm
certain it's a lot of the work that I've
been doing with John certainly
contributes to its attendant features
having said that is the religion that's
not a religion as a kind of as a kind of
banner project is not something that
I've been interacting with as directly I
trust it's being undertaken with all the
right bona fides certainly and with the
right humility but I find myself even
mournfully and it is Marvel I find
myself a little too steep in my own
religious ancestry
to be completely credulous that such a
thing as possible you know I believe
it's a project worth undertaking I do
and and no one is more capable of
undertaking it than John and company but
precisely because the nature of the
symbol as a coherent mechanism for
religion is spontaneous and emerges from
what is already given in our being it
has such a project has to be approached
I think great with great care and I
think that so yeah I guess that's a way
of saying I don't know it really don't
know but I but I live to it with great
interest and and and faith base in the
proper sense of the term because what is
happening I mean the very thing that is
motivating the impetus that is motivated
with the same impetus that is trying to
call attention to what has been
happening beneath our awareness for a
very very long time and that means that
it's a it's it's already a fused with a
lot of humility and a lot of caution so
yeah I think that's how I feel about
that fair enough and I think it's it I
think millat of us here you see it as
the same way an experiment that's that's
worth worth trying and devoting our time
and attention to and and to see what see
what we can do with it yeah it's really
it's really important to understand that
that you know there's a certain irony in
the term and I know there is religion
it's important I think for anyone for
anyone who's participating directly or
indirectly and experimentally for this
it's important to approach it ironically
what I mean by that it's important to
approach it knowing it will
not be it will not fulfill the function
in its full Gestalt form it will not
fulfill the function that the emergent
axial religion fulfilled at least not
for a very very long time if at all and
if ever so I think that having been
having measured expectations is like a
supreme understatement here okay I think
there's a certain amount of I think you
have to keep due reverence for what has
passed even if it's no longer present to
you even if you no longer feel it and
feel moved and breathe by it meaning by
it I mean let's say you know the Western
religions that has now that have now
been subject to centuries of sequential
even if you don't feel those breathing
you still and I'm I'm a case in point
because I find it very very hard to
become possessed of the faith that is
necessary to be a true and authentic and
pious believer I find that very
difficult but even absent that I think
it's very important that we understand
the complexity of the functions that
they serve and how we cannot simply
reproduce those functions with with a
feature list of design features now that
I'm not saying that's what that's what
John and Jordan Hall and company I'm not
saying that's what we're doing we
understand the scope gravity of this
problem as well as I do and that so
that's not what they're doing but
they're undertaking this task I think
with that irony but I think it's also
important that everyone who's taking an
ancillary interest in that project and
feeding into it understands the irony
and you know and understands that it's
not simply that suddenly a series of
experiments are going to produce a new
religion that's not how it works and and
I think anyone who thinks that that's
how it works
has has grossly underestimated the the
breadth and complexity and of the
phenomenon of the rich
helix say you have a question for Chris
hey there helix Robert it out right
helix this question was are there psycho
open there is no you can go ahead
oh please what would you would you read
it for me I have a bit of a headache
right no problem
I like I like how you read thank you are
there any psycho technology is not
mentioned in the meaning crisis video
series that you think are worth knowing
are there any other defective
technologies not mention I'm sure there
are and sorry I'm getting a bit of
feedback I I'm not yeah what we can come
back to that I think I was getting a
little bit of feedback I'm not sure if
it's me or is anybody else getting
feedback on Chris or is it just me right
now maybe me I'm just gonna I mean just
give me one second whether I'm gonna
leave in and come back one second
and let's try to close some windows
it's nating especially to be embedded
within it to see how it's forming up it
it reminds me less of truly a kind of
groundswell of a religious movement and
more like symposium or something more
like one of the ancient Greek schools
that's kind of the the sense I get more
of it just being around it that the that
the ideas are clustered around these
kinds of central themes and it's helping
to make sense of the world and you know
maybe there's some like political
leanings here or there but none of it is
clustered around that and so it's very
very much this had kind of heady space
up here and more recently there's been a
lot of an attempt to bring in
ritualistic elements and now red spring
of symbols there is still like yet this
yearning for I think the other stuff
these other deeply embedded kind of
ancient you know atavistic compulsory
needs that embody it so something has to
occur if not leading another flock back
to whatever they've strayed from Just In
re engendering that they'll often take
expression of that stuff that it really
is over and seeing then people that come
here and keep coming here and like just
like kids trying and notions of what
would be a fire there's and I iTunes I
appreciate it
it's you see you're like what words seem
to me or like handles that can move
mountains you know like these like that
I just don't write you have that just
our connected to these immense
structures that can be shift didn't tiny
little handles so I love I love language
for that reason I love anyone giving us
tools that didn't give us the capacity
to move those much larger mountains we
didn't even know existed and and I'm
trying to encourage that as much as I
can and there's a component of the
religion that's not a religion and a
component to religion itself it has to
do with I think expression and and you
know why the logos is bound up in that
so yeah that and I really appreciate
your sense of language - thank you for
it it's so it brings color - it brings
texture back to you an idea that is a
lot of times conveyed in a very
analytical or kind of contextual limited
space let's say thanks and I think that
you're right
you're absolutely right that there's
something about what this particular
exercise does this this communal venture
dialogue I think changes the orientation
of our speech such that the words we use
I'm thinking of that there's a is there
there's a Buddhist adage that about you
know when words become fingers pointing
at the moon I think that's what happens
that's what happens when the logos of
speech the intelligibility of the
reasoning is embedded within something
dramaturgical maybe that allows me to
just you're back to your earlier
question feel it's about another psycho
technology
I can't remember to what degree John
does or it doesn't talk about this in
the series but drama and dramaturgy
increasingly me allude themselves as a
contexture in which to change the way we
use speech and to create from it
something like a symbolic affordance for
unfolding a world that we can then live
in because if you think about what
play-doh does for instance that's I mean
Plato's it's a it's a I think it's a
context a very common and almost
canonical mistake and I say mistake at
this point to simply excerpt to try an
excerpt theories from Plato and then lay
them out as though they're meant to be
taken independently of independent value
but it seems clear that that's not the
case it seems like the dramaturgy the
dialogues the way that they are
characterized the way that the vocalic
lis with which they are embodied in
personality that are then exchanging
infants is essential to their meaning it
is essential to the over significance of
their new beyond the semantic content of
anything that the character says it's
the relationship Erika's have between
each other and the way the speech
becomes a fused with that relationship
and the speech intervenes in the
orientation of that relationship that
it's something like at the level at
which the reasoning a philosophy seems
to be calibrated at least within Plato
and so to your point about the symposium
I see that too and I think that the
other the other quality that's very
important about that is that you know it
might be taking place under the under
the auspices of a particular virtue or
definition that has been subject to
discussion that it's clear in those
dialogues
that the real meaning of the discussion
remains mysterious to its participant it
remains over and above it remains
supremely unknowable except in part to
its participants so I think that one of
the things that I think that these kinds
of these communities this community for
instance though I mean this particular
one obviously I'm new to I don't presume
upon it but dialogic communities in
general I think have a great capacity
and great potential provided that they
remain somewhat operatic meaning
provided that they always remain
possessed of mystery and they never they
never tried to lay too much claim to the
insight that emerges as a consequence of
that dialogue and it has a consequence
of that community like the truth the
true meaning and definition of the
dialogue is always always beyond us and
ahead of us and we will not catch up to
it
we will not well it's it seems to be the
free and equal exchange of the energy
back and forth is what defines this flow
state right and so no no there's no
claim on either end and two or three or
four or five or community of the size as
to the direction of the flock right
there's something that's that's in the
deep respect that you have in the the
relating and the receiving of energy
right and and the way that you're
receiving descriptions of the world and
transforming them and matching them with
your own and and then sending that back
out if you you share that equally
amongst all the collective sense making
seems to be much more capable of
providing that kind of unified approach
for those a coherence on an
understanding of the world and any time
it seems that one you know kind of voice
dominates or or it comes over productive
it seems there's for something there's
some strange component to this right
like it's noted by I think Emerson and
then essay early on about the American
philosopher that genius is always
sufficiently the enemy of genius by
virtue of over the influence
but that there's something to just
becoming so dominant a signal and so
expressive and impulse in the network
that you kind of almost prevent it's
unified and collective adaptation it's
really interesting but it does kind of
represent a really interesting strategic
niche right like English dramatists
because they followed Shakespeare got
really really good at doing it so
there's something to that expertise
component that is meaningful I suppose
but and at least an hour time it does
seem necessary when there are too many
elements in the world for us to cogently
examine on our own to distribute that
amongst ourselves and then to be in a
reliable network of that distributed
trust so that we can make sense of all
the elements that we can't match on our
own so there's some some element of that
strategy that won't work here and that
the collective wisdom that we're
searching for is both levelling up our
capacity to transmit how we see the
world and then developing a trust what
people do think so so I'm right in line
with that component of whatever John is
working on right like if that emerges
from this whole process I think it will
be truly something special right it will
be either the wedding component of this
technological layer and the way that
this shapes everything that we do at in
in this scale and then our own inner
capacity to develop these these networks
of and yeah all right so what to LA she
al has a question thank you yeah so what
is an ideology what should we pay
careful attention to so the religion
that's not a religion doesn't devolve
into a pseudo religious ideology hmm
that's a really good question um I think
I think one possible definition of an
ideology and so far as I understand well
let's take I mean let's take the rid of
the word right it is a it is a logos for
the organization of ideas so it is a
kind of mechanism of heuristics that
organize the meaning of any given set of
information and conforming it to a
particular way of knowing and way of
seeing the world so that is I think one
of the one of the properties of an
ideology is that it tends to be hold
phenomena in a way that in a way that
concentrates them all into the same
point of closure that is a way of
understanding that is consistent from
one situation to the next and is not
adaptive insofar as the constraints of
that logos the constraints of how
information is understood don't change
from one situation to the mass so I mean
one of the one of the things that makes
nationalism for instance ideological is
that every problem becomes a problem of
the nation every problem becomes a
problem of the nation because the
identity of the nation is the qualifying
it is the qualifying intelligibility by
which everything else becomes important
by which everything else becomes
meaningful
you are meaningful and important insofar
as you are meaningful and importance of
the nation a particular proposal becomes
important and valuable insofar as it is
valuable
to the entity of the relation to that
level of risk so it's a kind of it's the
better per crustose right it's a
template it's a template of meaning and
importance or John might say a template
of relevance that frames every kind of
problem or every kind of encounter with
the same set of evaluative criteria I am
going to evaluate this proposal based on
this set of criteria every single time
rather than to allow the introduction of
a novel or a novel book to reorganize
the set of criteria by which I know a
given thing so if I'm beholden to my
nationalism for instance and I encounter
a person who is in disagreement with me
propositional about my let's say my
fealty to the nation but is otherwise a
dynamic and and erudite and a person who
otherwise clearly has a lot of
independent value and virtue that I
could benefit from the ideological
person oh and I'm being a little bit I'm
taking this to its extremes I suppose
for the purpose of illustrating it but
you know the the supremely ideological
person would dismiss that second person
head of Han whatever other qualities
they seems to possess or introduce they
could not be accommodated because they
were not consistent with the criteria by
which all things are meaningful and
important namely by importance to the
nation or by agreement nation so I think
that I mean you know without getting to
polemical without it I think that we're
seeing a lot of that right now a lot of
the conversations around around social
justice I think give us some good
examples about this because regardless
of you notwithstanding the merit of any
one proposal you know what they tend to
do oftentimes is have a way of framing a
problem and then any time a new problem
or a new situation and count
encountered that frame then becomes the
way of knowing how that problem is
important to the exclusion of all other
ways so yeah I think that would be it's
a bit of a it's a rough scaffold but
that would be the definition I thought
is that is that helpful you want to hold
off on that no I think it's follow-up
it's so how should we what can we do to
avoid falling into the the pseudo reel
into a pseudo religious ideology so yeah
well I mean one of the classics very
classical ways of doing it is using
something less like a Socratic alingas
you know which is to - we just - deny
yourself the very is to deny yourself
the givenness of the proposition to
allow for yourself to lapse into a
genuine mode of ignorance right I mean
one thing that Socrates does is to
continually presents new versions new
species of a definition to show that the
originating definition of any given term
is lacking that it does not accommodate
it's not accommodating with the totality
of its all of its possible referees
right and he does that to show that that
that there's a lot of definitional
instability to speech and the way that
we proffer it and an ideological mode of
thinking takes speech as absolute it
takes speech it takes the denotative
structure of speech as as absolutely
prescriptive and and one of the things
that the Socratic Alenko process does is
it dispossesses the literal speech of
its capacity to envelop ever more and
ever more numerous problems so so
something like I mean so I know that I
know that actually to be very concrete
and I'm going to butcher it here but I
think Peter Peter Limburg has been on
this right no no he we haven't had him
on
okay well Peter Peter is someone that we
may want to talk to because he I know he
has a he and and and some other people I
can't I can't attribute it properly
because I only know this in passing but
he has a message that he key causes
mimetic mediation of trying to invert
the process of debate through through a
series of paraphrase holes to try and
make sure that two interlocutors are
absolutely certain that they understand
the propositions expressed by one
another before then building on them so
it's a kind of rhetorical style of
qualifying the logos of propositions so
that they don't so that they are
qualifying the logos of propositions as
they're being made so that they don't
become ways of thinking and they simply
become things to be known or not known
that might sorry that might have been a
little bit that might have been a little
bit of screws but I what what I mean by
that is that is that there are there are
there are ways of conversing that that
can disarm ideological thinking
precisely because they become so
probative that once they put an
ideologies back on its heels
once they reduce it to its axioms then
then it's revealed that that there's
that there's really nowhere to go from
it right they turn the ideological way
of knowing into an apple eeeh by
introducing a situation that it cannot
accommodate without stunting excellent
kedai has a question what do you think
of the various personality theories and
their potential for providing
individuals with the framework for a
divine double moreso MBTI and Enneagram
as they have development of aspects well
I can only be I can only paint in really
broad strokes on this one because I'm no
expert
I don't I think that they're I think
well I think that there's they're
helpful I think they're helpful insofar
as they allow us to affect shifts in our
identity that allow us to access aspects
of our experience and aspects of our
possibility that were formerly not
accessible to us one of the things I
think that personality tests do is they
strain they frame your knowledge of
yourself in such a way as to invite you
to play yourself out in different ways
to give attention to different kinds of
your behaviors give attention to
different kinds of activities that you
might otherwise not undertake I I would
certainly not take them literally in the
sense that I wouldn't take any I
wouldn't take any personality
designation as wrote gospel
unequivocally true about a person
because I think that would be an
idolatrous way of understanding yourself
as bounded with certain categorical
designations I think that would be that
it would be a mistake it would be a
mistake to entrust that kind of test
with a literal understanding of your ego
however I think that as an exercise of
playing yourself out with more
versatility and drawing your attention
through aspects of your experience that
have gone unattended I think it's in
that way that those are probably very
helpful I mean I think of someone like
you know back I mean backing onto
someone like you and can use to those in
a very practical we might even say
pragmatic fashion like personality test
was was a way of framing your
confrontation with the self it was
helpful insofar as it prescribed a mode
of engagement and that's how I think we
should look at this whole process that's
how we should look at not only not only
any given personality test but any given
any given any given philosophical
proposal is it's helpful in
far as it Corden's off a plain field in
which you can then exercise possibility
and so that it isn't that that I would
find value that was really interesting
and there was a divine devil in there
too that I completed in the well I I
suppose that fits and so far as your I
mean your your your divine devil is
precisely the aspect of self that is
submerged in the mystery that has been
explored
once you frame the plane care for
yourself true and asks how can we
transform the intelligible into the
livable from a symbolic perspective how
can we transform the intelligible into
the livable what would the end of that
question from a symbolic person from a
symbolic perspective yeah I think that's
I think that's the that question um I
think I don't know I don't know if I
have an answer for it because I think
it's the question that frames the
problem I think I think this kind of
praxis has a lot to do with it I think
ritual has a lot to do with it because I
think the kind of conscience I mean
symbolic concentration is the form of
contemplation that possesses the one
contemplating with that which is
contemplated right the coupling of what
is viewed with the vision that music
it's precisely some especially the
prerogative of the symbol to do that at
least phenomenologically but in the
absence of in the absence of available
powerful available symbols that
obviously becomes a very tall order
so I suppose I'll just I mean all I can
really do is gesture to what is going on
here in this moment and in this broader
and this broader series of practices and
wonder aloud as to if they might offer
if they might offer some way forward to
that effect I don't know it's a good
question David asks what are your own
ecology or practices what are my own
ecology practices hmm that's a good
question
I do I have I have spent some time
practicing meditation I don't do it
regularly I did learn from John years
ago and I do it quite intermittently I'm
not the most consistent or the most
faithful of participants when it comes
to practices in general I'd like to
become more so I'm remarkably
inconsistent I think it's just a feature
of my temperament sometimes that I think
I tend to wander a lot and I tend to
become distracted with all kinds of
different activities I do a lot of
writing I would say writing is the most
consistent and reliable practice and I
do it dialogical
I write biologically fairly often and I
do it ethically I do it I go I 10 I tend
to I tend to pair writing and walking
I've shared that I was not quite the
same time but sequentially I can prepare
those a lot I do I do a lot of this in
my in my private spheres of life I do a
lot of dialoguing with close friends who
have these mutual interests and yeah I
would say those are I would say some
combination there out I've fashioned
them for something that when they make
shift psychology that that seems to work
for me I spend I spend a lot of time I
spend a lot of time in silence and
solitude and and I use that to break up
a lot of these practices and I find that
actually
very helpful I find fits of activity
followed by or heated by long lingering
periods of silence and solitude very
very helpful I find that I find the I
find the opponent process between those
two extremes very helpful and I find
combining that with some form of
physical movement directively also them
have necessarily to observing or to
dramatic but I find pairing those
together allows me a certain latitude
for contemplation that that spatial
eise's my my time in a way that some
that that I find has some vitality I'm
not I'm not the enough of that I don't
have the rigor or the discipline or the
consistency of many other people I know
when it comes to finding routine and
regularity I think I do them I'm very
improvisational so I'm certainly no such
authority I had a cultivate one well
you're welcome to join us here in the
discourse those are all things we're
working on - so you're welcome any time
I just want to check up on time speaking
of time we still a few few more
questions we've gone about an hour
though do you do you do you have time to
stick around for a bit or okay really
great so
Berbers or BRB Zed asks what kind of
knowing is implied when one asks when
one says an arrow flies true quote and
how would you figure this kind of truth
in conjunction with propositional truth
and perhaps the other three P's of
knowing as well what kind of knowing is
implied when one says an arrow quote
flies true and how would you figure this
kind of truth in conjunction with
propositional truth and perhaps the
other three P's of knowing as well
that's a really good question it's a
very provocative question I think I have
to I have to I have to I have to venture
with my
imagination a little bit to understand
the question although in so doing I
think perhaps I've gotten to the meaning
of it I think that the kind of knowing
implied by the KY Roddick arrow that
strikes true is the knowing implied by
faith or the kind of collective form of
knowing that imagines and I say imagine
I I use that word advisedly because the
poesis of imagination is required in
order to make in order to make the logos
of speech into the logo symbol in order
to render it into a world that has been
possessive and has been participative I
think it is somehow the casting of one's
aspect ahead of oneself usually with the
help and care of interlocutors that
affords the possibility for loosing that
arrow first place because it involves
attention to
it involves attention to the emergence
of something that is not accounted for
by a particular frame of knowing in
other words well I'll give you with an
example I mean this for instance this
very format of relating that we're doing
right now this is very new to me this
decide of kind of virtual online forum
and community is a very very new thing
and if I'm being completely frank I was
I was I was very very reluctant and I
always still am very very reluctant to
engage it and to join it I have a
prejudicial I have I have a prejudicial
hesitancy when it comes to online
discourse in any form and that's not
simply because that's not simply because
I'm taking the more invective models as
exemplars I mean I was perfectly willing
to admit long ago they were that there
was online arenas that ostensibly was
was oriented properly but so it's not
that even then I was very reluctant and
I think it's because something about
this process always risks dispossessing
the ego might ego for instance always
risks dispossessing it of some of it of
some of it it's axiomatic fixtures
things that tend to hold it intact at
any given moment I know that every time
I venture into this even right now it's
very likely that I'm going to find
myself disarmed and become less than and
I'm going to discover things about my
knowing that we're not known to me I'm
going to be made okay to myself
momentarily
whereas before I may have
and transparent that's a very deeply
deeply disconcerting experience it's
existential II under and it's a poetic
precisely because it brings us to the
precipice of where we turn into our own
mystery and then become unknown tourism
I'm exercise like that like this for
instance it's precisely the Kairos for
self transcendence for that very reason
so when does your knowing become the
arrow that strikes true
it becomes the arrow that strikes true
when its target is not even defined
within the ambit of defined things that
you already called intact in your model
of yourself and your model of the world
when what you're shooting for is the
space between the syllables of your
given speech and that only happened I
think when you're teetering on the
precipice I think the best that can do
it that well no it's we're all sad at
the end to there and it's that is
exactly how it feels I think to be
rightly saying something is to be
feeling between those syllables is to be
it's to be pulling like up into that
space that which meaning needs from you
know the chaos of all of the things that
we know and to be to be pulling that
forward rightly at the time that it's
needed and the way that it's needed to
be doing it in each beat of the moment
that's it's exactly how it feels and to
give people that as a gift for them to
experience it themselves I think it's a
phenomenal way for people to come to
understand something like the potential
of human beings it really is what many
people point into and have been and
often do point to you did this love of
philosophy this love of wisdom this love
of rightly speak
and rightly knowing that that's it is a
gift that we are giving more of each
other so yeah yeah yeah I think you have
to be willing to be shown to yourself
and to be shown to yourself in the care
of those who may see you as you haven't
been able to see yourself if you can
relinquish your sense of agency long
enough to place yourself in the hands of
something that can know you more then
that act they will feel it will yield
it's a very different and I think we're
on that's why it look wired the trusting
and intimate relationship right now I
say I I think I can speak for all of us
that we're grateful you overcame your
reluctance and and and decided to join
us today this has been been great
gesture be good you were speaking of
poesis
if can you ask Christopher how poesis
comes to him and through him in the
context of beautifully structured
language and now G if he could define
poesis for for everyone while you're
answering this that would be great
define poesis well I mean III suppose I
suppose most basically poesis is
creation if and if we mean it we mean it
linguistically then it is it is the it
is the it is the invocation of the world
in the matter of speech I mean one of
the things that poetry good poetry does
is poetry turns language against itself
and ruptures itself open I had I can't
remember who said this I wish I could
attribute it properly but I've heard
I've heard a lot there's a quote that
you know good good good poetry strives
for its own extinction
it keeps to emancipate itself from the
linguistic boundaries from which it
originated well from perhaps not from
which it originated but in which it is
formed and and that's why that's why
poetry which has now become so strange
from the project of the contemporary
philosophy is its it I think it has to
be reintroduced those two need to be
remarried the poet and philosopher
there's a quote about I sorry I'm
shooting a few different directions here
but I'll come back to the question but
it reminds me there's a is a quote I
think I can't remember for this
Heidegger or liner Schumann Sherman who
who who wrote up Heidegger said that you
know philosophy philosophy opens the way
by which an unutterable experience may
be given and that's why philosopher is
just like the poets I think when they're
working at their best they use language
in such a way they bend it against
itself as to create from it openings
through which the ineffable and for
truth and I think that a lot of that in
translation
so poesis in the context of philosophy I
think is using the affordances of
language to try and gesture simply just
you're beyond its meaning that's why I
celebrated the philosophers that are
perhaps most celebrated are the ones
that have managed to do that they're the
ones that have managed to this enter a
world from within speak
and pronounced it upon us in such a way
that we could find ourselves in it and
living through it I mean that's why
Heidegger is haigha digger right that's
why he Heidegger is so revered it's
precisely because he does that because
you travel through Heidegger you don't
read him and you travel through Plato
you don't um I think the question that I
think the question asked me about myself
for my own process can you remind me yes
it's just one sec if there how poesis
comes to you and through you
in the context of beautifully structured
language no it does it I don't know I
don't even know it's the premise of the
question that something I can I could
have sent to or not um well if I should
be so lucky and agree with its premise I
don't know I don't know where to go from
there
I tell you that I can tell you that I
feel it most well I feel it obviously
most from the post date I feel that most
when I'm not conscious of it I feel it
most when it seems to call itself out I
feel that most when I'm speaking into
the listening ear when I feel that ear
is attuned and comprehending and very
very attentive the listening ear seems
to draw it forth without any volition of
mind and I'll be honest with you in this
moment in this particular moment and
then this in this forum I'm finding this
more open and please take this in the
spirit of contended this is a welcome
and interesting deviation from my from
from my experience as far but I'm
finding this for instance in this moment
more difficult than talking to a single
interlocutor cuz I'm talking to a CEO
interlocutor I understand to whom I'm
speaking and I understand that there is
a great deal more if it's a good
conversation and so understanding that
the ear into whom I am speaking seems to
naturally affect the speech that occurs
through
I don't lay any claim on it talking to a
group of people as I feel I'm doing now
and I'm excuse me my my discomfort is
that I'm not completely sure I mean I
know I know a couple people didn't I'm
speaking but I'm not exactly sure did
hormone speaking that's a very different
experience that's a very different
experience even writing I still always I
still always have a sense that there is
a single vow to who mind speaking and
that's that's how Dustin drove his
confession she was speaking to a single
vow and so I think the police's of
speech depends at least for me and
perhaps in general depends on the
figuration of its respondent of its
listener everything has to do with the
prisoner and that's why the listening
and the conversation is as if not more
important than its speech because it is
the listening presence and attention
that ultimately guides and leavens the
speech into its greatest possible form
that's Skyler you had something to say
to Chris did you - do you want to go
ahead
all right huh sure you can't or I can't
I don't know if you got me yeah go ahead
we keep making here you I was just
trying to find where I wrote that raises
yeah yeah Boston but essentially I'm
just I'm very interested in the reinvent
project and I'm Chris you seem to have a
real talent with glossolalia you kind of
somehow getting this little trance state
where you can kind of flow in a few if
you're up to date with your guyses
lexicon and you can get a whole lot of
information so um I just mostly wanted
to say thank you and do you have
anywhere where we can read more of the
books you kind of read any of the the
more audit the more esoteric alchemical
takes you have on things where where can
I find stuff to read that or other there
people to listen to mmm well first of
all thank you it's very kind of me to
say that and what what okay where do you
find more of what I I mean I'm not you
know what it's so it's funny I I'm not
as I'm not as duration to reader I mean
I obviously there's a certain amount
that kind of required even to stay up to
speed with these kinds of conversations
but I'm not as voracious a reader as I
think well certainly not as much as
someone like Jonathan boys that
important people there and but but I
would say I a lot of my my my sources of
influence are really not dissimilar from
the sources of influence that that that
Jon tends to refer to in his lectures
Plato and páginas featured very
prominently young for me features are
very very prominently tillich as well
which is very prominently increasingly
high degree and then secondary sources
that refer to those primary ones but you
know what's funny is that I I find
myself sorry I'm I'm answering a
question that you didn't ask but it
seems more honest than to try and answer
your question directly
okay good okay thank you I hope you'll
take that again in the spirit its
intended but I find that I become so my
experience with reading is very odd
because it tends to spin me off very
quickly I seldom get through books
because I'm so preoccupied with my
marginalia in those books that that I
get endlessly distracted them in the
sidetrack I I relationship with books is
very dialog very very dialogic I don't
consume them I live off of that and and
is I don't say this proudly because in
many ways it frustrates this fiscal
position particular proclivity of mine
frustrates me because it means that I
can often not stay trained well we
didn't love anything for very long
before spinning out and doing something
entirely different
I end up writing for which occurred
often occurs to me probably isn't a very
good thing and yet for whatever reason I
actually can't stop myself in doing it
something far more improvising my way
around or around paper or around an
argument rather than committing it
patently to lexical knowledge I think in
that way my ability and my approach to
these things is far more political than
it is classically philosophic or
classically academic and I actually
struggle with that
because sometimes it's appropriate and
sometimes it's adaptive and serves me
well and sometimes it is not
and sometimes it is officers so I would
say there is no you know my thinking
doesn't anchor itself in any secret text
it has much more to do with the way I
relate to the texts that are canonical
to most people and so if there's a if
you're asking after a secret sauce or
anything like that I suppose that would
be the best way of framing sorry that
was that didn't answer your question but
now it did actually okay because you
said you young in the the ideas around
him and chemical texts when I like that
marry by a man who's now a reverend and
he gave me his books quite a few of his
books right before he moved and then on
the move everything he owned burned so I
have his only booked his notes
you know his glossary is marginal yet I
have all his notes and stuff and that
book is so much more powerful just
because I have his thoughts in the book
also so I think I kind of see what you
said when you say you start to kind of
move in a in those things and then you
kind of get spun off maybe but you are
actually consuming them properly you're
not just trying to get through them to
say you rent the book thank you yeah
thank you
yo you've you've taken my meaning
Adrian you had a question yeah
have you had a bill to hand book the
burden of society and if yes what do you
think about it I haven't read that when
I've read I read the sense of time yeah
I'm his his books are like high up in
the queue they're high up in the queue
so I can't speak to the grant Society
specifically I can say that the sense of
it had a huge influence on my thinking
and and incidentally you know if we're
talking about form and style young
Chauhan is a very interesting example
because he has a way of writing I
remember thinking to myself after
reading the sense of time that there was
a lot of repetition a lot of formal
repetition stylistic repetition in his
book even though it's a very short book
and I can I know I have a similar
tendency when especially when writing
about something whose core components
are not yet clear even to me there's a
lot of circling around something there's
a lot of revolution that happens in the
writing process and I hope I'm not
interpolate Americana's concern but I
can actually see a lot of that I feel as
though when I read Han in the limited
way that I've done I can feel his
process of reckoning I can feel his
contemplative process in the form of the
way he writes in addition to the content
that was writing I can feel the world of
his text and I can feel it
I can feel its recursions and
repetitions as a way of lathering me
further and further and further into its
insight um so anyway that that yeah I
can't speak to the burnt-out society but
my experience of reading the sense of
time and not only do I not only do I
find his propositions very compelling
and persuasive but the manner in which
they're presented is very evocative and
exemplifying of the very phenomenon that
he's trying to explain and I think
that's a that's part of what makes I
mean he's very high to Goering
philosopher so that explains a lot onto
itself right but that's that to me that
kind of deduces what makes them a good
philosopher is it form we just have a
couple questions left so really
appreciate your time here could I ask
what are your thoughts and whether
Christians today can shift into viewing
Christ's resurrection symbolically
rather than literally without losing the
power it has for that
you've crafted a little bit for me there
as I asked that question I got something
Christmas and above the resurrection but
you're gonna have to repeat it for me
sorry what are your thoughts on whether
Christians today let me yeah sorry my
Internet's bad today you can click on
the event text right over the event hall
and that all and just scroll to near the
bottom that'll give you so much pie
kadai sorry can you say that again da
give me that instruction again the event
here let me just read this one what are
your thoughts on whether Christians
today can shift into viewing Christ's
resurrection symbolically rather than
literally without losing the power it
has for them yeah I don't know I mean I
think that in a way that question is
about whether I mean I might make the
argument and others have made the
collective with crams and you and made a
version of this argument that the way in
which people understood the way in which
you know the way in which Christians
Avantika
understood the resurrection was indeed
symbolic that understanding the
resurrection literally is in fact a
modern conceit of some species of modern
conceit and that the symbolic
understanding of the Resurrection the
living within the patterns invoke aided
by that symbolic activity is actually
the form of reality that it conduced
for christians of antiquity so I'm
actually going to frame this quest going
to take the liberty of framing this
question as a recollected one can we go
back to something more individuals I
think certainly I would imagine so
I would imagine that individuals can
salvage a symbolic experience of it
election can enough individual salvage
experience of the resurrection
symbolically for it to be ported to be
renewed as a kind of religious Commons I
don't know I don't know I think that I
mean Christian I mean Christmas is one
of those things that has become so
beleaguered and put upon over the course
of time by all kinds of idolatrous
meanings and philosophical deductions
I don't know if it can be recovered from
that I mean I'm not I'm not you know my
my relationship with Christianity is
very Invisalign very complicated so you
know I say this I suppose I say this as
a as a very wayward the time of
christening I'm very much a wavered
Christian and I'm not exactly and I'm
I'm not I don't presume to offer an
apology or a I'm not convert let me put
it this way I'm not convinced enough
myself that the rituals and calendar and
sacraments of Christianity can be
revivified for enough people to be
regained as a religious worldview I'm
not I would I certainly wouldn't say
never
but I'm not convinced of it I'm not
convinced as possible and there is
absolutely no joy in my believe me not
at all
straw and asks symbolically is such
Nastase as necessity is to sufficiency
hmm that's a good question
aye aye I don't know if they met
perfectly I might I might tinker with
that a little bit and say that freshness
awareness is something more like
necessity to possibility than
sufficiency yes I think I think as a I
think there's a loose mapping I think
there's something there yes yes I mean
that there's a reason that you know
something like Kierkegaard's synthesis
itself is falls at the center of several
apparent dichotomies one of those
dichotomies being that between necessity
and possibilities and it is precisely
the disposing possibility within the
bounds of necessity that resolves the
despair that is otherwise inherent to
that synthesis I think that there's
something very very powerful to that and
I think there is something analogous
that is being done what I'm working with
John on right now between search nests
and Lorna's that their mutual
impregnation and I I use that metaphor
very purposefully because it then finds
itself to the midwifery metaphors of
philosophy but the mutual impregnation
of such miss and mourneth as between
possibility and necessity it's something
that is only conduce
by a powerful symbol that can make a
turn into that can make a turn into an
agave an agave being that kind of the
kind of ascent of the soul that we
associate with with sort of climbing the
great chain of being that that's a sort
of deal photonic Neoplatonic and
christian will use the more mystical
versions of it that involve a normative
ascent for the great chain of being a
kind of self transcendence from the
theosis of the soul that those kinds of
things that that are represented by the
cursus of an agave
is this precisely affected by managing
two presents the mystery of mourning
thank you I wonder give for the final
question you could just give us a bit of
a preview of what to expect on the new
book you're working with John hmm so um
we're working on an anthology right now
the topic of which is inner and outer
dialogue we're trying to we're trying to
as well as possible we're trying to find
trying to refine to get ourselves as
close as possible to the center of the
pie Roz that is emerging in these
biological processes and to do that
we've convened several contributors to
to basically contemplate the topic of
dialogue in whatever discipline they're
most familiar with or they're most
learned it in to try and understand what
the relationship between dialogues
interpersonal dialogues like this
between persons in in that a classical
model and intra personal interest
psychic dialogues the kind that the kind
that were originated you know by by the
early Stoics and Christians people like
Marcus Aurelius from Agustin who
interiorized
the dialectical process and used it as a
way of probing interior mystery we're
trying to to collapse those two ways of
understanding dialogues together to see
if they can make sense of one other and
so anyway John and I were a couple of
chapters a couple of the chapters will
be will be ones that we've worked on
with with the weather opera opera is one
one that I'm working on right now
is co-authored with with John also by
saying stuff enjoyed a call because it's
based on a dialogue that we had together
that's on YouTube some time ago and it
was based on transcribing that dialogue
and trying to understand how one
dialogue can exemplify the dialogic
process and and and articulate out its
features as to understand exactly what's
going on and how that can be a model for
understanding how to set the conditions
for de locas so that's that's what over
chemo maintenance and through the summer
and and hopefully come all closer to the
calendar year
with any luck well this has been great I
want to thank you so much for coming
today I know you're you're not the
biggest fan of the the online of the
online mediums but but hopefully you
could see something that we're doing
here that that's worthwhile doing and
and you're welcome back anytime we'd
love to have you reading the comments
here people are expressing thanks and
especially talk your your linguistic
flow and your use of language is has
been deeply admired by by our by our
members and so I really thank you for
being here today
well thank you for making this so easy
for me and thank you all really I never
I never take it for granted that that's
anyone at any given time with any
interesting what I might this is this is
a humbling experience it's immensely
gratifying and I mean the questions are
what great questions they're really
really impressive and smart and gesture
to the center of what is important about
all of this
so my you know my my reluctance for
virtual environments notwithstanding I
mean clear this the value of this is
overwhelmingly met
happened to me I need no convincing fit
so thank you all for your time yeah I'd
be delighted to do more of this yeah and
talk with your folks more thank you
thanks again Chris and thank you
everyone for being here coming up next
week we've got well John will be here on
Monday for for the bi-weekly or
bimonthly QA on Thursday next Thursday
the 25th we've got JP Marceau coming by
who works very closely with the Jonathan
P Joe and and please check out our
calendar it pinned in the announcements
the pinned posted the announcements has
a link where we're having more and more
planned events on this discord of all
different types so please check out the
calendar and check it daily and thanks
everyone for being here and asking
questions and yeah I hope you come again