[Music]
so many of the people whose thought I'm
following most closely have have had
similar have ended up in a very similar
place in terms of what you might call
into subjective sense making or how do
we come into coherence with each other
to make sense of the world together and
I'd like to
why have you ended up in this space and
what's your journey been to get to this
place I mean I I mean the short answer
is no idea look I think we're all just
here and but if I had to kind of attempt
to assemble some plausible narrative I
think it's just that you know none of us
live in a vacuum and we all we are all
you know intrinsically social creatures
and I think there is some you know even
before we get together to talk about in
some shared sense making that we're all
needed and none of the challenges that
at least you know as you talked about
the people you're following that kind of
people who are thinking and writing and
speaking and teaching around these
things I think it's all fairly clear
that you know to to to quote cuing long
all right where we go one we go all and
that's not just batshit dudes on the
hall right that are coming to that
conclusion and I think that's part of
why that's such a resonant rallying cry
for that community is he's not wrong and
so that sense that we better figure out
a none of us have all the pieces and we
better figure out how to share exchange
integrate and operationalize all of the
pieces almost feels like table stakes
assumptions these days so there's a lot
of work that I'm familiar with through
kind of counseling and trauma work
around somatic experiencing polyvagal
theory and it's all about how we come
into connection with each other
especially polyvagal theory which is
basically saying that we're either in a
an exploratory framework where we're
able and open for connection with others
or in a defensive framework and I have a
real sense that were
is essential to come into a sort of
broader consciousness maybe into sort of
understanding why conversations break
down because we're in a culture of the
moment or the conversation just keep
seeming to break down again and again
and again and this kind of understanding
like the neurophysiology of coherence or
the neurophysiology of connection seems
really vital in that do you what's your
take on that yeah I mean I would almost
I mean short answer is yes because
there's no there's no opportunity for
tribal primates to be in coherence
without that also having a you know
showing up in the kind of stack of our
bodies and brains for sure so for what
we want is the ability to have a nice
conversation together the ability for us
to have that nice conversation sits on
the foundation all right
of bodies and brains and hearts and
minds in achievement not whether that's
simple things like mirror neurons or
it's more complicated things like
overall neurophysiological resonance
that is for sure another lever for us to
play with so you know the Business
School East sodding in Spain that we
wrote about in a stealing fire the idea
that they took a strategic business
problem and had a bunch of MBA students
try and solve it together you know with
one-way mirrors and biometrics tracking
them on all this kind of stuff and they
figured I could who are the emerging
leaders in this group and and they
backed out statistically you know how
much people talked how loudly people
talked the words they used even what
they actually had to say about solving
the problem none of that stuff was
statistically as significant as the fact
that that those leaders those emergent
leaders couldn't regulate their own
nervous systems and do it in a way that
entrained other people into their states
so it's a little bit like that old story
of you know Galileo entering the
watchmakers shop and seeing you know all
the all the clocks on the wall swinging
in time with the one with the longest
pendulum so that idea of the longest
pendulum and trains all the others into
that field that to me has been my
inquiry really on the sort of biohacking
spaces what's the longest pendulum
our bodies if we had to pick and there's
a gajillion things we can map track
measure from brain waves to heart rate
to heart rate variability to new
chemistry to posture to respiration
African you know get all sorts but what
are the one or two or three that if you
get those right the entire rest of our
bodies and brains cascades into
coherence and then that's a strong
signal that's now that's lengthened our
pendulum and now we are far more likely
to bring others into that coherent state
and so before we get to kind of what we
know you might call communitas or like a
highly coherent group presencing
something greater than the sum of the
parts my sense is that when we try we
get there occasionally particularly from
a shed peak state or experience we kind
of experience a bit but then it comes
undone it is unstable and it breaks down
and it you know it's almost a truism
that it breaks down because of our
trauma
I have ego based stuff personality stuff
I've lived a story where I'm I'm either
have to be in charge or I've never seen
in love don't you know me and everything
in between
and at some point in the game somebody
hits a few wrong notes things that
unspooling and we all go back into our
habituated patterns and overwhelming
majority of you know 20th century early
21st century efforts to deal with trauma
if it's ever dealt with it all often
it's not is verbal linguistic
psychoanalytic it's let's talk about our
feelings let's talk about our pain let's
talk about all this stuff but you
mentioned the body keeps the score and
the vessel vendor is it bender under
coke vessel vendor coke you know he
makes the case and I think it's 100%
valid and he would by the way the fellow
who actually got PTSD defined and coined
and entered into the dsm 3 i think was
at the time so in the sort of father of
PTSD in a research and therapy the idea
is a little bit you can't fix a problem
that the level it wasn't created so if
you're dealing with pre verbal or
nonverbal trauma to yourself system
talking about it isn't gonna get rid of
it in fact talking about it can further
calcified and
reify it even further which is why I
oftentimes there's nobody more neurotic
and more self-obsessed than the person
who's logged lots of Freudian cashton
all they've done is polish and perfect
the gems of their suffering so if we're
looking for how do we get a bunch of
people into coherent States and nobody
shits the bed we actually have to get
the out of our bodies and our
system and so nonverbal trauma release
methods tend to be I think again you
know archimedes one on one the longer
lever from which we can move the world
and if we can get pre verbal pre
psychological pre-die-cut
right it's how you and I are actually
feeling in relationship and resonance or
dissonance with each other and then the
words the ideas all that good stuff will
come as a byproduct of that more
foundational step and so that is an area
that fascinated by and really we're
trying you know I'm exploring for my
next book which is what's kind of a
unified field of high-impact
evidence-based trauma relief and
integration so we can be better more
joyful more resourced humans but also so
that we can get together play together
and stay together more consistently than
we have been I've got a friend called
Alex Evans who used to be a advisor for
the British government in climate change
and many different kind of hot-button
topics and he became quite disillusioned
with how the conversations kept breaking
down and now he's gone away and
researched a lot of this stuff that's
all under Cole polyvagal theory and I've
realized and this is the core key piece
that we need to understand before we can
kind of solve most of the problems yeah
do you do you agree with that yeah I
mean I've actually had several recent
somewhat you know puzzling saddening
frustrating experiences in groups of
rarified you know these are down to you
know Caribbean islands with famous
billionaires to solve ocean conservation
or gather
of you know wealth holders and wisdom
keepers so indigenous elders plus high
net-worth families and family offices
with you know everybody with incredibly
good intentions and saw one hijacked in
a heartbeat around gender and sort of me
two issues which was not the topic of
conversation and another one about ocean
conservation hijacked around race and
you're like we're here to try and save
the oceans this isn't even a human
dynamic and someone would the tiniest
propagation got triggered into a
personal trauma response and then into a
socio-political ideological trauma
response and just kicked the entire
house of cards down and you realize oh
 we have to figure that part out and
and if and and my sense is is you know
Ben Franklin you know when they signed
the Declaration of Independence he said
alright gentlemen and I said yes he said
the republic if you can keep it let that
bit that everybody knows but he also
said we must all hang together or we
shall assuredly hang separately and so
that's where we are right now and so
identity politics which are it which is
fundamentally a group of collectively
traumatized folks forming an identity
around that trauma right identity
politics of all stripes and this doesn't
matter left or right they can be in
cells outright 4chan wack nuts or it
could be social justice warriors right
and and and that entire community I
would I would advocate that community on
the progressive left is right they
absolutely all those folks all those
dispossessed out groups have been
subject to abuses of long term
entrenched power over time they're just
not being effective at all and in fact
there are the only people they're the
only people that they are harming is the
center left for well-intentioned
progressives who do have access to the
instruments of patriarchy post colonial
oppression money markets platform and
those are the only Pope's there even
subject give a about that critique
centre-right is saying oh no that's way
too extreme for my value sets my
position my experience so I'm actually
getting pushed away and alright is
gleefully trolling the libs and watching
this circular firing squad on the Left
go down and weaponizing all the tools of
postmodern classical academia whether
that's freedom of speech or help help
I'm being oppressed or my voice must be
heard too and they're actually just
turning and weaponizing the tools of the
progressive left against themselves so
it is a stock rating shitshow all around
and the key is is if I go back into my
trauma and even my in groups the shared
experience of trauma and the stories
around them and I said any it's a little
bit like kids playing you know sort of
all day monopoly games back in the day
you know when wouldn't you run out of
banknotes and then you'd start having to
write IOU it's like I owe you 1 million
extra dollars for landing on board or
gourmet fare or whatever it would be
right at some point we have to come to
the conclusion that my i/o use what's
owed me to fill the hole I believe I
have from those traumatic experiences is
dwarfed by the potential pain and
suffering we're all staring at coming
down the pike if we don't get our
together and learn to hang together so
identity politics are a structural
roadblock right now in from anything
resembling group coherence on a
collective mobilized scale and I think
the only way through it and people
experience this as well because there
were in that wisdom keepers wealth
holders retreat that I was invited to
attend and speak at there were Lakota
and DNA elders so from the Navajo
community and the Lakota Sioux
communities and there and actually also
someone from Guyana so so the
experiencing you know all sorts of kind
of both African Diaspora into you know
South American colonial expression and
their effect was fundamentally different
than the San Francisco's social justice
warrior
fundamentally different they had act and
arguably had been experiencing far more
egregious oppression and trauma for many
for even more generations but they had
come out on the other side of love and
they had come out on the other side of
open embrace and it wasn't squishy it
wasn't new agey it was fierce and it was
unapologetically in that stand but it
was integrated you could absolutely tell
integrated humans from wounded activists
and the integrated humans is what Martin
Luther King called soul force and they
were sourcing from soul force and it was
palpable I mean Here I am two months
later still talking about that
experience that three or four days with
those people and how much it's impacted
just my thinking and feeling about these
subjects so the question is is can we
create catharsis right the except the
metabolizing of our trauma the digesting
of our grief such that I'm no longer
separate in my pain body and my
narrative that wraps me around that and
can I experience both my wholeness my
enoughness and potentially my
connectivity to self to community to
society to plan it and be on whatever
the levels I choose or am able to access
and from there can we learn to play this
bigger game together and if we sit if we
only have words to talk about it never
gonna get done if we have access to
neuro physiological resets then we can
potentially come back to stop figuring
out how to play this game together a
little bit more skillfully with much
higher Boz for what triggers us into
decompensated States it's funny because
I've written a question here is identity
politics incompatible with coherence and
you already preempted it yeah well the
other thing about identity politics
again just on a developmental
psychological level right identity
politics is a regression into
ethnocentric and egocentric centers of
gravity it's saying I heard we hurt your
fault their fault so it is by by sort of
design it is fragmentary and and
fractional if you and what we have to do
no question about it both from a simple
strategic level but also arguably from a
cultural and humanitarian level we have
to make the next step to global century
consciousness have to the problems are
wicked and complex they they don't
observe ethnic linguistic Geographic
political boundaries right we have to be
thinking of that and you think okay how
on earth do we get to global centric
consciousness at scale and the only
instances we've had our sort of saints
and stages so tiny tiny fractions of
percentages on the leading edge if you
marry well who knows how they've done
that most religious traditions aren't
very good at repeating those are those
lucky leaders they sort of born not made
or occasionally pop through so we
haven't figured out how to open source
that part you think okay well what about
the little blue marble the flyover
effect of astronauts and everybody's
familiar with like the Apollo astronauts
and how many in seeing the Sun come up
over this little blue planet of ours and
seeing the Amazon and the Great Wall of
China and the you know and the Nile and
go holy right I am a human that is
our home we are all connected and the
boundaries and the separations are
ephemeral they're illusory that
experience we can't all hop on SpaceX or
Virgin Galactic just logistically not
gonna happen
so can we instead of being astronauts to
precipitate that flyover effect of
global centric perspective can we become
not astronauts but Psychonauts is there
a chance we're by doing interior work
and having interior experiences I
experienced the dissolution of myself I
experienced the connection to something
bigger than me and that can I come back
to do that but the lead the lead anchors
present preventing that is our
undigested grief it is the trauma we
carry with us and and it's not that we
have to become perfect we don't all have
to become Saints and Yogi's but we just
have to have the
ability to say okay I defrag my nervous
system and I'm 80/20 woke to broke I'm
80% like oh yeah this is what it's like
to stand tall oh yeah this is what it's
like to feel enough to even feel joy
possibility whatever right and am I done
yet no I'm not done yet
I'm probably never gonna be done
figuring all that out ironing out all
the kinks the bumps the scrapes in fact
the scars are what make me me but I've
got enough that I remember what's
possible and I have a felt sense of what
it's like to move beyond that skin
encapsulated you go move beyond my
stories move beyond seeking pleasure and
avoiding pain to play a bigger game by
choice on purpose
with others and if we can get there then
maybe we've got a shot you know and just
before when we were talking about kind
of coming into coherence with each other
you talked about neuro neuro
physiological resets what what are those
yeah well I mean and this is the this is
the research I'm doing for my next book
but it's basically the idea of again you
can do all sorts of things in the lab
you can do all sorts of things with 10
million dollars in a kit and a fancy
retreat center or a research project or
you know or you know Dafa you know kind
of you know multi-year study or
something my interest is in what is
cheap to free what is open source
meaning almost everybody who would want
to can have access to it and what's
scalable kind of the first to you know
put into gear and so if you take a look
at I think you can kind of run a fairly
straightforward thought experiment which
is you're like okay well if it has to
mean all those things it probably
already exists in our bodies or you know
we either carry around with us or it's
simple protocols we can adopt with a
minimum of tools and spend and you also
think okay what are the things that are
evolutionarily encoded because if we can
judo flip those things to higher better
uses we have a real chance of what you
just got to let them you want a lot of
an inertia hit that you can harness and
redirect so a couple of examples
you know the simplest is respiration we
are biologically encoded to breathe damn
it right and oxygen is the fuel for your
Ronal computation as well as all of our
cellular health and growth so and you
know if you try and hold your breath for
as long as you can and then you get you
know what they call ibm's involuntary
breathing movements or rhythmic even
look that kind of gulping swallowing
thing you get when you're a kid playing
that game and you think oh you finally
take a gospel bear anything I I wish I
was out of oxygen
well you want you actually have 50%
oxygen in your tank still at that time
what you have had is an excessive carbon
dioxide buildup and our brain is like
Mayday Mayday Red Alert red alert get
more air dumbass because you might
sometime minutes from now cook it and
expire so we've built in that massive
buffer right of overwhelming imperative
to do the thing well if you can take
that and you know folks like wim HOF the
Iceman who's you know roaming the world
leading breathing and ice bath workshops
and those kind of things
what is he harnessing what is he hacking
he's hacking respiration and basically
if you just realized that changing the
balance of nitrogen oxygen and carbon
dioxide in our blood streams completely
changes our consciousness we can up
regulate if we sort of if worth tired or
depressed or we're about to go onstage
or give a performance or something like
that we can up regulate our nervous
systems usually by faster more potent
breathing if we're stressed out and
we're trembling and we just need to calm
down to go to sleep or again to give a
presentation or to do anything else that
we need to do we can with slower vagal
nose breathing where our exhales are
much longer than our inhales we can down
regulate our nervous system we can
increase our vagal nerve tone and our
vagal nerve just goes from our brain
through our heart all the way down to
our route and it modulates much of our
nervous system and therefore our
experience so and if you want to you
know really get interesting
you can hyperventilate or do other
breathing practices that completely
transcend your waking state
consciousness and
profound non ordinary state experiences
and so that's an example which is cheap
it's free it's infinitely portable and
all you need is is three different sets
of instructions of up regulating down
regulating transcending your current
consciousness because you want to get
someplace else very very easy and back
to the idea of the pendulum it has a
cascade of effects it's not just our
breathing it's even not just our the gas
exchange in our bloodstream it's
actually you know cascades to our vagal
nerve cascades to other elements what a
hacks that if we're in a conversational
we're in a situation that feels
overwhelming how do we reset yeah so so
yeah if you find yourself in an attempt
to have a coherent conversation meaning
we're trying to do something that none
of us know what's gonna come of this but
if we play it right something better
than anyone of us separately could have
thought of let's say that's the kind of
a version of the game we're playing and
things start to go sideways right
somebody gets hijacked somebody starts
engaging an older less functional
pattern you feel triggered you want to
react you know that's what we're that
right there the first moment is you know
this this is man's search for meaning
right it's that it's the stimulus in the
response and the space between what's
happening and my reaction to it therein
lies freedom and redemption so a couple
of things and this is you know granny
wisdom 101 which is if you're about to
get angry or say something off the cuff
take a deep breath
it actually takes several deep breaths
and specifically engage in you know what
freedivers called vagal tone breathing
which is just the idea of act like a
ten-second exhale with a two-second hold
so exhale fully empty your lungs
once your lungs are completely empty
hold them for two seconds and then just
fill your lungs and you can do that at a
table you don't need to announce it you
can just actually use that and just take
five of those and you will match it in
fact if you do it a friend of ours as a
neuroscientist at Stanford his name's
Andrew Huberman and he's done a
fascinating research where if you
combine I games so if you kind of go
soft focus meaning that you're focusing
your eyes to the outside of your frame
and you do that vagal nerve breathing so
the super slow exhales a whole you know
and you do it through your nose
you completely draw your physiological
threat response you just chill the
out super fast and so that would be the
simplest and people might think you've
just kind of spaced out or you're not
there but yeah if you can just go soft
soft I focus so you're not laser focused
and you're not focused on something
immediately in front of you and you do
nitrogen basically nasal exhales then
that will really calm you down further
the next would be and part of the reason
for the nose breathing the Carolyn's the
Karolinska Institute in Sweden has done
some fascinating research on the nitric
oxide and that correlates with some
research at Harvard that basically said
nitric oxide is a neurotransmitter and
it's a gaseous molecule and it takes
stress response stuff out of our brain
it shunts it all the way and it brings
in feelings of you know bliss if you
call it the Bliss molecule right so
basically anything you can do in your
body to increase nitric oxide is usually
a good thing for stress response and
resilience alright so that was the
Harvard research then the Karolinska
Institute has found that nasal breathing
increases it three to five times and
that if you really want to get freaky
vibrating your nasal cavity as you
breathe out through your nose so hmm
something like that or if you were
playing a didgeridoo or playing a
clarinet or a trombone that I actually
increases nitric oxide production 15
times so if you slam all these together
you're like okay I'm gonna breathe I'm
gonna exhale slowly through my nose with
visual focus to the periphery and I
might depending on my social situation
of my comfort level even hum as I do it
that is actually gonna calm me down and
give me a reset so that's a true
straight up kind of biohack I don't need
to think anything to do it just do it
and it will have some positive effect
the next is now a bridge what's the
bridge between the neurophysiology and
psychology right so Lisa Feldman Barrett
who just recently wrote a book called
how emotions are main has kind of
upended the field of sort of
neuroscience and causation unlike what
our
Russians John Gottman and some others
have you people have probably heard
these stories of like the smile muscles
and all the micro muscles around the
face in the eyes and different
combinations and different micro muscles
equals certain emotions and her pushback
was actually like hey a lot of that's
more culturally constructed than you
think if you go to Asia what is a smile
what's a slight upturn that can be
cynicism that could be suck that could
be actually absolute joy but that's just
the most we actually display of it
there's a whole host of cultural layers
of how we're taught to emote starting
with mirror neurons babies and mothers
so her point is actually emotions are
way more plastic fungible
context-dependent than we might have
thought there's really only four things
we feel we feel positive or negative not
surprise active or passive so if I was
negative passive that might be
depression if I was negative active that
might be anger if I was active positive
that might be joy if I was active if I
thought it was positive passive that
might be contentment so that's the jam
there's just four ways we tend to feel
and she calls it interior Inception
meaning that before I even have an
emotion which we usually we usually
think of in terms of our psychology like
I am happy I am sad even intransitive
though I equals made that emotion she's
saying it's happening at the level of
our organs of our nervous system
literally at the level of our bodies and
brains know just they're just in those
states and so one of the things that
research has also found is that when you
have that interior receptive response
you can actually overwrite it so you're
actually at that moment of choice I'm
having one of those four feelings now
out of my memory bank of words that
represent emotions which one do I pull
off the shelf and say I am sad I am
happy I'm excited I'm nervous and what
they have found is that you can actually
overwrite and nudge by the word you
choose to pick so sort of DIY neuro
linguistic programming so if you're
about to get on you know up on the
diving blocks for a swimming race anyway
my god oh my god I'm shaking right I'm
feeling something
I'm having an interior septic response
I'm actually still at a moment of choice
and if you if you lay in you prime
yourself by saying I am excited right
and you actually repeat that several
times you will actually move into
positive active instead of negative
active if you say I am nervous I'm
scared that then you will reinforce
those things so we have a chance which
is when like a no just even just
awareness there's this thing called
interior section and it precedes our
emotions and we're actually some and
more at choice on the emotions we feel
than we might have thought and that by
choosing positive you know
neuro-linguistic priming for ourselves
we can help shift that so if we're not
conversation with people and something's
off some things something doesn't quite
a few it like first notice the sensation
this is the possum ax Insight Meditation
what I want
notice the sensation don't rush to judge
it don't rush to fix it but now once
I've got a bead on it and I haven't just
jumped into a reactive trauma primed
response to that other person I can
notice it I can overwrite it with a more
positive effect if I choose to or I can
even with a little bit of practice learn
to speak into it
hey I'm noticing I felt my energy really
drop in that last 10 minutes or I'm
noticing I feel agitated I'm noticing
these things so there's there's levels
of I'm having a response and I want to
just address it the down-regulation the
breathing the nose breathing the high
gates there's I'm having a somewhat
neutral interior receptive response and
I can nip it in the bud before I've
named it as a destructive or a reactive
emotion and I can prime it and override
it and then even higher level of Judo
would be I'm not trying to fix it change
it shape it at all I'm simply gonna
notice it and name it and with a little
bit of practice I can speak that truth
into the shared conversation and quite
often you'll find out did you
I need the whole thinking job to the
level where oh me too or oh thank you
for saying that and then we're back to
that level of resonance and coherence
not from follow me I'm super stoked this
is all amazing and I'm gonna be this
bright light it's more like actually
let's actually orient around what is
happening right now now what are the
truths we can explore if we can stay in
this place together without judgment
without naming the emotion without then
creating the narrative without enacting
triggered drama responses around it and
that actually is arguably an even more
magic place for us to get together to
forge coherence which is wherever the
hell we actually are versus some effort
to escape it fix it mend it
transcendence
[Music]
you
[Music]