look at me Damien it's all for you the
invention of television has made it
possible for us to communicate through a
combination of sights and sounds modern
means of communication have overcome the
ancient barriers of time and distance in
which is visible a whole new era of
communication in one generation boys and
vision have transcended space science
engineering and organization have
harnessed the ratio between lightness
do you suffer because your storehouse of
words is smaller than you'd like it to
be well then hey hey don't touch that
channel selector well then kids you
don't have to pay I told you not to
touch the selector this is all for you
this is all for you this is all for you
this is all for you psychological
warfare has been waged against America
for much of this century this war for
the mind of the public has been
facilitated by the emergence of mass
media and the transformation of American
education by behavioral psychologist in
the book 1984 George Orwell warned that
people were in danger of losing their
human qualities and freedom of mind
without being aware of it while is
happening because of psychological
emotional and intellectual manipulation
mind control the most effective way to
protect yourself from subconscious
manipulation is by being aware of how it
works what the conscious mind
the subconscious acts on it works like
programming a computer information is
fed into a computer and the computer
acts on it however if the information
fed into the computer is wrong it's
still acts on it if a person believes
something that is not true the memory
banks of the subconscious mind do not
correct the error but act on it the
theory of cognitive dissonance holds
that the mind automatically and
involuntarily rejects information not in
line with previously accept thoughts and
beliefs
watching television often produces an
altered state of consciousness though
not consciously perceived the television
screen while appearing static actually
flickers any repeating light or sound
pattern can lead you into an altered
state a hypnotist uses patterned speech
by varying the pacing and inflection of
his voice to induce the state of mind in
his subject it is in this state of mind
where one is the most receptive to
mental programming whether or not the
information takes hold in the mind
depends on two factors trust in the
source of the information and repetition
of the message trust in the source of
the information induces acceptance of
the message as true even if it is not
understood repetition of the message
embeds it in the subconscious so that
acceptance of its truth and accuracy
becomes a conditioned response thus this
information will be accepted is true
without thinking about it whenever it is
presented again directed all these words
on this page without making a mistake
you will get a letter and together in
every sound it makes get ready pal yes
type get ready to read this word the
best waking right game yes sound it out
get ready he found it out get ready
hey what words yes good boys and girls
sound this word out get ready
what word pls steal these words the fast
way get ready Friday and playing it
ready right yes month let's read these
words the fast without making mistakes
get ready - yes I'm ready
Kate yes get ready feel yes feel get
ready hey
playing and ready but yes mark or just
get ready time yes hi get ready yes get
ready feel yes feel get ready
hey yes playing and ready but yes much
because we look Americans are asking why
do they hate us they hate what they see
right here in this chamber a
democratically elected government their
leaders are self-appointed they hate our
freedoms our freedom of religion our
freedom of speech our freedom to vote
and assemble and disagree with each
other
[Music]
every nation in every region now has a
decision to make either you are with us
or you are with the terrorists either
you're with us any love freedom and with
nations which embrace freedom are you
with the enemy there's no in-between if
you the with us here with the enemy I
would
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Applause]
we have an obligation to every last
victim of this illegal aggression
because all of this carnage has been
done in our name since world war ii 90%
of the casualties of war are unarmed
civilians 1/3 of them children our
victims have done nothing to us from
Palestine to Afghanistan to Iraq to
Somalia to wherever our next target may
be their murders are not collateral
damage they are the nature of modern
warfare they don't hate us because of
our freedom they hate us because every
day we are funding and committing crimes
against humanity the so-called war on
terror is a cover for our military
aggression to gain control of the
resources of Western Asia this is
sending the poor of this country to kill
the poor of those Muslim countries this
is trading blood for oil this is
genocide and to most of the world we are
the terrorists in these times remaining
silent on our responsibility to the
world and its future is criminal and in
light of our complicity in the supreme
crimes against humanity in iraq and
afghanistan and ongoing violations of
the UN Charter and international law how
dare any American criticize the actions
of legitimate resistance to illegal
occupation our so-called enemies in
Afghanistan Iraq Palestine our other
colonies around the world and our inner
cities here at home are struggling
against the oppressive hand of empire
demanding respect for their humanity
they are labeled insurgents or
terrorists for resisting rape and
pillage by the white establishment but
they are our brothers and sisters in the
struggle for justice the civilians at
the other end of our weapons don't
but American soldiers have choices and
while there may have been some doubt
five years ago today we know the truth
our soldiers don't sacrifice for feeding
on our country they sacrifice for
Kellogg Brown and groups
they don't fight for America they fight
for their lives and their buddies decide
them because we put them in a war zone
they're not defending our freedom
they're laying the foundations 14
permanent military bases to defend the
freedoms of ExxonMobil and British
Petroleum they're not establishing
democracies they're establishing the
basis for an economic occupation to
continue after the military occupation
Resendiz Iraqi society today thanks to
American help is defined by house raids
death squads checkpoints detention
curfews blood in the streets and
constant violence we must dare to speak
out in support of the Iraqi people who
resist and endure the horrific existence
we brought upon them through our
bloodthirsty imperial crusade we must
dare to speak out in support of those
American war resisters the real military
heroes who uncle their vote to defend
the Constitution of the United States
against all enemies foreign and domestic
including those terrorist cells in
Washington DC more commonly known as the
legislative executive and judicial
branches
Frederick Douglass says those who
profess to favor freedom and yet
appreciate education are people who are
cross without piling the ground they
want rain without thunder and lightning
they want the ocean without the roar of
as many waters the struggle may be a
moral one or it may be a suitable one or
a navy boat but it comes be a struggle
power concedes nothing without a demand
it never has and it never will every one
of us every one of us who keep demanding
he fight it keeps pondering and flowey
no justice no peace no justice
you
now also mentioned to that a fellow that
has been touched before an awful long
time his brother wasn't a CIA
there is no CIA he will never talk about
the CIA to him he will never give
anything away whatsoever
he said one bit of advice he said never
watch the television
never watch the television that's the
greatest scientific indoctrination tool
ever devised have me figured that out
has changed the whole culture of nations
not just one nation why do you think it
was mandatory
everybody in Britain give access to
televisions by the government why do you
think China is under the same program to
get everyone with the TV right now
because it love to have you entertained
do you really think that and endi is on
the same route as well right now to most
of your ideas in their opinions and how
you emulate because you emulate things
you mimic what you see as Charles got
and Darwin and others have said in the
past
it becomes you you become it and that's
what's happened it's been very very very
successful never watch the television
you can't watch a movie unless you do it
critically if you watch it critically
not there to enjoy it remember a
decision and motions to get you on and
center of what woven all these emotional
themes all through movies you're played
like a harp and they embed ideas and
given to you along with the movies and
predictive programming - so you'll
accept that which is still to come and
you'll and you'll behave the same way as
the characters in the movie when it
comes
oh well what can you do all this watch
much music good television
today to meet the woman of my dreams
I've been talking to this girl on the
internet for a while I actually been
trying to save some money to go see this
woman to talk about her online I go to
the library Believe It or Not talk to
this woman I met her on myspace yeah
she's a very beautiful woman she called
skinny redhead very beautiful woman why
don't we do it this way because you've
never met him ever letter well then I'm
going to ask you to leave for a few
moments and we want to bring her out
with the audience meet her and then we
can both observe you two meeting with
Hanna let's bring him back now here's
Brad good to meet you
it's kind of nervous on national TV I
know but like I wanted to ask like maybe
like you know you could be my girlfriend
well bad I have to tell you and I mean
try anything once
so in this book from the book behold a
pale horse written by William Cooper a
former naval intelligence officer in
regards to a document concerning the
American public it states the version is
the primary strategy the syphilis left
it for securing silent weapons and
gaining is to keep the public
undisciplined and ignorant of basic
system principles while keeping them
confused and this is what these reality
shows are doing confused about gender
confused about political confused
confused about your role your exam is
very confused about religion confused
about politics it says keep them
confused disorganizing distracted with
matters of no real importance whereas
the media in EDI a which stands for
mostly ethnic destruction in America or
maniac European Devils in action keeps
the adult populations attention diverted
from real social issues and captivated
by no matters of no real importance it
goes on to say the schools are kept keep
the young public ignorant of real
mathematics real economics real law and
really
some of the things that surprises a lot
of people and it shouldn't because it's
publicly now is that our education
system is not about educating as much as
it is about socializing I subducting in
the chicken yard if you if you take that
duckling and raise it with the chickens
it's going to be imprinted it's going to
behave like the chickens and in that
very real sense we perpetuate this a
danger is we don't just perpetuate it we
don't just enculturate it but it's the
only sane way we see raise our children
and the result is there's no escaping it
CS Lewis said when training which is
Skinner
have love beats education civilization
dies
you
well she always was really cool outfit
for going from like it's always signing
and that's why we're doing this so we
can be like a man 20 years ago by John
dr. John Coleman in the book the story
of the committee of 300 number six to
encourage and eventually legalize the
use of drugs and me pornography and art
form my question is does life imitate
art does art imitate life if you've got
to make pornography an art form and then
make it art for to your little rating
other babies how does that work it was
like a nightmare I was down in Galveston
two weeks ago on a vacation the last day
I was there a convention of cheerleaders
came but it was little kids at a
competition and there were like ten year
olds dress like prostitutes everywhere
and they were being rude to my daughters
because they thought they were there for
the competition and I mean I was it was
freaking me out
we even came home a day early I mean
that people are training their daughters
to be whores
Wow
although education has proven to be
highly effective in controlling human
behavior more intensive research would
need to be conducted away from the
prying eyes of the public the Tavistock
Institute was set up by the British
Empire to really study mind control and
to scientifically drill down into human
behavior and put in textbook form
systems of basic control so that could
be duplicated out to government and
corporate entities and Tama stock has
been involved at every level of social
engineering the Tavistock clinic was
founded in 1920 and operated as part of
the psychological warfare division of
the British military it was initially a
voluntary outpatient clinic for
treatment and research and was made up
of general physicians neurologists and
psychiatrists to facilitate the
treatment of neurosis in shell-shocked
British soldiers returning home from
World War one going through their own
publications on Amazon you can find some
of their books cost 1820 thousand
dollars and that what that tells me is
they don't want the average person to be
anywhere near getting their hands on
this book because what it gives you
inside those books is the teachers
Edition to use an abstraction as opposed
to the students sitting around the class
not knowing what the answers the
question are there's a group of people
who are being given the answers to all
the questions about how we act react and
how we've been under stimulated with
curiosity no more in order to make us
more subordinate to entertainment is
kept below the sixth grade level we saw
here so like Laffy Taffy and these time
song we hit your lower chakras and
vibrate that negative energy activating
your pituitary gland releasing those
hormones now you've got grown-ass men
making songs for twelve and
thirteen-year-olds Tunes road I hate
jay-z you're the center train so the
public is kept busy working and the
result is no time to think and that's
exactly what they produce and they wrote
about it inside of a book called the
Tavistock Institute of
relations shaping the moral spiritual
cultural political and economic decline
of the United States by John Coleman now
John Coleman is the gentleman that wrote
the committee 300 in the community 300
is that organ
that decide what the trends are going to
be in the black community so when you
start seeing people weighing Mohawks and
tight pants and acting wearing two
earrings and acting like women that was
manufactured and put them on us suits
Road suits road your Senate race we have
to understand that how they did it they
put they said they devised the system
the end the aim of the twelve a total
system that they devised jointly by
British intelligence operatives from
Tavistock university or Tavistock
Institute in England they put these 12
tones among us I and created this thing
um punk rock and its other
uncontrollable music lift up on
operation paperclip and it will tell you
all about it but our door know was a
system of music that could program the
mass music culture capable of eroding
the morals of its listeners until they
decline to a point where they will
totally be degraded by it and that's
what's going on today the musical is
bringing this down to an animalistic
level to the point where we don't even
care about the art form we just want a
paycheck sir so now it's cool for a Jim
Jones will come out talking about man
and in there and grow folks go for it
the other sayin I'm saying it's cool put
it this captured colosso talk about I'm
stupid you're stupid we stupid and
surprises that appeal to grown men and
grown women
well that's the thing all it's funny you
said all this stuff about wrappers and
stuff that I thought was pretty scary
and then it all started coming out in
the news right after you said it right
about how it's a weird sex cult and
Illuminati execs now they're all
bragging that's what they're in yeah I
think now they're trying to make it um
wow you call you say it's so much
becomes less important everybody they're
acclimating they're just throwing it out
it's a fad everybody needs to do this
year right
no it's still dangerous and people still
losing their last and losing in mind and
ultimately losing their souls I don't
know why they're into this reportedly
Lady Gaga has been confirmed by multiple
friends and managers someone has to
sleep in the room with her and she's
tortured by demons and think she's
falling around by ghosts
well yeah you're telling little girls to
worship the devil bad stuff is going to
happen to you exactly I'm n so they're
admitting these things these things are
out there people that she's not taking
this serious this is absolute demon
possession and they're going to rituals
in front of millions of people in front
of a County Blair admitted that he falls
to the ground every morning and is
possessed by the angel of light this is
mainstream news and he said yeah what's
the big deal and flops around on the
ground the devil's call the angel of
light I mean you can't make this out
definitely can
you
Joubert Joe pecan put out a DVD called
the corporation he said term children as
tomorrow's consumers represented huge
market today and therefore a fair game
the other insane so they are attacking
the children using tones and frequencies
and parents want to see their children
happy we go out and use our credit cards
and a hard-earned dollars to make sure
children are happy so we get the
sneakers and the new sneakers and the
new video games and the new songs that
come out and this kind of thing thinking
that we making our children happy with
feeding our children's minds and souls
to the wolves
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Music]
Oh
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
if you don't submit to control if you're
a radical you're less likely to be loved
you're not fitting in what society
you're viewed as an outsider there so
there's a lot of social prohibitions
about the outsider and the person who's
going to upset things from the time
we're very young we're taught to you
know worship Authority basically because
that's our key to survival as young
children but as adults we never go
through the rites of passage that tell
us how to methodically think for
ourselves and thus we're always in a
state of extended adolescence well we
take all this stuff whether it's a
television or it's the enculturation
that the school yards the teachers we
take this whole system we put it into
our unconscious mind and it is the GI
Geo that comes out garbage in garbage
out we simply in that computer language
have harnessed our own power by
accepting all these beliefs as though
they are factual whether it's the Flat
Earth of Columbus or it's the idea that
I'm not good enough to be or to do
something I've dreamed to do to the
degree that the individual loses a sense
of what freedom really means for himself
mind control is working this is the
constant battle and the struggle what
does my freedom mean to me what is it
how deep does it go
how far
you
I said I'm a careful 13 people that take
orders only from the Rothschild tribunal
in London which they claim they take
their orders directly from Lucifer's
I was a manager zodiac productions which
zodiac productions name has been changed
since then I'm not even sure what they
call it now but it's the largest music
conglomerate in the world elds RCA
Records Columbia Records Motown Records
owns almost all the concert booking
agencies in the United States and that's
not even the name of the company know
that the name of the company owns that
it's Brenner enterprises and Brennen
enterprises is owned by Chase Manhattan
Chase Manhattan all my Standard Oil and
Standard Oil both by the Lords of London
you can track it all back you kind of
get the idea after a while but I was the
managing president of zodiac productions
it's one of my jobs as being one of
these 13 people duh I got to know many
of the people who produce music and
saying the music and play the music that
you play now one of the closest friends
that I got during that time that I
contained for the man named David Crosby
Crosby Stills Nash and young I saw David
the day before Christmas last year
talked with him I got him away from this
witch that he had with me he told her to
go shopping we were in West Hollywood
not was witnessing around two people I
knew we went off in his store we started
talking I said David I like to ask you a
couple questions I said I already know
the answers but I've been gone for five
years I'd like to know if certain things
are still the way they were when I left
I said did they not explain some of this
when I'm done she not going to
understand it all let you know something
about music I said did they still take
the master to the temple room they said
yeah I said did they go out to : conjure
demon into the master it said of course
I said no I got to know something
what's the main reason for rock music is
come on Lance you know what the reason
it please David I don't want to get tell
me what the main reason is he says the
same as when you were in so that we can
play spells all people that we couldn't
can't spell the part I'll explain what
that means in a minute I said okay one
last thing I've been hearing that you
must be an initiated which now to get a
record contract he said that's right he
says many of us that wort total witches
has to be which is now in order to
produce music thank you the master is a
tape about as big as the top of this
podium that looks like an overgrown
8-track that the album is cut on and
it's placed in a machine
produces impressive the records in the
eight-track to cassettes this you buy
after it's been recorded it's taken in
this is why a masters cut months in
advance before its release on the full
moon it's taken in to a temple room
about the size of this auditorium that
is in every one of the major music
companies behind locked doors up in the
executive offices and it's placed on an
altar setting in the north of the room
and a pentagram engraved in the floor
and 13 hand shows and wishes in which
wizards and a Colvin come in and conjure
a principality or power up usually
region or something like that and order
him to tell the demon under him to
follow every record and every tape
coming off of that master
[Music]
you know what was going on in my life at
fifteen and that's how I got into to the
music industry is I swear I want to be
like Amy Grant of music yeah I didn't
work out and so I go mikkel with the
devil how came about being nurses it's
weird because I started out technically
I used to write all the time you know
before I start going to rain man faint
you know why do you still do it why you
still out here well it goes back to the
Destiny things now made a tough bargain
with it you know aunt I'm good I'm
holding up my hand
what was your bargain to get where I am
now
should I ask you you make the bargain
with the chief commander or deserve and
ascertain and then where we can't see
yeah well sometimes they don't want to
in there so you know god no we can't get
you know this is the frequency's weird
and you know it's sounding a little bit
strange and I'm like a genius right now
I swear to Lucifer nothing good a little
bit about it I'm like if you don't get
this right now I swear to listen for us
I'm gonna just done to your career blade
and it'll be on to your career in what
way how is it impacted in my outer ring
what's album's number one all over the
world
all over the world America is the only
one because I don't let say too much
what is not number one in the United
States conspiracy yeah I want to thank
too much I'm done I want to say much
because I'm hurting I'm really hurt has
asked some friends since I'm hearing a
lot about her and so they told me you
know who she was and what she was doing
and I come from the school of thought
there's just there's just some things
that the that the public just shouldn't
know you know what I'm saying like
things that happen between two people a
wife and a husband girl I just don't
think that it's for mass consumption I
just have always felt that way and I
just think that the whole idea celebrity
and fame has become really convoluted
and you know kind of bastardized like
whereas Fame used to be the byproduct of
success and now it's the ultimate goal
and if your if your ultimate goal is to
be famous then you're going to do a lot
to do to get there like sign your name
and blood and a contract with the devil
like you're going to end up in on a
one-way street and it's going nowhere
like that's just the truth I've seen so
many people like forsake their their
their moral code and their value systems
just for a little bit of Fame and it's
not worth it at the end of it it's
really not worth it ma Lawrence is a guy
that showed everybody you can make it
from BC to Hollywood and I had a
personal stake in his success every time
he did something it made me feel
inspired and really good and he was
always real nice to me
sit me down what's going on with you
baby boy but but we talk about comedy
whatever and you know when we did Blue
Streak
we were promoting it you and Martin had
a stroke almost died and then after that
I saw him I was like oh my god Martin
are you okay and he said I got the best
sleep I ever got in my life how tough he
is so let me ask you this what is
happening in Hollywood that a guy had
tough will be on the street waving a gun
screaming they are trying to kill me
yeah what's going on
why is Dave Chappelle going Africa why
does Barack Kerry make 100 million
dollar deal and take clothes off on TRL
is a weak person cannot get to sit here
and talk to you ain't no bleep people
talking to you so what is happening in
Hollywood nobody knows the worst thing
that cause somebody is crazy is
dismissive I don't understand this
person so they're crazy
that's bullish people are not crazy they
strong people maybe that environment is
a little sick
some of us are against the Illuminati we
are against a little Menotti at our own
detriment when people are against the
Illuminati then they get punched in the
face all the time
depressed hates them and nobody likes
them in quote we all go through exactly
Dave Chappelle has never been a part of
the Illuminati they don't want him or me
or people like us but now it's not
necessary for us to stir up the hornet's
nest unless we intend to get stoned a
million times I didn't understand that
they had to sting me a million times I'm
still not going join but I respect it a
little more alright you're managed by
the company and it surprised me I only
found the photo you managed by the
company look after S Club 7 you should
look after the the Spice Girls Simon
Fuller have they tried to mold you
anyway lot of people ask you to do
things to change how you look or speak
or behave yeah one of them tries to mold
me into a big triangle shape and I went
would you like me to show them how the
sign of the curse works silently very
different how does it go no not at you
not at you people out there in the
audience but this is the difference aim
it toward Red China would you this is
the sign of a horn a curse sorry the two
fingers extended this way spread apart
for sort of shotgun blast you
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
I was University of Wisconsin professor
Kevin Barrett who has recently drawn
criticism for plans to teach an Islamic
Studies course next fall that will
incorporate conspiracy theories that the
US government was involved in the events
of September 11th offensive barracks
joins us now professor can you give us a
context within which you teach this okay
what we've just seen here is he used a
non verbal gesture with his hands in an
outward motion to kind of scatter his
thinking and then swayed both of his
hands over to his left shoulder which
would give the subconscious impression
of being far to the left and also kind
of distract his thinking a little bit so
that's what he's doing that's why his
hands are all over the place and then
they swing over to his left shoulder to
send the subconscious message that he is
an extremist a left winger okay can you
give us a context within which you teach
this well yeah sure I'm teaching an
introductory course on Islam and I think
it's really important to cover these
contemporary political issues and one of
them is of course the so-called war on
terror now the fact is that the great
majority of the world's Muslims believe
that 9/11 was an inside job and that's
your opinion right it you're again
manipulation is all about timing and
redirecting and trying to take control
of somebody when they're speaking here
you see a great example of that by
saying that's your opinion even though
he just stated there's a vast number of
people that are waking up even though he
specifies the Muslim community that's
not true it's all over the world so the
journalists responsibility to misdirect
his thinking and to to mislead use to
follow up and say but that's your
opinion even though he stated that it
wasn't just his opinion but it doesn't
matter because people believe what they
hear from newscasters they take in the
barrage of words and the newscaster here
understands that so if he says that he
planted that seed now the fact is that
the great majority of the world's
Muslims believe that nine
Levin with an inside job that's your
opinion right your well no that's been
your opinion that there was an inside
job
well after studying the evidence pretty
intensively for two and a half years I
am convinced that 9/11 was in fact in
our times required to regurgitate that
you know in some way in order to be well
enjoy again more manipulation I'm sure
you caught that even though this very
system of the world creates people to
regurgitate they will often accuse
people of doing the things that they do
it's just part of it okay
so by saying our students required to
regurgitate that gives the subconscious
impression that he is controlling their
minds and not teaching them to think
when in actuality to be able to see
through the media to be able to see what
is going on is not regurgitation any
person that does regurgitate and only
memorize and not think would not be able
to see through it anyway
it doesn't matter this is reverse
psychology this is just not even that
it's just manipulation is just
name-calling it's I'm rubber you're glue
again this is a way that he disrupts the
guy's thinking with petty comments like
that he knows that this type of person
would never want anybody to regurgitate
anything because that doesn't allow them
to learn to think doesn't matter if
there's an audience to this he plants
that seed again
well after studying the evidence pretty
intensively for two and a half years I
am convinced that 9/11 was in fact an
infant our students required to
regurgitate that you know in some way in
order to be well in ridiculous no I
don't I'm not interested in making
students regurgitate anything I mr.
Barrett Sean Hannity here do you really
believe that the 9/11 that was an inside
job okay Sean Hannity I never watched
Fox News before but within seconds of
seeing this guy you can just see that he
is a snake at least he is currently
conducting himself as such now this is
pretty basic what he's doing he's not
giving eye contact he's pretending to be
bored with the guy's very presence and
this is a way to discredit him that way
as if he's just that some sort of gnat
and not even worth considering and
that's why he's purposely looking down
and acting board when he talks to them
secondly he uses the word believe do you
really believe to believe is not to null
and that's why he's stressing that and
again you're going to start to see
extreme manipulation from this mr.
Hannity all right mr. Barrett Sean
Hannity here do you really believe that
9/11 that was an inside job not just 911
but Madrid and Bali and is Akali well
you know actually I meant I'm on a
second yeah yeah all right so what he
does is he tries to take control of this
conversation right away he insinuates
something and the professor was smart
enough to catch what he was saying and
then when he tried to respond to that he
interrupts him to take control now
notice and I'll point this out in a
little bit when he puts his hand up in
the okay sign you're about to learn what
that really means and what they use it
for but for now just to understand that
that's how they'll do it they'll insult
you while they speak and try to continue
speaking before you can actually reply
to it and therefore it makes the
professor look nuts you know what I mean
because if people don't catch this
neural linguistic programming if they
don't catch the manipulation you know
which is comprises the majority of the
audience anyway nevertheless if they
don't catch it then he can do that he
can take those cheap shots and when the
professor tries to correct those then he
interrupts him says hey hold on you know
and then tries to make him look rude for
interrupting and take control over him
and disrupt his thinking at the same
time actually I meant I'm going on a
second yeah okay personally that these
are inside jobs yes or no it's not quite
that simple okay believe personally
that's another way to plant that into
your psyche that it is just he that
believes this and then he uses the yes
or no trap because that is again
misleading if you can't see that the way
he twisted around that question would
not allow the professor to be able to
give a yes or no answer because he
injected manipulation into the question
itself so when the professor tries to
say that of course
then it puts them under pressure the
professor is smart enough to catch that
and it isn't that simple and he
understands the professor knew of course
what I'm telling you right now however
time is ticking he only has so much time
on the air and their job is to disrupt
his thinking as much as possible and
make as many hidden accusations as they
can and as many subconscious embeds into
how to perceive the professor's they can
in the short amount of time that he's on
the air and that's their only job is to
discredit and disrupt ok but he did
catch it now he has to respond to that
rather than being able to say anything
that matters and that's what they do
another good person that this is Stephen
Colbert if you want Stephen Colbert with
any of his interviews his whole job is
to discredit and disrupt that's what he
does and you keep it moving it's very
very petty but these are the people that
you allow to run you ok
so know that and that's what's going on
right here yes or no it's not quite that
simple I'm I dunno I don't believe I
know that 9/11 was an inside job
professor Stephen Jones has found
residue of government officials from the
world radio in a half we now know that
it was taken down in a controlled
demolition I see you believe that the
building's came down into control yep ok
so the professor did a really good job
of identifying his manipulation by
saying I don't believe I know and
because he was starting to get through
that Hannity interrupts and says I don't
have a lot of time wait a minute you
just asked him a question and now he's
able to break through your manipulation
and suddenly you don't have a lot of
time for the very answer to the question
that you just asked the next thing you
see he asked him what evidence does he
have and he interrupted him giving the
evidence to ask him what evidence he has
why of course he's not interested in
hearing the evidence or anybody else
hearing it he's interested in
interrupting and planting another ended
into the psyche that what he happens to
be saying right now is somehow not
evidence it's all misdirection of focus
redirection of focus disrupting
interrupting gaining control
and you know it's this very petty they
rely on these petty techniques now at
the end of this he does something that a
lot of you probably aren't aware of he
does a hand gesture he takes both of his
hands and puts them up in front of his
head and then pulls them down and he
pretends he's talking about the
building's falling down what that is is
I don't know what they would term it
I'm just intuitive I'm perceptive I can
see what they're doing that sorcery
sorcery is just anything that is used to
circumvent the conscious mind to control
the mind that gesture is designed to
take away his zest his focus his power
by bringing his hands down like that
he's trying to subconsciously take away
the focus of the professor take away his
power and that's exactly what he's doing
a nice interesting and I play that again
for you bad job professor Stephen Jones
has found residue of samples from a
demon have now know that it was taken
down in a controlled demolition so you
believe that the building's came down in
a controlled demolition no I don't
believe it I've looked at the evidence
you're right it was overwhelming all
right the evidence is overwhelming to
you because you're sure he Racine utt
but no actually all of you I I asked if
you were sick
okay now in this one I'm sure you caught
the obvious part but you probably did
not catch the neuro-linguistic
programming
what exactly is neuro linguistic
programming simply put its dual meaning
that is speaking to the subconscious now
of course he's shaping public opinion by
saying it's obvious to you because you
are a conspiracy nut well remember now
people are very phobic of being called
anything that goes against the norm so
if you agree with him oh then you're a
nut and people you know they can't
escape their own ego so that's used to
shape him what you probably didn't catch
is him saying but you know putting that
all aside this is a neuro linguistic
programming now pay attention here your
conspiracy nut but putting that all
aside what that is doing is he's
directing your subconscious mind and
your conscious
to store that label that impression of
him put it aside keep that it's called
anchoring and neuro linguistic
programming because I've watched a
little bit of it I didn't need to watch
it to pick up on how they do this but it
allows you to get some of their
terminology down
they call this anchoring anchoring of
thought anchoring a concept anchoring of
feeling putting all of that aside means
put that aside in your mind he's a
conspiracy nut do you see how they
manipulate you that's a very good lesson
right there in neural linguistic
programming the evidence is overwhelming
to you because you're very Racine utt
but they don't actually all of you I ask
your viewers to take a look at this
evidence for themselves they can go to
my nest e-911 dot dot dot org that's
alright I want you for nine eleven years
take a look take a look at the others at
the demolition I know you Morgan
reminisce former Bush administration was
a sky official okay that's pretty
obvious
you see how he's treating a very
nonchalant irritated board and I know
you think you're the smartest guy in the
world this is you know the typical yura
know it all type of comment if you watch
that David Icke video where he goes back
on Logan he draws attention to the same
thing we said well that's a cheap shot
when he said you know it all and the
response was accurate I'm not saying I
know it all but people are trained to
hate people who quotes know-it-all why
because they want you to be dumb that's
why in society you have catchphrases
that go around that people use like you
think too much
you're too deep you know it all these
have all become derogatory terms in this
new Orwellian society haven't you
noticed that his response is Petty and
childish but he means to be this way it
does nothing and addresses nothing he
can't think of anything to say in
response to the professor so he has to
take a cheap shot like this I know you
think you're the smartest guy in the
world that should be obvious to you that
that is just overdoing it creating
manifesting and insult just again for
one reason and one reason only to diss
dropped his thinking and to program your
mind on how to view him take a look at
the demolition I know you Morgan rental
artists former Bush administration or
the sky official or hears that the Bush
administration Lula the World Trade
Center to kingdom come
that the direct quote from a member of
the Bush administration itself hello
world senator Kingsly those were told to
leave we've heard a lot of these sick
bizarre theories and okay so suddenly
he's an anti stealing when did that come
about I didn't hear him say anything
about the Jews what he's doing here is
he's trying to link him to anti-semitism
that's what they want to do know anybody
that's really trying to speak the truth
in this world has no interest in
focusing on a group or even an
individual what they try to focus on is
the problem in general outside of any
group or individual that may be
manifesting the symptoms of the problem
but again what he's trying to do here is
in your mind link the professor to being
part of a hate group someone that's
going to target a group or an individual
and make you link the terms sick in
bizarre to the professor he and say
anything about the Jewish community
nothing
so catch that see how he's trying to
link the professor to it world trade
center to kingdom come
that's a direct quote from a member of
the Bush administration itself great
senator ginger who knows were told to
leave we've heard a lot of these sick
bizarre theories and I don't believe any
of them but you're allowed to believe
what you want but that's not what's at
hand here okay now another thing just to
make you aware again of just how much
they are programming your mind to you it
looks like a man that said that's not
the issue at hand here you need to start
learning their language their language
is dual meaning which goes hand in hand
with neural linguistic programming the
issue at hand here what he's doing is
directing the professor to look at his
hand now why would he have the professor
look at his hand well if you look at his
hand right now you see it is what you've
been told is the okay
right well let's show you what it really
means
the okay symbol as you see right here
means 666 for some reason 666 has some
sort of control over the mind now it
could have something to do with the
Beast Computers many of you have read
about its sorcery it is putting a hex on
somebody in his subconscious symbolism
that somehow affects some people it
doesn't affect everybody but he's using
that and he was directing the professor
to look at his hand to use sorcery on
him it's not that one thing will work if
they try to use as many combinations of
things as they can but that is a symbol
and it means 666 and that is why he told
him to look at his hand or the issue at
hand here told his mind subconsciously
to look at his hand do you see and that
is what just occurred there that's not
what's at hand here meaning you are not
allowed to believe what you want and
that also tells the population looking
at him because remember he is also
talking to people that are watching
television and so they are also
instructed to look at his hand
subconsciously or take notice of it
subconsciously and when he says you're
allowed to believe what you want but
that's not what's at hand here he's
saying with the 666 rule over your mind
you are not allowed to believe what you
want and that speaks to your
subconscious mind and programs people to
not think and that's what it means all
around and all together that's what just
happened but you're allowed to believe
what you want but that's not what's at
hand here the issue is respected and I
knew with your bizarre theories are the
badge ik you have animals Arthur you
think it was 19 second ok again saying
his issues his views are bizarre right
but the reason he puts up his pinky
there's because that is the weakest
finger that it would imply a small penis
not a potent man using that in reference
to him saying that he is impotent that
he is bizarre that he is weak
that he is of the pinkie and that's why
he chooses of all fingers and all
gestures to speak about his theories he
puts his pinkie up and these are all
subconscious sorcery methods again
sorcery is not some guy wearing a
magician's hat part of sorcery is
speaking to and manipulating the
conscious mind from the subconscious you
with your bizarre theories or the badge
ik you have the Mozart you think it was
nineteen five guys with box cutters led
by guy always in the cave in Afghanistan
that's ridiculous I mean that's the
craziest conspiracy theory of all of
them okay I wish I had the twilight zone
music now here's my next see all you can
say is something to discredit him I wish
I had the twilight zone music and then
the people watching the televisions that
say yes that must be weird twilight zone
music is weird and the honest incredible
news reporters saying that about him
okay now you see that all the neural
linguistic programming is starting to
get to the professor he's starting to
screw up his words he's starting to
screw up his concentration
he's mispronouncing that's because
there's a lot of negative energy being
focused on him
interrupting his thought process so you
can see how he's starting to screw up
his words but he's still holding you
know with all that working against them
and being unaware of those techniques he
still holds his own but you start to see
it get to him a little bit I mean that's
the craziest conspiracy theory of all of
them okay I wish I had the twilight zone
music now here's my next question the
issue at hand here you're entitled to
have your opinion I don't really care
what you believe but if we're talking
about a captive group of students in a
class again making a board face says
that he's nothing he's the pinky he's
lower than low I really don't care what
you believe but if we're talking about a
captive group of students Kate first he
said that they implied that he wants his
students to regurgitate now he's holding
them captive which goes hand in hand
with what terrorism hostages he
subconsciously painting this professor
to be what a terrorist so not only have
they discredited him but
people are already getting in their
minds that with this neural linguistic
programming that's now you understand
what neuro linguistic programming is
neural brain linguistics speech
programming programming the brain with
speech via the subconscious dual meaning
don't really care what you believe but
if we're talking about a captive group
of students in a classroom because I'm
not even I don't have to pay a second
well they're they're sitting in your
classroom and you have a position of
authority I mean I'm wondering it's what
the question is whether or not you're
the most competent to teach them and
most people think you're a nut now this
one should be obvious is it he a person
that's in a position of authority and
isn't he about as incompetent as you can
get as far as love and honesty and
caring about other life forms yet he
turns it around because people believe
what they hear and what they read so if
he says it first
and that's a big part of this is trying
to save things first before somebody
else can say something then it seems
like they will always be on the
defensive and that's the whole point is
to keep the professor on the defensive
all right and saying that he's
detrimental to his students when the
truth is Fox News is incredibly
detrimental to you just in this short
clip I'm showing you here and people are
watching this all day long and most
people think you're a nut most people
think we did it - we just had a poll
here in Madison than we found it 90
percent of the respondents of channel
3000 poll said that I should be allowed
to teach only 10 percent I said
supplanted anti-treaty percent I don't
think whatever you said agreed with me
about the questions I'm raising about
nine eleven eleven percent of the
respondents I I thought you're in the
minority I don't think this is the
proper forum though for people that hold
extremist views like yourself okay first
of all when he says no no like that what
he's doing is he's programming the
television viewers collective
consciousness to disregard the results
of that poll
he says no no and then your mind says no
to the information he just gave these
are just little tricks he slips in there
and most people think he's a nut
what but see people watch that of course
and they store that in their mind as
fact of course most people do not think
he is a nut but if he says that he
programs anybody watching this
television program hint hint that
everybody thinks he's a nut so hi will
to to fit in where did he get that
number how does he know most people
think that he's a nut think about it I
they don't
he just says it and then the professor
has to respond to that he's totally
disrupting the whole interview so it
appears to people because time is moving
by that there's actually an interview
going on here but it's not it's only
about disrupting and discrediting and
programming your opinion okay first of
all I used to live in Madison Wisconsin
and I can tell you that people did not
think that he was crazy it was the
television that began to program people
to think that he was crazy again now
extremist views like yourself now they
already set the stage in your mind or
the viewers mind before he brought that
up in the beginning when that first
reporter took his hands and whipped them
over to the left side of his shoulder to
subconsciously say that he's an extreme
leftist he's on the extreme left so now
they're reinforcing them telling you to
believe that he is extremist that these
are extreme things one fox is 666 let me
just look look what they're doing look
what I'm pointing out to you once you
start to understand the dual meaning of
neural linguistic programming things
become crystal clear to you questions
I'm raising about 911 seven percent of
the respondents hi you're a minority I
don't think this is the proper forum
though for people that hold extremist
views like yourself reason are you going
to extreme it reasonable people now
notice what he did there he took his
hands and he gestured them towards
himself instead reasonable people Wow
pointing to himself therefore your
subconscious and your conscious mind is
shaped to see Sean Hannity as the
reasonable person they're always using
gestures against you in coordination
with dual meaning in things they say and
direct meaning so again reasonable
people all you have to do is point to
himself and that's a subtle nonverbal
gesture to make you associate being
reasonable with Sean Hannity's point of
view this program in your mind so now
after you have associated being
reasonable with Sean Hannity and when he
says people think he points out or opens
his hands so you are to think see
reasonable people he points to himself
and then opens it up to you think you
shouldn't be allowed to teach this class
we can do a better job people will be
programmed by that reason are you guys
very extreme it is because a bunch of
extremists sundial antics so many low
people see you as an extremist and I
don't think you're the most appropriate
guy to teach that class Mike what Mike I
don't think you're the most appropriate
guy to be on the air whether they leave
your venom and the professor got her
right you can see the look on his face
he's just spewing your venom that's
exactly what he's doing the problem is
that you can't get all of this out in an
interview for example say I was on an
interview like this they would be doing
all the same things to me all I would be
doing is calling attention to everything
he's doing and then he would sit there
and argue with me nothing would ever get
discussed this is how they take
advantage of people look how long it's
taken me Deno this clip is only like two
minutes long normally but just to
describe two very short minutes of media
to you look how long this is taking
that's the problem that's why I haven't
done it before because I can sit here
and explain it to you but you need to
open up your eyes so you can see it for
yourself because it all happens way too
quickly if you try to explain something
that happens in a three-second period if
you're not educated on that if you're
not aware of it it will go by way too
fast before you can bring somebody up to
speed
understand what's going on this is why I
had to break it down for you
but I still can't do this with
everything I see because this is
everywhere this is common this is always
going on and it just you need to educate
yourself but you need to become aware
again dual meaning neuro linguistic
programming gesturing Association of
concepts and beliefs to link them anchor
them in your mind
to misdirect your perception your
beliefs and your ability to perceive
reality in general class Mike Mike I
don't think you're the most appropriate
guy to be on the air we're doing your
venom that's my thought throughout this
country I think you guys should be taken
off the airwaves okay you want to get
our concern we don't want to tell
anybody you will do having read on Thank
You professor coming up we'll have a we
don't want to silence anybody that's
exactly what they have just done though
you heard a lot of speaking going on
nothing was able to get out into the
open they completely took control of
this poor man and he's brave okay to get
out there lose his job and to speak the
truth and they hound him like bees
they're using techniques that are hidden
that are sorcery they're of sorcery in
their nature their hypnotic their
they're using negative energy
manipulative techniques childish
argument techniques and so you've seen a
lot of talking but nothing got out into
the open and you see how nervous they
made him why because he couldn't he had
to keep dealing with their techniques
and he couldn't express the truth and
this is how anybody who tries to get on
the media to speak the truth is
manipulated and that's why most don't
even bother they don't bother because
they would just get into an argument I
mean what's the point the expert that
I've seen at this is Stephen Colbert he
was one of the biggest disinformation
agents out there he'll get somebody in
for an interview and just completely
distract disrupt discredit and there is
no interview that's what I call Stephen
Colbert's interviews there they're not
interviews there Stephen Colbert using
techniques
to distract and discombobulated
basically so this is why you don't get
the truth in the media even if people do
get a chance at airtime they will be
interrupted misdirected hypnotic
suggestions to the audience that are
watching it you just can't people that
know the truth won't even try
they won't even try to go into
mainstream media and people that do it
ends up like this so until that is
addressed then nothing will ever be told
on mainstream media but what you can
learn from this don't watch TV