today's video I'm gonna talk about the
problem I see with profit I took
economics in school so I know a little
bit about economics macro and micro
usually when you are a producer of
something you're trying to maximize this
point where supply meets demand where if
you priced it too high you'd have less
buyers and so your profit is going to be
lower if you price it too low you're
going to not have as much profit per
piece so you're wanting to maximize the
amount of profit as an overall company's
you want to have this sweet spot of a
price to get the most profit and there's
graphs to show with that which one I'm
able to do this video because that's
beyond my capabilities but I figure out
the other like there's another graph in
my head that would be what happens when
instead of profit being your number one
motivator like it isn't capitalism
purpose is your number one motivator
because every business has a purpose and
a profit the purpose would I mean the
purpose is for profit in most businesses
but there's also the way you're getting
that profits your mission statement so a
car company is getting transportation
needs met pharmaceutical company is
getting health needs met it's meeting
the needs of its clients health needs
and it's trying to make the most profit
so it's kind of trying to get the most
customers at that price point to get the
highest maximum profit which doesn't
mean setting the price point too high
and doesn't mean setting it too low and
then profit goes to the people who
started and took the risk either be
important Board of Directors see
investors because they took a monetary
risk or the person came with the idea
the CEO who ever owns it all right you
can go per√≥n's it also through their
profits thrace sorry three shares so
every dollar in my mind that goes
towards profit is a dollar that's not
going towards purpose so if you make a
dollar and it goes to the investors it's
not going into research and development
or it's not going into making sure
you're lowering that price point so more
people have access to it your so it's
it's undermining the purpose and that's
fine if your purpose is for profit
every profit dollar you make your make
your doing your purpose but it's hurting
you overall I mean pharmaceutical
companies are not my favorite but if you
are pharmaceutical company you're in
business to make money clearly but your
underlying mission and purpose is to get
people or make people healthy or at
least keep them alive and every dollar
you're gonna spend on profit and handing
out to your shareholders is a dollar
that's not being spent on your next
piece of of medicine or isn't lowering
the price point so more people have
access to it and in their paradigm that
makes complete sense so try to maximize
profit not purpose but when you're
trying to maximize purpose and you have
a pharmaceutical company that was done
for that then you're gonna want to make
that price point for that drug not free
because you still need to be able to be
able to have drugs in the future and you
still want to be able to be a
sustainable company but you want to be
able to set that price point where
you're able to help the most amount of
people where you break even and breaking
even means you pay for everything you
mean pay for R&D you've paid for the
place to manufacture it you plan for the
testing you paid for all of your
employees and their benefits it's just
there's no profit on top of that because
once you start getting profit you're
taking away from the purpose itself and
so I hope I explained that well why I
think that there is a problem with with
profit it doesn't mean it's evil it just
means that every dollar that goes to
profit isn't going to purpose and my
main every idea I have the purpose is
greater than the profit so I want people
to be able to live meaningful amazing
abundant lives and when dollars are
going to excess instead of having needs
met and having that joy created I think
it's it's inefficient and that's why I'm
trying to create a global cooperative
which will be a non profit in the way
that every dollar that's made is going
back to the purpose and doesn't mean
that no one's making money as people are
still gonna be paid a fair wage for what
they're doing but there isn't that that
risk reward where you're taking great
risk to hopefully to gamble on getting
reward and that profit isn't the purpose
purpose is the purpose and those are the
conversations were having so we're not
having conversations about how to make
the most money we're having
conversations about how to make the most
impact with what we have money will be a
factor in that but not the highest
factor and we're not having
conversations on how to necessarily
create jobs because that is a profit
they even it's some but we do need to
have people live non poverty lives which
means they need to have food on the
table they need to have a roof over the
head which and conversations need to
have in solutions we need to generate
but if every solution needs to have
profit in it it's just it's inefficient
and I'm gonna get into that more in
other videos what that was today is day
2
the problem with profit