alright so now I'm going to drop down
one more level into some more concrete
stuff of how does this play out all
right so let's make some predictions
about what kinds of things in the world
we might be able to I should do
something about I'm gonna start with
themes and then look at drivers and then
go through some actual examples so
themes the old these are kind of the
rules of the old legacy model it was
dominated by things like hierarchy as
ways to get things done and audience was
a you know the creator audience
relationship and we've got some new
themes right so obviously and these are
pretty obvious I hope everybody here
gets them the new models are gonna be
built on networks controls can be
replaced with flexible protocols within
out opt-in processes can replace with
flexible principles that drive and
create parameters but don't actually
control inside boundaries audience is
gonna be replaced by community customers
by community everything moves to
co-creation the idea of transaction is
replaced with relationship which is to
say that goes into extremely high
complexity transactions are simple and
tend to be one-off relationships repeat
over and over again and have extremely
high complexity and profit is replaced
with purpose which is to say that we are
now proliferating many many many
different reasons why we might be doing
things and to integrate and get to a
single solution is gonna require a
completely different way of doing it and
then major drivers I'm coming on from a
different direction now
so major drivers that are happening kind
of like to get at the little laws of
physics things that are happening in the
world that push stuff that doesn't want
to get pushed digitization and
information dynamics it's obviously a
pretty good rule of thumb that anything
that can be turned into information will
be turned into information I remember
when the RIAA said you wouldn't download
a car they had no idea that they were
actually predicting the future of course
you're going to download a car alright
as soon as we can figure out how to turn
a car into information we'll download it
and we are gonna turn everything we can
into information and information has
fundamentally different dynamics than
material than energy right network
effects Metcalfe's law accelerating
returns understanding what those
dynamics are and how they apply and how
when you move a domain from more
material into more information is a key
strategic in
sighs next is obviously decentralization
we've seen that happen all over the
place
decentralization fundamentally is two
things the first is pushing power out to
the edge right empowering different
components in the Indian in the
environment and the second is a generic
toolkit which means that every element
in the network has to have the capacity
to play most different roles right
hierarchy simplifies you know you do
marketing you do engineering you don't
you know to do software you don't need
how to talk to people go right
decentralization doesn't work that way
everybody has to have with a relatively
complete toolkit to a greater or lesser
extent and the authority then gets
pushed out into the end of the edge and
communication through protocols
liquification all right looks
vacationing has to do with fluidity
right as the world changes and as a
change the pace of change accelerates
things that become solid things that
require that they stay stable for a long
period of time just gets swamped as
disruption waves come through so things
need to be very fluid very flexible all
right you've already talked about this
I'm sure a lot in just business planning
and when I started out the notion of
doing a 10 or 15 year business plan was
still pretty standard right I can't even
imagine right now
cholera bleah trying to do a 15 year
business plan it seems insane and
impossible
all you have to do now is you have to
start thinking about models that are
responsive to changing environments
right now an organizational model
responsive to changing environments
right now and then this notion of
empowered individuals right human
capacities can continue to increase and
so structures that are premise on the
ability to preventing people from doing
what they actually want to do are going
to fail and structures that are designed
around the notion of taking advantage of
individuals doing what they want to do
and maybe flowing them into better ways
of making choices will be successful so
let's look at some examples what that
means on the to bad fidelity is not high
enough this is a model of our current
monetary system how money's made and
this model on the right is my effort to
represent the notion of decentralized
currencies you have lots and lots of
them they won't be controlled the way
they're control but the fact that money
itself is in that process and there will
be some significant innovation like on
the order of 10 times where we are right
now and a major shift that follows
they'll open up a huge numerator for
business models because a decentralized
currency system change
the power relationships between
different institutions power
alright energy energy is also moving
from highly centralized concentrated
capital intensive power coal systems
into increasingly decentralized models
agriculture annecy agriculture is also
moving for a lot of different reasons
remember ecosystem disruption we're
gonna need to take real responsibility
for water and it turns out this stuff
here on the rights a lot more water
efficient and stuff here on the left
it's also better for you cars right we
downloaded that car we're gonna be
moving away from those systems oh and by
the way cars are also gonna get smarter
need to drive themselves right we're all
aware of that that's obvious but we can
now start making some plans but what
does that actually apply what's gonna
happen as that begins to infer
manufacturing facilities and even a
worker will go away from extremely
large-scale a huge industrial
concentrated facilities they're highly
automated facilities which take you know
functions and turn them event
essentially into information and then
highly customized spoke facilities in
this case I just wanted to take a two
step right because these things tend to
go through waves and says one way that's
going on right now in this particular
industry all right taxis where Ober
essentially is now somewhere in the
middle of that curve it's clear that
they're gonna win it's not as question
of exactly when and how but it's also
clear if you understand what I've been
talking about that they will then die
and they will be replaced by something
that is even more fluid and
decentralized okay and empower the
individuals even more at the edge my
guess is we're probably talking about 12
to 15 years maybe 10 on the inside
depending on other things that go on
yeah listen mean Travis doesn't drive it
into a cliff okay so what are the
challenges and opportunities at the big
picture right I'm not bringing this down
to a low level but big stuff right to
keep in mind the first is entrenched
interests and I mentioned this in terms
of intellectual property companies you
may be able to predict the wave coming
but be aware the facts of the folks are
in the process of being disrupted are
gonna fight it and they will do their
best to prevent themselves from being
going into the dark night so what do you
do now so the solution is first disrupt
and just hammer away at the Foundation's
all around whatever it is that they're
protecting and they will eventually
lose their energy and their capacity to
defend will go away if not rot around
just do something better make what they
do obsolete and ignore them completely
and then also co-opt I create
opportunities in the new model that the
old legacy institutions can slide into
and feel good about it right essentially
give them a way to save face and save
resources a big one here is gonna be in
effect innovating governance the last
refuge of scoundrels is control of
government and they are all crawling in
that direction right now willy-nilly so
I look to see significant governance
innovation kicking off somewhere in 2016
actually I think you'll see a lot of
that happening particularly in
peripheral areas the second as I
mentioned was sense making one of the
big problems that we're all running into
right now is that all the legacy models
for understanding what's going on in the
world are either breaking down or have
been largely captured so we're gonna run
into problems around echo chambers noise
like what do you pay attention to
overwhelmed there's too much to pay
attention to a distraction and
propaganda manipulation righteous which
has reached epic levels so the solution
there are trust networks what are called
files and imputation new mechanisms for
reestablishing the level of trust that
people had if they spend time with each
other and this may be mediated digitally
that may be mediated through actual
grassroots environments think about how
human beings are wired to form trust and
to create and create and build
relationships that are based on trust
but that's gonna be a big part of the
solution is getting away from a model of
where you trust an institution like a
newspaper or television program or a
website and begin having more and more
capacitive field more nuanced and subtle
trust and the big opportunity here is
going to the attention management
economy dear God Almighty if any of you
could tell me what I should be paying
attention to on a daily basis like
really what information is relevant and
what person is to give me the insight
that I need to have I will go to you
with all that I've got right the amount
of overwhelming distraction right now is
insane the obsolescence of the existing
model this is a big problem I don't know
about you guys but all my startup
companies are dealing with it right now
know you you either struggle with the
fact that the old model is really
inefficient and breaks down pretty
quickly or you're trying to build a new
model in the real time like poor Tony
over Zappos with hole
model which is you know equally
difficult so you know these things are
maladaptive we know they're gonna fail
they're gonna fail pretty badly but in
the meantime what we gonna do so we need
to figure out how to do build
increasingly decentralized and ad hoc
organizing structures one of the groups
that I funded recently and I've been
working with pretty closely called back
feed is focused exclusively on that
decentralized autonomous organisations
but decentralized organizations more
broadly as thinkers could be a major
piece of disruption and I'm really
interested in a decentralized autonomous
economy which I've been allowed to talk
about next and almost last increased
complexity and uncertainty and that's
just the nature of the beast information
is doubling what is in every nine months
and information doubling leads to vastly
larger amounts of stuff so more scale
more scope more pace of environment we
had a great question about you trying to
deal with customers in different
countries what do you do 15 years ago
that would have been barely a question
for almost any entrepreneur only a very
small subset now everybody
instantaneously has to deal with that
right it's just bigger scale bigger
scope so the solution is intelligence
amplification and personal development
and people are gonna have to get a lot
better at dealing with the uncertainty
we're gonna have to get a lot smarter
whether we're doing that through
collective intelligence mechanisms or
through individual intelligence
enhancement or various flavors of
applied transhumanism and I'm not
kidding I mean the reality is as the
world becomes more complicated think
about like computers the higher your
bandwidth the higher your processor the
more you're able to deal with intrinsic
complexity which means you're gonna be
more fit to survive in that landscape