[Music]
hey everybody we are back it is Jack
Murphy live and this is a Jack Murphy
live podcast you can find me on Twitter
at Jack Murphy live at my website Jack
Murphy live.com Jack Murphy live
everywhere basically the book is
Democrat to horrible but now on Amazon
make sure you check that out but enough
of that let's get to today's guest we
have Justin ley Miller here and he is
the author of a new book that has just
been released called tell me what you
want
the science of sexual desire and how it
can help you improve your sex life how
you doing Justin great Jack thanks for
having me ah my pleasure justin is an
expert on human sexuality and he is a
research fellow at the Kinsey Institute
and we're gonna get into what all that
means but first I just want to sort of
get a little bit of background on
yourself so that we can put this in
context for people I'm assuming that
some of my readers and listeners will
not know who you are but you do happen
to work for I think what is the sort of
world leading institute for research on
sexuality and I find that to be
completely fascinating so could you just
give give me and everybody just a little
bit of a history on your academic
background and what led you to this
position at the Kinsey Institute and
let's talk a little bit about what the
Kinsey Institute is - to give people
some context sure so I am a social
psychologist by training I got my PhD
from Purdue University and for the last
10 years I kind of have hopped around to
a couple of different universities and
have taught human sexuality courses to
college students and done research on a
number of different aspects of sexuality
what universities were those so my first
job was at Colorado State University
okay for three years and then I was at
Harvard for three years at are at and
then I moved to Indiana and I was at
Ball State University where I was the
director of a graduate program there and
then now I'm at the the Kinsey Institute
which is also in Indiana okay yeah I had
no idea I'm actually originally from
Indiana from Fort Wayne Indiana
so Ball State sounds familiar to me okay
so you taught at Harvard you got your
PhD you're now living in Indiana working
at the Kinsey Institute and is this is
this tell me what you want this is your
first book
on the matter or this is my first book
that's not a textbook so I've written a
couple of text books one of which is a
textbook called the psychology of human
sexuality and it's used in college
classrooms around the world to educate
undergraduate students about the science
of sex and it covers everything from the
the basics of you know anatomy and
physiology to you know sexual behaviors
and relationships and and basically
everything a college student should know
about sex the site and the science of
sex I suppose yes cuz I wonder what
they're teaching on college campuses
about the practicalities of sex these
days but that is a subject for a know
their podcast another issue so what um
you know I I belong had an interest
personally in human sexuality and the
majority of my early writings on my blog
and on Twitter were we're all about
human sexuality and the and human
relationships and inter gender dynamics
and such but what was it in your when
did you figure out that you wanted to be
come an expert on the science of human
sexuality and was there like a moment
was there an event it's something happen
or was something that you grew up with
or telling me about that yeah the job I
have is not the kind of thing where when
you're you know ten years old and people
ask you what you want to do when you
grow up you say I want to be a sex
researcher you know it doesn't it
doesn't really work like that so for me
I went to get my PhD in social
psychology I was studying the psychology
of romantic relationships and what makes
for a good healthy long lasting
relationship and along the way I was
assigned to be a teaching assistant for
a human sexuality course and as part of
that course you know that was sort of
when I realized that that studying sex
was even an option you know I was
training to become a relationship
researcher and I wasn't being trained
and sexuality at all and relationship
researchers weren't even talking about
sex which was kind of weird well right
so what do you what do you attribute
that to because you know I think we see
right now there's so the first thing
comes to mind is like the recent APA
guidelines on toxic masculinity and and
whatnot and the pathology you know the
pathologize a shin if that's even a word
of what some people might consider to be
traditional male
behaviors but but more importantly it
sort of leaves out like or introduces
this idea that psychiatrists at colleges
aren't being trained in in studying some
of the key elements that make up healthy
relationships and healthy behaviors and
so what what what do you make of that
sort of absence that you discovered and
your training to become a relationship
expert but you're not learning about
sexuality itself where does that blind
spot come from I mean I think a big part
of it is just that sex remains a
controversial subject even within the
field of psychology for the last
three-and-a-half years I was working in
a department of counseling psychology
where I was training future PhD
counseling psychologists and there was
one class and their entire curriculum
devoted to sex therapy and it was also
like a sexy in marriage and
relationships course it was everything
all in one and this idea that you can
teach these counselors like everything
they need to know about sex in the
context of one semester in one class is
just kind of absurd I think also there's
part of it that you know why we don't
have as much research in this topic is
that it's hard to get grant funding if
you want to study anything related to
sex
other than STDs you know there just
aren't many funding mechanisms for it so
people tend not to study it because
these days you kind of have to go where
the money is if you're an array emic
right so what what do you attribute that
sort of backing way way up to the most
macro level and I can I can imagine that
the same forces that are guiding the
amount of funding available for research
and the time spent you know learning
about it you know you can tie all that
together like what what do you make of
humans who engage in sexual activities
and sexual thinking on a near-daily and
virtually constant basis for many of us
what do you attribute this sort of I
don't know what you call it is it an
aversion is it a willing ignorance like
why why are people not as interested in
this element of our existence which is
you know crucial 100 percent of who we
are and our perpetuation of the species
like why don't why don't people want to
know
more about this yeah this is one of
these things where I often like to say
when it comes to sex we have a much
easier time doing it than we do talking
about it and it's because we have so
much shame and guilt and embarrassment
and anxiety that's that's tied up in it
and this goes back centuries you know
this is not a new thing it's you can
talk about the role of religion the role
of politics all of these things go in
and have made sex this taboo topic in in
something that we just feel so much
apprehension studying or talking about
and it wasn't even until very recently
the last half century or so that people
have even thought that sex was something
you could study scientifically so the
idea of sex is the science is also a new
concept and it's taking a long time for
it to find its footing in society that
that just blows my mind I mean this is
like one of the most basic human
activities you know that we engage in
and the fact that there's a blind spot
to it an aversion to it and as we were
talking about before we started
recording you know I don't know if
you've experienced this personally but
you know people that spend their time
studying section talking about sex I
find out in there in the sort of
intellectual marketplace that there's
like a stigma even attached to the idea
of thinking about it talking about it
writing about it I mean have you
experienced that in your professional
life like you know you put in the time
in the effort you've got the credentials
in the background you've taught at
Harvard you got a PhD you know do people
I don't say look down but do they do
they diminish you know your sort of
intellectual or academic you know
horsepower because you focused it on
this particular topic
sure there are people who don't take it
seriously I can tell you even some of my
my fellow colleagues a lot of them have
dismissed the fact that I teach a human
sexuality course at the college level
and they say oh well that's easy
you know everybody likes sex that has to
be the you know like the easiest course
to teach because who wouldn't want to
learn about it but it's actually one of
the hardest courses you can possibly
teach because everything you say is a
potential minefield you know for a fend
marry up one or and there's also people
have so much misinformation about it and
so many false beliefs and so many people
just come in
nothing you know I have some students
who have had no sex education whatsoever
and they're they're asking the most
basic questions and so you have to
assume nothing so it's actually an
incredibly challenging course to teach
but people dismiss it because they think
it's it's frivolous it's sex they don't
take it seriously
that's really weird that's really wait I
mean and we're gonna get into taboos and
disgust and and just natural aversions
to certain things and you know I wonder
if there is wonder what the evil
psychologist would say about our sort of
mass long-term historic unwillingness to
address the details and the science
behind sexuality I mean is it is that it
was that a benefit to us in our
evolution to like not pay attention to
it
you know or is this a diss genic
activity as as jeffrey miller he taught
me that word just genic I was like
flopping around for like 30 seconds
using like 50 words to describe
something he's like that we call that
diss genic oh my god thank you I learned
something and so yeah I just find it
fascinating cuz in my personal
experience like I like I said I wrote a
lot about sex and then I sort of learned
personally that the things that I found
were disrupting male-female
relationships and disrupting the bedroom
were also tied to other things that were
disrupting the nation politically and
like creating a lot of divides and and
and disrupting our dating and mating
markets we're all tied together with the
political scene and so I started writing
about politics and then every time I you
know in the beginning certainly as I
started writing more about politics
people like oh you're just a guy they
wrote about sex and here's the guy that
wrote about BDSM that one or two times
and you're the guy that wrote about you
know consensual mom and not non-monogamy
how can we take you seriously how could
people take you seriously and you know
that's that's lingered with me - I mean
I've deleted posts that were about BDSM
and about feminism and and break
fantasies and all kind of thing and I
deleted them people go back into the
archives they dig up the trash and then
they use that to smear me and you know
it's like you know I feel like I'm just
talking about people's truth and in fact
and now I remember I actually cited a
piece of yours that you wrote in like
2014 maybe a
about bondage fantasies and fantasies of
submission and dominance as you know as
a way to like you know the numbers are
just astoundingly high of people that
that have those type of fantasies and
we'll get into that but I remember
writing about that and using using some
of your early data as a way to be like
no this is a very normal thing to write
about and yet even in doing that you
know it's like sort of followed me
around but I've embraced it now much I
guess as you have and you know it's
important to me so I like to keep
pushing it could you tell us a little
bit about what the Kinsey Institute is
and because I want to I want to put your
work in in a larger context and give
give my listeners you know the ability
to sort of really legitimize in their
minds you know what you're gonna say and
like you know the Kinsey Institute is
famous you know in many circles and so
can you just sort of describe what it is
and what the mission is and what in the
history and maybe some of the things
that we may recognize as a product of
that work so the Kinsey Institute is an
Indiana University and it traces its
roots back to Alfred Kinsey who
conducted these landmark studies of
human sexuality back in the 1940s and
50s and he wrote two books that were
groundbreaking at the time because they
were the first real attempts to study
sex scientifically and he surveyed or
interviewed thousands of Americans
around the u.s. about what they were
doing sexually and he published it in
the form of two books the first was a
mail volume the second was a female
volume and these were just a bombshell
of the American public in terms of what
they revealed about what people were
doing sexually you know for example the
the women's volume in particular was
incredibly controversial for showing
that hey women actually like sex - and
women are masturbating women engage in
same-sex behavior so you know the these
these were revolutionary books for the
time that they were published and so the
kids Institute's legacy really really
starts there and and the Institute it
continues in Kinzie's name to this day
and they have some of the best sex
scientists in the world who are doing
research in a lot of different areas but
it's all aimed at furthering the the
science of sex and we do some graduate
training there
where you know we're helping to train
the next generation of sex researchers
so there are postdocs were there were
actively involved in research as well
and it's it's it's a really
intellectually stimulating place to be I
guess to be landing in all kinds of ways
I think I feel like I saw it was like on
Showtime or HBO or something I think
there was like a series done about
Kinsey and maybe the studies and I see I
seem to remember them like actually
observing live subjects is that is that
right so I think you might be referring
to masters of sex
yes that's it yeah so that was the
Showtime series about William masters in
Virginia Johnson and they came just a
little bit after Kinsey and they did the
you know sort of live sex studies where
were they were developing technologies
to study what was happening inside the
body when people were becoming aroused
and having orgasms and their work
actually took place in st. Louis
Missouri it's funny when you look back
and you look at Indiana and Missouri
would like the hot beds for sex research
and not San Francisco no and it's funny
you know even today like Indiana is home
to so many sex researchers but you just
you wouldn't know it because it's a very
you know politically conservative state
and people don't tend to associate sex
research with us
right and is it safe to say that the
Kinsey Institute is one of the world
leading institutes for the research and
human sexuality I think it's fair to say
then there there are very few
Institute's than sex research so yeah
again I'm just astonished at that fact
really and so it's part of my mission
really to to keep talking about sex
frankly like I think I've found in my
experience like I work with guys one on
one and and I just get my get millions
of emails and tweets and and I meet guys
all the time all across the country who
expressed to me that they are confused
about sexuality and relationships in
particular they find themselves having
fantasies or desires that don't line up
with what people are telling them is
okay because in fact actually people are
even telling them what is okay and what
is and they're just saying kind of like
don't talk about I don't think
just kind of do it and everything will
be just fine just be yourself and so
there's a lot of uncertainty out there
and there's a lot of stigma and taboo
and it's might be fighting an uphill but
I'm trying to diminish some of the taboo
around talking about sex and sexuality
because really what I one of my main
missions is to help alleviate shame
right like I just don't want people
feeling bad for things that are
perfectly normal and when you don't know
what normal is it's easy to fall into
like a shame spiral and think that
you're bad or nasty or whatever the case
may be and then you might live a life of
fear being unwilling to express your
your thoughts and your desires and and
and be unable to communicate them to
your partners and then I see this
long-term sort of relationship distress
that we're having a lot of it can be
centered around lack of communication
and you know I and so to me this is part
of my mission is to is to help bring
these conversations to people that might
not ordinarily hear them and so for that
I'm really thankful that you've taken
this time to talk to me you've written a
book and the book is called tell me what
you want and it is from what I
understand like one of the few if only
books I have have this amount of
original research in it that you have
conducted and so could you just like
kick off the the general concept of the
book and talk about the the study that
you did and then we'll sort of work our
way through all the details and the
findings the basis for this book is a
survey I did of almost 4,200 Americans
from all 50 states who are very
demographically diverse participants
ranging in age from 18 to 87 covering
the entire political spectrum all gender
and sexual identities the goal was to
get as large and diverse a sample as
possible and I asked these people to
complete a survey that consisted of 369
questions that looked at their biggest
sexual fantasy of all time hundreds of
people places things they might have
ever fantasized about as well as their
personalities sexual histories
demographics so that I could really look
in this comprehensive way at what our
sexual fantasies are and and what they
say about us and so I wrote a whole book
based around the survey that the dives
into some of the major
findings it also brings in relevant
research from from different areas talks
about for example how it's tied to
evolutionary biology how it's tied to
neuroscience and then toward the end of
the book there's a self-help component
where I talk about what you can do with
this information in terms of trying to
improve your own sex life and this study
how is it conducted because I did a
study from my book Democrats a
deplorable where I got about 1,500
responses to a 67 in question
sixty-seven questions survey and of
those questions 15 of them were short
answer and so basically I have like I
had like 15,000 like
essay essays to read and I read them all
I mean that's where that's where so much
great of the anecdotes and little
nuggets right there but like I did in
mind with like a Survey Monkey
you know app and like I distributed it
over social media and Internet and how
did you go about collecting this
information you pay people to do it you
hand it to them at person was it done
over the phone like how did that work so
as I mentioned a little bit earlier
there's I think I meant to this there's
not much in the way of grant funding for
for sex research so I was not paying
people to do this I was relying on
volunteers and as a result it took a
long time I spent almost two years
gathering all the data to try and get
the sample that was as large and diverse
as I could and I wanted to make sure
that every state was included in there
and and and so forth most of the
participants came through social media
it was advertised over Facebook Twitter
reddit places like that so so the
demographic skew a little bit more
toward the average social media user
then toward the average American but
it's still a very diverse sample right
yeah and that was one of the main
criticisms that I got of my survey which
was you know did you go around door to
door talking to people that didn't have
internet and used social media and so I
found that my results may have skewed a
little bit educated and affluent
relative to sort of the national
averages did you did you see something
similar or what were the diff what what
would you say the mean if any
discrepancies that were between your
sample size and like a nationally
representative sample so what is that
it's a little bit younger so the average
age of my participants is between 32 and
33 the average American
if you look at census data 36 to 37 so
it's a little bit younger it's a little
more educated and you know in terms of
like political and religious background
you see that you know Republicans are a
little underrepresented and people with
religious affiliations are a little
underrepresented but that's not
something unique to my work that's true
of all sexuality studies where there's a
selection effect for people who tend to
be a little bit more comfortable talking
about their sexual attitudes and
behaviors so I still had hundreds and
hundreds of people who were Republican
identified or had various religious
identities but you know that's just an
issue we face in sex research is that
it's hard to get representative samples
from all groups of the population
because not everybody wants to take part
in the sex study right like how long did
it take to complete the survey on
average it was somewhere between a half
hour and an hour depending on how long
people spent with those open-ended
responses because I asked people to
write out their favorite fantasy of all
time and you know some people wrote
pages okay but people have very detailed
fantasy if it turns out yeah and like to
talk about it
yeah and like to write about it was I'm
assuming it was a completely anonymous
it was completely anonymous and you know
something that's interesting is that in
most of my sexin relationship studies I
do men tend to be underrepresented in my
sexual fantasy research men are you know
on par with women or they're
over-represented in some cases which I
think speaks to the fact that you know
men really want to talk about their
fantasies which so so I found that to be
interesting and doing this work that is
interesting what why do you why do you
think people want to talk about their
fantasies because almost all of us have
them and a lot of us just don't know if
they're normal or not you know we seem
to be very worried about our fantasies
and that was one of the things I found
in this work is that I asked people you
know what are the kinds of emotions that
come to mind when you're thinking about
your favorite fantasy and you know
people report a lot of guilt shame and
anxiety and and I also ask people you
know how common do you think your your
fantasy is and people tended to
underestimate it they thought their
fantasies were rare
the rarer people thought their fantasies
were the more negative emotions they
felt about it so I think that's a big
part of what's going on here is we just
we think we're weird because we don't
have the information and then that leads
us to hide this and feel more ashamed
than than we should right right I'm
jumping ahead here with this question
but do you think that if we educate
people on the quote normality of their
fantasies that that would lead to a
greater percentage of people sort of
trying to activate those fantasies and
live them out I think there is something
to be said for education about you know
what what sexual interests are more or
less common but I think in doing so we
need to also educate people about the
difference between a fantasy and a
desire and you know it's okay to have an
OP that turns you on but the desire to
actually do it and the actual behavior
might be something very different so we
also need to provide a lot of education
around how do you turn a fantasy into
reality when should you or shouldn't you
think about doing that and that's
something that I'd try to get into a bit
in the book but yeah when it comes to
the sex education there's there's a lot
that we need to cover there right well I
just made me think of an interesting
phenomenon where you know the the
greater the awareness it may actually
change behavior it's an interesting
thing to think about in terms of sort of
like our imitating life imitating art
like but more you tell people something
is okay maybe the more they're gonna do
it maybe maybe maybe the research ends
up changing behaviors because people
feel less shame or they feel empowered
or they feel like it's it's something
normal and so that's interesting I think
unfortunately there's a long way to go
before before the results of this type
of work becomes part of the sort of
common wisdom of our culture so I don't
think we have to not gonna happen
anytime soon
I see we brought you brought up
something that I wanted that was like
one of my first questions about the
whole study which is can you define what
a fantasy is for me and then you you
couched it also versus desire and so
because that was something that I kept
asking myself as I was reading the book
that's like
what what is a fantasy what am i
fantasizing about and then I also
thought later like well if I stop
fantasizing about it now does that mean
that I'm no longer interested in and
there's all there's all all kinds of
questions that go along with that so
let's just start with that like what
what is what is a fantasy so a fantasy
is something that happens while you're
awake it's a conscious thought so this
is different from a sex dream that's
that's something totally different and
something I don't really get into so
fantasy is a conscious thought that you
find to be arousing sexually so it is a
mental thought or image that that turns
you on and a fantasy may or may not be a
desire a desire is something you
actually want to do I find that for most
people their favorite fantasy of all
time is a desire about 80% of people say
it's something they would like to make
part of their sex life in the future
but most people have lots and lots of
fantasies and most of our fantasies
aren't desires you know it's not the
case that every thought we ever have
that turns us on represents something
that we true they want to do right and
you know I've talked to a lot of girls
that have like gangbang fantasies and a
lot of them will say that they have a
fantasy about it but quote some things
are left better as fantasies that's a
something we talk about later too but um
is there a difference between like a a
sexual thought and a fantasy right
because I can think about all kinds of
sexual things I might like to do but it
may or may not actually stir a physical
arousal like for your work where you
focus solely on a thought that actually
causes some sort of sexual arousal in
the body whatever those physiological
markers may be and could you describe
what those may be also yeah so in terms
of the way I defined it for my
participants I was very clear at the
beginning of the survey to say this is
what a sexual fantasy is it's a mental
thought or image that that turns you on
it creates sexual arousal so yeah you
can think about sex but not have it be a
turn-on
that's that's not what I'm talking about
here it's only cases where it actually
creates a state of arousal and that
could be mentally you feel aroused it
could be genitally it could be both it
kind of depends you know sometimes
people will fantasize in a situation
where they tried
to inhibit their genital response you
know I find some people fantasize about
sex when they're in church and you know
they they might inhibit their their
genital arousal in that situation but
they're they're still turned on
subjectively mentally just not
physically and would you would you say
that a fantasy is more likely to be
spontaneous or something that you are
proactive like in like because if you
ask me start thinking about things I can
start think about a ton of stuff but it
like is this something is this something
that you know I mean it doesn't happen
to me so much anymore honestly but I do
remember just being like hit with waves
of like oh yeah I really want to do this
thing oh my god that sounds amazing you
know is there a certain level of
spontaneous thought that involved in it
being a fantasy and or do you see
fantasies more common among certain age
groups like when people get older do
fantasy start to diminish and you know
is there a peak to that or something
sure so fantasies I think it's important
to recognize that they serve a lot of
different functions so when I ask people
why they fantasize they do it for a lot
of different reasons and when I ask
people where they fantasize they do it
in a lot of different situations so
sometimes it's just this spontaneous
inexplicable you know thought that pops
into your head other times however it's
very deliberate so for example if you're
having sex with a partner you might
intentionally fantasize so as to
maintain arousal or you might
intentionally fantasize because you're
you know in the process of masturbating
and it's a way of you know getting there
so so there are times when we
deliberately call to mind but there were
other times where it just it just pops
into the head right right
interesting and what about the age is
there a relationship between like the
frequency of sexual fantasy and and your
age yeah I think it's interesting when
you talk about age and sexual fantasies
because you know yes we do tend to
fantasize a little less often and then
that's tied to you know just general
changes in libido that happen as we age
so if sex drive is decreasing you're
probably going to be fantasizing about
sex a little bit less often but you also
see changes in the nature of people's
fantasies as they age too
something I looked at in the data for
this book and we haven't previously had
any research on that because almost all
the fantasy research has been on college
students and it turns out that college
students if you want to study sexual
fantasies are the least interesting
group you could possibly study because
they have the most narrow fantasy
repertoire you know they don't have as
much diversity and variability so it's
actually older adults who have more
variable fantasy content and there's so
much more interesting to study yeah I
mean I can tell you that as a teen as a
youth my fantasies if he close what if
he cliff you can see inside my clothes
mine it was just like two giant breasts
right or just like just I'm trusting
inside of a woman like that was that was
enough of a fantasy and I'm telling my
fantasies now involve like complex
situations props into like multiple
people their own individual motivations
the feelings that they're having you
know like what I'm wearing where we are
like they get they get so much more
complex and that brings up a couple of
other issues too which is one like do
you see a relationship between people's
the number of sex partners they've had
well which is not necessarily the same
as like the amount of sex that they've
had and their fantasies also what is the
impact I'm like I don't want to call it
sexual maturity that's not right but
like you know being very being
experience with sex like what is the
impact on your sexual fantasies there
too so I don't recall if I looked at how
a number of partners was linked to
people's sexual fantasies but I did look
at how sex drive was correlated with it
and what he's so Yee is there for people
who have a higher sex drive they tend to
have a lot more frequent fantasies and
more variable fantasy content the same
goes for people who are what we call
sensation seekers where they just have
this heightened need for thrilling and
risky encounters to try and get them
there also for people who are high in
the personality trait of something
called openness to experience people who
have overactive imaginations right we
see certain groups of people who just
tend to have a lot of diversity in their
fantasy content so so the
it would be incorrect to say that like a
young man that's not in an active sexual
relationship who may have loaf' partner
count and is not like gonna have more
sexual fantasies than someone who's like
you know these are just totally random
examples versus somebody who's done like
a consensually non-monogamous
relationship who's having sex with
multiple partners every week there's
like Yuki there's no universal
statements to be made there there are no
universal principle we're not kind of
thing human sexuality you we can talk
about you know trends on average but
when you start looking at individuals
there are always exceptions to the rule
right I guess the image that I was
trying to work through is so like you
know a young man that may not have the
sex that he's desiring the frequency or
quality of you know I'm wondering if
they tend to be more more fantasy driven
and overloaded with fantasy maybe even
consumed by fantasy versus somebody
that's like you would call sexually
sated I would consider myself to be
sexually sated like I can't remember you
know the distant I'm between like a
sexual urge and my satisfaction of that
urge is like so low they're like I don't
even know that I have any time to like
allow fantasies to bloom her or get to
that point where it becomes like an urge
right so I guess you would call an urge
a desires I was sort of similar or it's
not even a separate thing altogether
urge no III dump it in the same category
as a sexual desire you know thought I
did you want to do Yeah right
fascinating okay so what in the early
things that you talked about in the book
is the way that the medical profession
has treated sexual fantasies and desires
and fetishes and other things and the
way that they've labeled them and this
word I've been using a lot on you know
if it's worth pathologized is that even
word you know this type of behavior
there's a word for it and can you give
sort of like a just a little bit of
history on on the way that the the sect
the the medical community has viewed
these fantasies and these urges and such
and and how they're classified and why
and why it's an issue so we can trace
this back to Sigmund Freud whose view on
sexual fantasies was basically that
happy people don't fantasize only people
who are decide
five and that wrong I know that sort of
set the tone for people to think about
for psychologists and psychiatrists to
be thinking about sexual fantasies as is
pathological and if you look at the way
the the mental health community is
treated sexual fantasies over time you
see that they've labeled fantasy after
fantasy desire after desire as being
what they call paraphilias if it's
something that strikes them as unusual
or as outside of their perceived norms
for for sex that they call it a
paraphilia which just means unusual
sexual interest and these paraphilias
have made their way into the DSM which
has the effect of of stigmatizing and by
making people think that this hey this
is weird and unusual because it's in
this medical manual and so sadism and
masochism are two examples of the sexual
interests that appear in the DSM that
you know people think are weird
for that reason because they are
diagnoseable mental disorders and have
been for decades right like an example
of pretty common and very mild
sadomasochistic behavior would be like a
dude smacking a girl in the ass while
they're having sex right right obviously
you know BDSM can right there's a wide
wide range for all that and we can talk
about that later but I just wanted to
sort of give context to what a physician
a by-the-book physician who's not
thinking outside of the sort of the
Canon I guess the medical Canon there
would perceive what you know my guys for
sure and myself for sure for sure see as
like a completely benign behavior as
something that is is like mentally I
mean come on I mean we will just say
like paraphilic you mean that's like a
mental deficiency or a psychological
deficiency or some sort of you know
quote improper wrong behavior right yeah
and for a long time when people have
heard the term paraphilia it's been
synonymous with disorder you know it has
meant that writes something mentally
wrong with you and it wasn't until a
couple of years ago that psychologists
finally started making this distinction
between people who have unusual sexual
interests and people who have unusual
sexual interests that are problematic
that's really a new thing for the mental
health community I yeah right I mean and
we can clearly define like some of those
things and this list will not be
exhaustive but like bestiality
necrophilia incest these kind of these
kind of things are bad and they're bad
for you and they're bad for the people
who or objects or things that you would
do them with right so we're not talking
about like normalizing you know all
types of sexual behaviors and whatnot
but so we're we're in do you draw the
line you personally as a researcher to
it being and I'll say deviant in a
technical sense right away from the norm
but as we found in your book a lot of
these things are completely normal to so
but like we're where do you draw the
line between what would be how would you
characterize something that goes from
being like a healthy sexual fantasy to
something it becomes an unhealthy sexual
fantasy for me the key things are first
is their consent involved in this
activity and with something like
pedophilia you know when you're when
you're talking about a prepubescent
child they cannot consent to sex so that
is always a problematic sexual desire
you know I should mention that sometimes
people will have a sexual fantasy about
something that's non consensual but that
doesn't necessarily mean that they want
to act on it you know if it's just a
one-time thing it's probably nothing to
worry about but if you have a fantasy
repeatedly and it becomes your favorite
fantasy content and it's non-consensual
that's when it starts to become a cause
for concern because you might
potentially act on it then the other
issue is aside from consent is there a
serious risk of harm to you or to
someone else if you engaged in that
behavior and you know most of the BDSM
things for example that people fantasize
about or not cause for concern but there
are some people who fantasize about
really intense activities where you know
there's there's cutting and electric
shocks and other things like that and
that's where you start to get into this
area of you know safe sane and
consensual and figuring out you know
what is an appropriate videus I'm
related interest act on and what isn't
and that gets into a whole area that you
know I it's hard to draw lines and say
you know this is acceptable and this
isn't because everybody has their
different threshold for the amount of
risk there will
to take on so you know I just I tend to
stick by go with safe sane consensual
and legal and yeah right well I'm one of
the earlier pieces I ever wrote was
based around this model for sexual
health I was developed by Michael Vega
Reno and Braun I can't remember his last
name and the Bron Oh Harvey Harvey and
bigger IDO yeah and so it was a model
for sexual health that had six
components and if it had these six
components that it would then it was
okay right the first one let me see if I
can remember oh except up my head the
first one was consent the sexual the
second one was protection from pregnancy
and st st d--'s is what i grew up they
were called oh no now they're called I
guess the eyes or something
mutually pleasurable jeez Oh Cheryl use
non exploitive gosh and there's one more
I can't remember but if you if you if
you hit all six of these elements then
their model for sexual health will say
that this is a healthy a healthy baby
and basically honesty that was fun
that's a big that's a big one right so
as long as you as long as your sexual
behavior is falling under those six
categories and you can check YES on each
one of those you're not hurting anybody
you're being totally upfront and honest
about it both partners are getting what
they want out of it both partners are
getting pleasure out of it and you're
not lying cheating and stealing to make
it happen then you know it's it's a-okay
and and and I think when I wrote that it
was actually really useful because the
world am i writing early writing came
from was like around guys like trying to
figure out how to have relationships and
meet girls and at the same time it's
like how do i bed women and then you
know after a while you start doing it
enough and you become proficient in it
like meeting and sleeping with women
then all then then you start to think is
this right is what I mean what I'm doing
healthy and so it was really important
for me to get that model out there for
guys and and I can't tell you the amount
of positive feedback I got from people
who were happy to have a framework to
analyze their own behavior and safe sane
and consensual it's a it's another
shorthand way of putting it that comes
from the BDSM community for sure so
that's what we're talking about we're
talking about things that are going to
fall under these categories
especially in your in your actions right
because I at least believe partially
that we can't be held accountable for
our thoughts so it's really just about
our actions and stuff so that's what
we're talking about and and and and the
weird part of this story is that even
activities that fall under those
guidelines and that meet that criteria
we're still being defined as something
as this paraphilic right which is a
negative it's in the book your your
deviant and maybe even deranged for even
thinking about these things and have we
seen any have any of these activities
come out of the manual and and been
unlabeled as paraphilic I mean have we
seen an evolution and thinking there
yeah and that just goes to show how
subjective the term paraphilia actually
is so one example is homosexuality was
listed as a paraphilia in the dsm until
the early 1970s and at that point it was
taken out and for about a decade it was
replaced with this different category
called ego-dystonic homosexuality which
referred people who were had same-sex
attractions who were uncomfortable with
them and wanted to change and then
people still looked at that and said
well it's still stigmatizing
homosexuality please who saw this
listing for it in there so that came out
in the early 80s now outside of the DSM
I've got a book on my shelf that lists
more than 500 different paraphilias and
it includes oral sex and anal sex and
basically you know anything other than
penile-vaginal intercourse there they're
calling a paraphilia so for for
procreation or any anything outside of
procreative missionary right right well
um that you know that's interesting that
you bring up sort of the researchers
perspective or the the writer of the
manual like if it falls outside of what
they feel like is normal then all of a
sudden it's not normal for anybody and I
I get the feeling that a lot and I feel
like I feel like psychology is big is
having it's like pants pulled down these
days like to that reveal a lot of these
personal biases and and a lack of
objectivity and we're seeing that now
like with these gender roles and stuff
too and yeah it gets infected with
politics and ideology and sexuality has
certainly been in fact
with religion and moral codes and and
judgment and such and all of which are
fascinating to me and this is probably a
subject for another another podcast but
like where where did those initial
feelings come from where do these ideas
of disgust come from where do those
norms and stuff come from like why why
were they there were they healthy for us
or not
but I certainly am one I consider myself
to be sex positive like I believe that
to healthy adults can consent to do
whatever they want to do with each other
and and I'm all for it
like and I'm certainly probably the most
sex positive guy in my little sphere
which is which gets me a lot of flack
sometimes and people come across my like
conservative political writing and then
they then the next day they're seeing me
on Twitter talking about sex positive
stuff and they're like uh-oh what's
happening here and then I get unfollowed
so I'm definitely cultivating a unique
following here so the book that moves
away from talking about the pair of the
defining elements of the paraphilic
nature and into your sort of main
findings and you know let's talk about
that because I think that's the fun part
for sure what what would what were your
main findings or you know you know how
to present your work here so like let's
give it people an introduction to what
what you found and what you saw and and
then we can we can go through there
because I think there's some also some
really tremendously health concepts that
you were able to glean out of this data
so the first thing I looked at is you
know what are the most common things
that people are fantasizing about and I
found that there were three themes that
that almost everybody reported having at
one time or another
these were group sex fantasies which
ranged from threesomes to orgies to
gangbangs almost everybody reported
having one of those fantasies before
regardless of male/female other
demographic characteristics and will you
say almost everybody can you like put a
number on that we're talking like 58%
are we talking about like 90% yeah it's
it's uh I think the number for group sex
fantasies was more than 90 percent for
men and it was it was close to 90
percent for women okay and so all right
so let's just get this out there very
clear at one point is at one point in
time in their life they had this fantasy
or this is listed as like one of their
top fantasies these people 80 90 percent
of Americans who use 10
excuse to social media have fantasies of
group sex threesomes orgies or or
gangbangs right so that is you know 90%
is whether people have ever fantasized
about it before in terms of whether it's
their favorite fantasy you know the one
that they go to most often the number is
lower it's it's closer to 50% who say
that you know some type of group sex is
part of their favorite fantasy of all
time that is amazing
okay so 90% of people have thought about
or fantasized and gotten aroused with
the idea of having threesomes group sex
getting things or orgies and I got to
tell you that those are all wonderful
fantasies from personal experience but
you know and and none of that really
surprises me and in it's funny when I
when I'm intergate engaging with people
online who seem to think that nobody has
any of these fantasies and and nobody
has thought about this stuff and I write
about it and they're like you're wrong
that's just that's just your experiences
and like well you know I'm sorry maybe I
don't regret but I do have almost a
scientifically statistical relevant
sample size so like my my experience
does have some weight to it but I love
seeing this stuff backed up by research
so after group sex like basically like
multi-part multi-party sexual
experiences what what did you find after
were after that a BDSM was almost as
popular you know again it was close to
90 percent or more for for many and
women that they had ever fantasized
about it and it was a you know very
large percentage who said that it was
part of their favorite fantasy of all
time in some way you know whether there
was a dominant submissive dynamic or
whether there was some bondage involved
here there's so many different ways that
could play out so one of the one of the
the detailed questions I had when I was
reading this was thinking okay so your
survey men and women and I think I think
I read that you found that there's a
tendency for the greater number of
people fantasized about being submissive
than they did about being Tom yep right
and I can guarantee I can I can
definitely put my personal stamp of
approval on that one confirmed in the in
the field no question about that but
did you find that there was a skew male
or female on dominant versus submissive
and then what does the Venn diagram look
like of people that were fantasized of
dominance like you guys can't see this
on the podcast but I got my hands on
that diagram the the Venn diagram it
looks like people that that that were
fantasize about dominance and Submission
and then like the total population
because I would I would think that you
would have some sort of balance but many
or not perfectly and that but it's
almost everybody right like that that's
my guess what did you find
yeah I'd say more often than not people
are you know what you could call
switches in the sense that you know
sometimes they're fantasizing about
dominance sometimes they're fantasizing
about submission yeah there are some
people who are at the extreme ends for
they only fantasize about taking on a
dominant role some who only fantasize
about taking on a submissive role but
you know people tend to be a little bit
more in the middle in terms of sometimes
they're feeling more this way sometimes
they're feeling more the other way right
so could just put a number on the total
number of people or the the percentage
of people that fantasize about power
dynamics in their sexual relationship
just in terms of the dominant submissive
dynamic it was I think it was 80% or
more who had had those fantasies they I
can't recall the specific numbers off
the top of my shirt there's a lot of
numbers in the book I don't mean to put
you on the spot with that no there's so
many and I've actually I'm in the midst
of going around the country right now
and I'm teaching these workshops on the
the science of sexual fantasies for sex
therapists to try and give them the the
sex education that maybe they didn't get
in graduate school and I've been
presenting table after table and so I've
got so many numbers hold at my head
right now I can't keep them all straight
I can imagine I can imagine but be but
basically I'm at it's really starting to
snow here in Washington DC basically you
know 80 or 90 percent of people have
fantasized about some element of a power
of a consensual power exchange happening
within their relation within their
sexual relationship and but let's you
know I think people get scared when they
hear the phrase BDSM and the first thing
that pops into their their minds are
like people like dressed up in leather
with those funny like motorcycle
hats on and then the you know beating
each other up and people are tied to
crosses and stuff like that and getting
set on fire or whatever but like can you
put can you put BDSM in context for like
sort of air quotes normal people yeah so
I think most people when they hear BDSM
they get this sort of extreme imagery in
mind like it like you said but for most
people who are into BDSM it's pretty
mild pretty symbolic especially when it
comes to something like like pain so so
spanking is one of the more common forms
of BDSM or tying a partner up you know
using handcuffs or or maybe just you
know holding their hands behind their
back biting them on the neck you know
there are so many different ways that
this can play out that range from you
know the mild to wild but most people
tend to be on that more mild end of the
spectrum right right and I think I mean
I think statistically that that makes
sense so when but when I mean I used to
bright I'd use the term BDSM I think I
probably turn some people off because in
their minds are having these images but
really what I'm talking about is exactly
what you're describing is like light
bondage which could involve handcuffs or
maybe some ropes or maybe just like pull
a tie off of your tie rack or something
like that or even just holding
somebody's hands down behind their head
or something I suppose like pulling
hairs probably somewhere in that
spectrum yeah
and then when it comes to like the S&M
part I mean man lights banks maybe a
paddle maybe light whipped with a
flogger but you know nothing nothing
that's meant to like leave any lasting
marks or caused any bruises or anything
and you know I think when people examine
the true functionality and their own
sexual relationships they'll find some
of these elements in there that they
didn't even really ever think about as
being BDSM you know I like to put my
hands down on her shoulders and pin her
down into the ground while we're having
sex what you can't move oh well you know
that's you know that would probably fall
under this category right yeah and I
think a lot of people are exactly right
they don't necessarily think about their
behaviors in those terms but if they
went back with a broader understanding
they might say oh yeah you know I'm
turned on by the same things that a lot
of other people are and this can break
out in a lot of different ways right so
what
what do you attribute where where does
this come from where where is it where
do people what causes people to be
interested in power dynamics when
they're having sex and what causes
people to find arousal and either
delivering or receiving pain of some you
know to some degree like where does that
come from because you know I believe
that we've evolved over all this time
and some of these things serve a
function for us or harken back to like
some some period of time in the past
that you know where things were more
common like what where do you think what
do you think it comes from the way that
I look at the popularity BDSM is that
much of it has to do with the fact that
it changes your mental state and it
allows you to get lost in the moment
become very absorbed in a way that you
can maintain arousal and just enjoy the
sexual experience and without getting
pulled out of it and losing that arousal
and then not reaching orgasm and so
forth so I think it's often just about
creating that state of absorption and we
have some really fascinating research
where they've you know observed people
who are engaged in BDSM rituals and then
they give them different psychological
tasks to do at different points during
that ritual so that they can see what's
happening you know mentally for them and
we see that from people who are taking
on dominant roles they enter this state
of what's called flow where they just
have this enhanced concentration so they
mmm if this high level of focus whereas
people who take a submissive role or a
masochistic role they experience often
like the state of spirituality where
it's like they're sort of like floating
and it's it's a very different kind of
absorption and so yeah we call it we
call that subspace yeah yeah so there
are different terms that people in the
community use versus just it's all the
same thing
but I think that that change in mental
state is appealing to a lot of people
because so many of us just get
distracted during sex and that takes us
out of the moment and this is a way of
keeping us in there yeah I'm gonna jump
ahead because you brought this up now
and this is this is one of what I found
to be one of the best takeaways and I
was tweeting about this the other day as
I was reading it basically my my big
take out of a lot of this was
that one of the most erotic things that
you can do with your sexual partner is
to be fully mentally physically and
spiritually present and a lot of these
things you know we didn't talk about
this now but it's in the book definitely
group sex with multiple people there's
increased level of stimulation there's
visual stimulation physical stimulation
emotional stimulation for sure where
your become overwhelmed by stimuli I'm
gonna try sound like a scientist SWI
overwhelmed by that BDSM you know you
start focusing on the pain and and you
become you you you're very aware of
what's happening and and as a dominant
status for that's such a strong word as
a dominate guy that likes to you know
spank some butts every once in a while
you know you do get really focused
you're focused on the flash on the
redness on the safety of your partner on
whether they're good you're checking in
with them you know you really it's
really all about like a sexual
mindfulness and what can you talk about
some of your findings with that or did
you come to some same I mean I'm sort of
borrowing you paraphrasing you're
writing here so what talk about your
perception on that and and how you sort
of came to that as well
so this is an idea in sexuality research
in theory that's been around for a long
time that when people can find a way to
be in the here and now they just they
have fewer problems when it comes to
sexual performance because so many of us
have performance anxiety and
insecurities about our bodies or you
know wondering whether we're good at sex
or not and we all need to find a way to
kind of get in the moment be in the here
and now and we see there's a lot of
research on this in recent years
specifically looking at this idea of
mindfulness and whether we can you know
sort of train people to to do this and
there are all kinds of ways that you can
achieve that state of mindfulness one is
through BDSM practices and other is
through you know doing breathing and
other sorts of exercises based on you
know classic mindfulness trade
traditions but but yeah it's it's all
about that that getting lost in the
moment so many of us need that to enjoy
sex well I think that so many of us need
increased levels of mindful
in all aspects of our lives I mean we're
overwhelmed by stimuli look at how fancy
I am in every element of our life you
got you got the infinite infinity of
worlds knowledge in your pocket there's
people everywhere your jobs or kids your
dogs and it's hard to take a moment to
just slow down and I found for me
personally and all aspects of my life
everything is enhanced by increasing my
mindfulness increasing and becoming more
present and man I tell you the first
times I heard this stuff was when I
first got into yoga like 10 or 12 years
ago and I thought it was the dumbest
kookiest thing I've ever heard
pretty come today here and now become
present listen to your breath and it
sounds so cooky back then but man it is
absolutely friggin right like being able
to shut out all that outside stuff
enhances the very thing that you want to
be doing right now and I think for my
guys listening and women listening like
if you can find a way to increase your
mindfulness in every aspect of your life
you're gonna you're gonna find greater
fulfillment and your activities whether
it's greater success or greater
appreciation for what you're doing but
definitely within a sexual experience
and I think that's you know I haven't
gotten into sex workshops yet but I
think I can see it in my future but like
you know I think so many men are racing
towards orgasm because they're there
they're focused and and and actually
guys that is not being focused on sex
right like racing towards orgasm is is
being focused on the finish and it's
focused on an event that is outside of
like the thing that you're doing right
now and at the same time I was learning
about BDSM I was learning about Tantra
also and like Tantra quirk where it's
really it really is like yoga sex yoga
it's amazing where where you really take
the time to focus you take the time to
breathe and you take the time to be in
the moment in the act you know an act
that you're doing at the time and so
like its penetration for example and
then like one of the one of them one of
the activities that I first learned
about in order to enhance this this
ability to become present during sex was
to like just insert the penis into the
vagina and then just chill right just
like hang out with your partner
at that in that state and just sort of
see what happens to your bodies and man
if you do that you will find that your
body your your erection becomes more
pronounced the vagina becomes more
swollen and and lubricated and it opens
the vagina opens up it becomes deeper
and and like there's just a deeper sense
of connection and so I'm I was really
really excited to see that one of the
conclusions at least that I drew from a
book was this increased sense of
presence and this increased sense of
mindfulness will lead not only to like a
decrease in in your sexual anxiety it
will increase your ability to perform
but it's also going to increase your
just overall enjoyment and could
possibly take you to places that you've
never been before so that's my that's my
sort of a technical note practice sort
of rare rant rant here and BDSM does the
same thing the group sex is over
stimulation and there was one there's
another third component I think that you
found was one of the more frequently had
fantasies and what was that that was the
novelty adventure and variety you know
just going out buying something new and
different and trying to fend off
something that sex researchers called
the Coolidge effect which is basically
this idea that tend to become less
aroused so the same stimulus over time
so for example in studies where men can
you can you can you give the can you
tell the story it's about fluid effect
yeah say the one more thing about how it
works is that if men and women watch the
same porn clip every day for a week they
show less arousal to it over time but if
you showed them a new clip with new
actors then they get really excited
again so that's the idea behind the
Coolidge effect it's named after a
former President Calvin Coolidge and
it's this comes from this anecdote about
him and the first lady visiting a
chicken farm and they're going on a tour
of it and the first lady gets ahead of
her husband and she sees this rooster
who's has a lot of sexual prowess you
know he's going from one hand to the
next and you know just she's impressed
by it so it shoots up with the tour
guide you'd be sure to point that
rooster out to my husband when he gets
here so the tour guide does when when
President Coolidge gets to that part of
the tour he says your wife wanted me to
be sure the point this
throughout to you and mr. Coolidge sits
there looks of what's going on and he
says be sure to tell mrs. Coolidge that
there's more than one hand you know yeah
the only reason that that rooster was
was getting it on so much is because he
had a lot of options right and I can
speak from personal experience that that
is an actual real-life thing and I
definitely read other like evolutionary
biology studies and such that that we'll
talk about when the man has like
multiple partners or even perceives that
the woman has had other partners or
there's a new partner or I think in your
book you even cite like even if you just
are masturbating to a different porn
star you have increased like ejaculated
and Seamon levels I mean it's built into
us some way and I've found at least
personally that a lot of the things that
I found to be most sexually satisfying
in terms of acting out these fantasies
is are are things that that I call them
like bio hacks they like tap into
something that's in our circuitry for
whatever reason but you're actually
changing your physiology around and
you're actually getting a greater
stimulation sexually and it causes for a
more intense more pleasurable experience
and that Coolidge story the cool story
cracks me up because it's also very
quintessential sort of male versus
female sexual perspective if you if you
adhere to the sort of variety the
argument about fur for men and the way
that it stimulates them and he brought
up something else that I was highlighted
on my list
and that was a attenuation so I
personally and one of the things that
I've always prided myself on my writing
is that I was very revealing and I
revealed my own sexual history and my
own sexual experience and one of the one
of the things I noted personally was
that like okay so I had you know anal
sex okay
did that all right and then I had sex
outside okay I did that and then I had a
threesome I don't know anymore and then
and then the stimulation required to get
that same novelty effect or the same
whatever effect it was became sort of
greater and greater and that's when I
that's when I sought out like a healthy
actual model to operate under to make
sure that as I was pursuing these like
greater and greater sexual fantasies
that they were still healthy and sane
and consensual himself so you mentioned
this in terms of pornography
no I did a whole podcast with dr. David
Leigh about pornography and the impact
on men pornography on men masturbation
and the effect of masturbation on man
etc and I I don't know and I'm gonna put
words in his mouth and I may be wrong
but I feel like he argued that
pornography did not necessarily have
that same effect but I could be wrong
I'll go back and listen so David sorry
if you're listening the and I know and I
know he will
the what did you find what studies did
you cite please talk about that because
I know a lot of guys are concerned that
they're like okay I'm jerking off for
this now there's three of them now
there's ten women now I can only get off
to jerking off to like a hundred women
all wearing cat suits with butchered
knives and you know peeing on each other
or whatever so like what what did you
did he that's a good one I'm gonna what
what did you find like what kind of
study did you see and and how do you see
I playing out in terms of porn use and
sexual fantasies Wow okay that's a
complex question so you know the idea
behind the Coolidge effect is that we're
just we're turned on by novelty and so
what that means in terms of porn use is
that we're just we're not gonna want to
watch the same thing over and over and
over again that doesn't necessarily mean
though that we are going to need to amp
up the intensity level of it right okay
thing new and different so that could be
a new actor you know actress performers
it could be you know having sex in a new
setting or location you know there are
all kinds of ways that had a new twist
to - what's going on sexually that don't
necessarily involve amping it up in a
way that that some people might perceive
is as dangerous and I think this is
where we you know the sex addiction
people come in and they start
interpreting our need for novelty as a
need for as you know they're completing
that with addiction I think those are
very slippery slope yeah very very
different things and you know there is
some research I believe by my colleague
Nicky drowsy we're maybe it wasn't her
sorry I forgot somebody somebody studies
I can think of I just can't always
remember exactly who did them of course
or you could just you know half make it
up like I do so well I know it's my blog
written about this that when people the
people who are turned on by the very
intense kinds of porn
they're also turned on by the the mild
sorts of foreign as well right so the
data isn't consistent with that idea
that you know there's necessarily this
escalation effect that if you watch a
little bit of poor and that makes you
just you know you can never shut it off
and you have to keep going to some more
and more people more and more intense
activities right and at least personally
I can I can say that that that didn't
happen to me and like honestly like my
poor news has really gone down quite a
bit and I've always wondered about the
correlation between poor news and actual
sexual activity David said that there's
no there's no relationship I don't know
my personal experience I'm not sure
exactly but I don't you know porn yeah I
do
I personally though in my own novelty
experiences I have found that like you I
do need if I want novelty I need it well
it needs to be novel and I guess there's
a certain point at which you know you've
you've checked off you know not that
it's a mechanical thing or anything but
like you you've lived through a lot of
these fantasies and you sort of get to a
point where like to go to go into the
next layer of fantasy there's it's
unattainable in some ways I mean I as as
great of a lover guys I am I don't think
I'm never gonna have 50 women all at
once like fanning me with palm fronds
and throwing little pickles at me you
even though it may you were the one who
submitted that fantasy all right I still
I have stole that from movie real genius
with Val Kilmer from like the 80s I
don't know if you're old enough to
remember that movie but definitely the
palm fronds and the little pickles in
that element
I borrowed but I think guys have a guys
women female female relationship experts
as well female relationship therapists
especially oh my god
don't use porn if your husband's using
porn he's never gonna want you again
that's a sexual experience he's having
that's infidelity he's being unfaithful
to you when he's masturbating at all but
when he's masturbating and you know to a
woman on the screen
he's definitely cheating on you I mean
I've heard all that I've heard that in
couples therapy with my ex-wife and the
60 year old women sitting across from me
telling her that I was cheating on on my
ex-wife because I was masturbating to
pornography cuz my wife won't have sex
with me but anyway that's the no story
that's another story
so this novelty effect is not and it I
had written down attenuation was that me
without my word did you it was that word
in your boat habituation is what I was a
publication okay and and do you think
that there's any relationship between
sexual anxiety and failure to perform
and porn usage and well what causal
direction that's a very thank you for
saying it that way so your question
implies that maybe people that have
sexual dysfunction then seek out
pornography in order to masturbate on
their own because they can't perform not
the other way around that they're using
pornography and that causes the
dysfunction yeah and this is one of
those things that's hard to study
scientifically and tease apart which
which direction it is so yeah I don't
know that I have a good answer for that
because we don't necessarily have great
data on it yet
yeah oh this brings up a question I
asked David to which was are there any
studies and if the answer is no that's
fine and if there answer's no and you
want me to be a subject in this study I
will definitely do it is there any
correlation at all that or is there a
difference in the physiological response
that you have to orgasm in different
situations such as solo masturbation
with no pornography solo masturbation
with pornography masturbation in the
presence of another woman mutual
masturbation intercourse like are the
hormonal and physiological
responses to each of those the same do
they have the same impact on us do they
boost our testosterone do they SAP our
energy do they release oxytocin like is
it orgasm just an orgasm or is the
context and the stimulation is that
relevant as well based on my
understanding of the data and I should
back up and say that orgasm science is
not where it needs to be because Masters
and Johnson did sort of the pioneering
work on this back in the 1960s and then
there wasn't a whole lot of research on
orgasms until very recently and a lot of
what Masters and Johnson said it turns
out you know when we're starting to
reset e this we're coming to some
different conclusions and so I think my
understanding of the data is that an
orgasm is an orgasm physiologically but
psychologically it might be a very
different experience you know you can
have different feeling orgasms based on
your state of arousal or what you're
doing or what substances you consume
right so the the physiology is there and
it's always the same but the psychology
is different and in the mindfulness is
you know sort of part of it you know are
you and present and fully enjoying that
pleasure like that can affect the
quality of the orgasm you have right I
guess the the reason that I bring it up
is because a lot of guys on the
definitely the more conservative side of
things online that will write about sort
of helping young men will say that an
orgasm achieved through masturbation
especially with porn use will like
impact your body and your mindset
differently then if you're having
orgasms with women and they say this as
a way to be like quit jerking off no FAP
no porn you know cut yourself off
abstain from that it's you know it's not
helping you it's ruining it's ruining
your ability to go out there and form
meaningful relationships etc and and
these are guys that are like genuinely
trying to help other guys and and I have
been pushing back against this this
notion and I think it's far more common
on the more conservative side of things
but you know that's a that's a study
that I want to see I want to see what
the impact is on your testosterone
levels and sort of your
general motivation to engage in like a
personal relationship if you orgasm
versus and masturbation with pornography
or orgasm with another woman I would
love to see what the what the hormonal
impact and the physiological impact are
in those different cases because I want
to put this issue to bed once and for
all it would be nice I'm I'm with you on
that I get those kinds of questions
frequently and yeah it would be nice
that the data point for it
it really would I guess I would I would
have to like get blood work done after
eat I'm gonna do an n1 study and I'll
have the phlebotomist right there in my
bedroom and as soon as I'm done in each
of the three circumstances I'll have her
draw my blood and tell me what she finds
I mean that's actually study I could do
really that's interesting okay anyway
moving on moving on um let's see I want
to talk about impact on the realization
of your fantasies on your fantasies so
you know do your fantasies change once
you've achieved or experience them in
real life and then what does that
process like and is there as there a
path like what happens that's a great
question and you know this is a case
where we could really use longitudinal
data on sexual fantasies where we could
see over time what happens when you
share this fantasy and then when you act
on that fantasy and then does that lead
to change in subsequent fantasies we
don't have the data to be able to do
that that wasn't something I was able to
collect as part of my study but as I
mentioned a little earlier people's
fantasies do change as they age and
maybe that is in part because they're
acting and achieving some of those
fantasies and as a result developing new
fantasies from there
what's your hunch forget about the data
I always want data you know I'm a
scientist and I like to speak based on
data whenever I can but you know my
prediction would be that if you acted on
a fantasy and the experience didn't go
well you know it was it didn't live up
to your expectations then I think maybe
you've replaced that with a different
fantasy but you know acted on it and it
was really good maybe you'd keep
fantasizing about it because you want to
keep repeating that experience or maybe
you add a new twist to it yeah well I
found for me it's definite
adding a twist adding a twist like I
said my fantasies have gotten farm far
more complex when I can't you know I'm
personally I'm very dominant and so my
sex partners are looking to me to like
lead the way anyway so like part of my
job my sex job is to be creative and is
to be a leader in the bedroom and I
think that that's one element that
people lose sight of when they talk
about dominance Submission like the the
dominant person is a leader in the
sexual activity in a way but you're also
sort of submitted submitted huh
submissive to the to your partner's
desires to because you're you may be
dominated leading the way but you're
also have their fantasy in mind too so
like there's a responsibility that comes
with being dominant and in charge of
your sexual experience and so therefore
you kind of if you do it long enough and
you're any good at it and you develop a
real process you you you begin to become
more creative and come up with twists of
more ideas when I think of some of my
earlier 3 some fantasies versus the ones
that I have now which involves like well
no I'll leave that out but they've
definitely they've definitely gotten
more complex so the next thing that I
had on my list was the political your
political perspectives your political
parties your Trump voters versus your
Clinton voters versus you know how did
you see political leanings impact
people's fantasies and/or realizations
because I feel like we're also not
haven't yet delineated between fantasy
and realization I think that that's a
wide gap to you know to cross write so
well what we'll keep talking about
fantasy so what did you find in terms of
people's political affiliations or
ideologies and their sexual fantasies so
my data were collected 2014 to 2016 so
it was before the recent presidential
election and what I found was that
self-identified Republicans were more
likely to fantasize about a wide range
of taboo sexual activities as well as
infidelity and orgies and
cuckolding as well swinging too so you
know it was sort of the multi-partner
activities the partner swapping
activities in the taboo stuff I found
were more common among the Republicans
among self-identified Democrats the area
where I saw the biggest difference there
was that they were more into BDSM so I
saw you know some differences and what
people are fantasizing about based on
their political leanings Wow okay that's
fascinating let's dig into that a little
bit so I presumably self-described
Republicans I'm just assuming here and
correct me if I'm wrong may have a
tendency to to be a higher rate of
marriage more strictly adhere to
monogamy maybe got married earlier maybe
have more kids maybe a wider maybe are
more religious right like all the
stereotypes but actually they're
actually true and so they're living a
life where they're married and they have
kids and maybe they're going to church
and they're they're not having a wide
range of sexual experiences so like
they're thinking about like stepping out
on their wife but not you know maybe
consensually but like some sort of
extramarital affairs like a level of
novelty and such there but absent in
those fantasies is BDSM like power
exchanges and the SNM or submissive
dominance you know it's not to say that
it's absent it's just that statistically
it was less common for Republicans more
common for Democrats to fantasize about
BDSM I got it so David David and I
talked about this as well and he told me
he told me that the reason the reason
that Republicans don't have a less of a
tendency to fantasize about dominant
submissive relationships because
traditional relationships are inherently
dominant and submissive what do you
think about that makes sense I mean yeah
I guess I can't argue with that I hadn't
thought about it but hey maybe it's uh
yeah yeah I right oh so I'm gonna tie
this together when we go over to the
other side right and I think my
conclusion something that you wrote
about and can
so then on the Democratic side on the
liberal side more interest in BDSM which
includes power exchanges and also
includes a little bit more physical
aggression and some dominance and stuff
and so my the way that I look at it is
because the Democrats are constantly the
progressive especially constantly
seeking equality in all things at all
times so then when they argue having sex
they can act out on their fantasies of
actually things being unequal of power
exchange is actually taking place and is
there anything in your research that
that will I can confirm that suspicions
cuz I'm one of the first things I ever
wrote that I got in a ton of trouble for
and I still get I still get for all
the time it was titled up do feminists
have rape fantasies and like my personal
experience is hell yeah they do and I've
found that some of the the the most
sexually open-minded women that I've
ever encountered self-identified as
Democrats feminists intersectional as
like as far left as you could possibly
be and so like I found personally I like
to have sex with the progressives and I
like to hang out with conservatives I
don't know it's just my preferences but
is there anything in your data that can
like give some credence to that like I'm
a progressive I believe in equality at
all things except in the bedroom where I
want to get thrown around by a big
strong man yeah so your your
interpretation of it is something that I
have argued before in other places about
you know espousing these ideals of
equality and then you know sort of
playing with them sexually as a way of
you know sort of dealing with that I
I think a way to make sense of that and
and what also helps to make sense of why
Republicans had more of the taboo
fantasies is that ultimately you know
we're turned on by taboos and what we're
told we shouldn't do and I think for
Democrats when you're adhering to those
ideals of equality and the playing field
is perfectly level for everyone all the
time
it becomes very transgressive to you
know have that dominant submissive power
dynamic and so I think that it's sort of
the taboo element that makes it
appealing right so it we want the thing
that we can't
basically is what it comes down to
you're right yeah and I think you see
that in the the areas where Republicans
are reporting certain fantasies more
than Democrats where I say it's
non-monogamy or group-sex you know
they're more moral restrictions placed
on what they can do
sexually many of them do based on what
they're told by their religious
teachings or so forth and so it's just
it's ultimately that that taboo more
than anything oh my god I just got
bowled over by a thought that I had that
that's gonna change my entire worldview
okay I don't even want to speak
this into existence but here I go
so basically if I can deduce from what
we're just talking about here that our
social constructs on the right or the
left influence our thinking and
influence our sexual urges and our
fantasies which is sort of like our
biology right mm-hmm
oh my god so I I have been a very ardent
non Blake slater determinist right and I
just had a friggin Epiphany just now
where we're clearly describing social
constructs and sort of you know not non
biologically related sort of endeavours
that have a direct impact on the
biochemistry in our brain and the way
that we think and the way that we feel
and the way that we express those
feelings from a social construct and
when you can compare two separate social
constructs they come up with different
results in humans oh man I don't know
how I feel about that I mean I'm gonna
have to take a little bit of time to
process this I'm gonna take a little bit
of time to process this that's really
bumming me out actually but that's what
this podcast is all about man it's all
about exploring these ideas and and
honest-to-god if I can come away from
the end of a conversation with my mind
changed on something then I know that
I'm a better man for it and I've learned
something so I do
I do appreciate these moments so if if
we take this logic and and and took it
to its extreme if we released the taboo
on all of these sort of safe sane
consensual sexual activities
I guess fantasies would uh when fancies
go down like in it and this is totally
hypothetical total thought exercise
right like if you were a hundred percent
sexually sated would you have would you
have sexual fantasies like with those
continued if you could if you could just
snap your fingers which some of us can
and have any kind of sexual activity you
want do you do you see do you see or
would you predict what your hunch just
us guys talking about what it would it
would not take don't beside this what
would it what would it do to you your
fantasies would the increase/decrease
would to become more elaborate when they
go away like what do you think well I
guess that depends what you mean by
sexually sated you know it's it's just
because you you finally had that fantasy
that one fantasy fulfilled or is it
because you're worn out and exhausted
because you had so much sex or true
that's true I'm just thinking about in
the context of these taboos like the
taboo against infidelity and it makes
people want to sort of step out or the
fact that they're actually stuck in a
monogamous relationship that they don't
want to be in is sort of an expression
of their you know sex at dawn you know
if you believe in that sort of theory
about people wanting to have more one
sexual partner so if you're totally
limited by that then of course you're
gonna feel an urge to do that and on the
other end if you have a little bit more
of a sexually liberal perspective and
you've had multiple partners then you're
not necessarily thinking about that I
guess do Democrats have fantasies of
being they do of being in a traditional
relationship girls girls clothes horizon
masturbate of like having a strong
father figure tell them what to do and
like put them in the kitchen and put an
apron on them but I asked to figure out
whether that's indeed the case that is
really funny yes funny stuff okay I'm
gonna have to I'm gonna have to dig
deeper into this idea because I'm not as
I'm talking about a little bit more I'm
not so I'm not so sure that the social
constructs are shaping our biology but
rather like some of us have our biology
expressed and some of us don't and it's
like where you can express it or not
it's gonna be where your where your
urges and where your fantasies are I'm
just totally thinking out loud and sort
of babbling at this play alright let's
move on let's move on down the list
one of the notions that I really really
appreciated was the difference between
sexuality and flexibility so could you
talk about that and set that up because
this is going to trigger a lot of people
that listen to my podcast the difference
between what your sexual orientation is
and your proclivity to flexibility and
what they are and the difference is in
how one person may or have you know
different you how we have different
levels across across the spectrum so the
way I define sexual orientation is it's
your orientation to partners of a
certain gender and you can be
heterosexual homosexual bisexual
pansexual you know however it is that
you want to define your orientation
sexual flexibility on the other hand is
sort of your your general willingness to
deviate from what it is that you've been
told you should do when it comes to sex
and your willingness to just you know
try new things and experiment sexually
so some people are high on section
flexibility some people are low for the
people who are high on flexibility they
might actually even deviate from their
sexual orientation right so if you're
somebody who is heterosexually oriented
but you're very flexible of the right
kind of circumstances arises you might
have a same-sex experience even though
that's not what your orientation is is
gearing you toward so I see these as two
very different things and it's part of
the reason why I think some people just
have much more varied sexual experiences
of the course of their life span is
because they're just high on this sexual
flexibility factor you know okay so
let's define sexual orientation there
for a second is there is there a
difference between your ability to love
somebody and your ability to have sex
with them is that is there a difference
there in your in orientation like how
what how do you see that yeah so there
are some researchers who make a
distinction between your sexual
attractions and your romantic
attractions for most people those tend
to overlap you know the people that you
have sex about tend to be the people
that you fall in love with there are
some people where there might be a bit
of a discrepancy you know for example I
you know talked to some men who are
primarily you know romantically
attracted to women but they're still
sexually attracted to men
right so those things can overlap or or
sometimes they can be totally different
but for most part they go together they
go together
okay so sexual orientation is like who
you who you desire to fall in love with
and have sex with yes usually okay okay
and you're saying there's a there's a
separate you use the term dial in the
book on flexibility which means you're
just open to it's not necessarily gender
specific experiences but open to just
new kinds of experiences in general
right and you can have your sexual needs
met in a wider variety of ways as sort
of what it is and we're we're okay so
like you we I think we the research
shows very clearly that like women are
higher in levels of agreeableness and
like neuroticism and men are and I can't
remember the other one the men's side
but I can definitely remember them
inside but my point is is that they're
there we have difference and in those
gender related differences is there a
gender related difference in in one's
flexibility so we often talk about you
know women being a bit more flexible
when it comes to the gender of their
partner and you know there is some
research to back that up I see it in my
own data where for example if you hear
people who identify as exclusively
heterosexual it's more than 50% of the
women and about 1/4 of the men who say
that they've had a same-sex fantasy so
so women are a bit more flexible with
regard to the gender of their partner
there's also some data to suggest that
women are more flexible in other ways to
wear just over the course of their
lifespan their sexual behaviors are a
little bit more variable but then men's
are they're more subject to
socio-cultural influences than men's so
you know trends sorry what trends yeah
so you know the data would suggest that
women are a little bit more flexible
than men but it's not you know anybody
of any gender could could be sexually
flexible
right so yeah so okay so it's
independent so guys what you're hearing
now is that women are more open to
same-sex experiences and potentially
more open to a wider array of sexual
experiences who's not safe to say yeah
yeah and I think I think that I think
guys are taught that women are are
chased and women don't have the same sex
drive and don't have the same variety of
sexual fantasies and are less
open-minded but actually the truth is is
probably the opposite huh yeah what I
see in my data is that women's fantasies
are far more buried and diverse than
most people have given them credit for
you know most women in my sample I've
reported group sex fantasies BDSM
fantasies fantasies about sex in public
and just trying new and different and
taboo activities yeah yeah I've
definitely had that one I'm gonna say my
data that means my personal my personal
data might my data definitely backs that
up as well too but I just would like the
young men especially that are listening
to this - to help squash that
eliminating belief that they have in
their head which is that women aren't as
sexual as men are because really the
opposite I think is true they're as
sexual or even more sexual and you know
to not be as afraid and this is a great
segue to not be as afraid to bring up
your sexual fantasies or desires with
your woman or women you're dating or
whatever out of fear that you will be
rejected because women are somehow less
sexually open-minded or less sexually
flexible or whatnot because I think I
think that society sort of hammers or
did at least hammer home this notion
that women are chaste value comes from
chastity and that they tend to not have
this this just wide a fait of sexual
choices that they would like to select
from and so I that in turn leads to
anxiety for men in expressing their own
sexual fantasies and desires with their
women and it also leads to an inability
to come to like a real connection with
the women because they would how could I
ever bring that up she would never want
to do that if I bring that up oh my god
she's gonna hate me so this is a great
segue later on in the book you do talk
about
like how to make this stuff happen and
this is a great way to sort of wrap up
our conversation I think here which is
alright you've you you general have come
to the conclusion that you have sexual
fantasies you've read this book you've
realized that your fantasies of BDSM or
group sex or threesomes are outside or
even sex with the shoe or whatever are
not paraphilic they're not you know bath
pathologies they're not horrible
negative things they're okay you're okay
you're normal you're normal you guys got
that normal normal and your woman's
having the same fantasies or slightly
different but definitely a plethora of
them how do we how do we bridge this
chasm the socially constructed sexual
chasm between the between the genders
where people are I think people are
truly terrified to express their
fantasies to their partners whether it's
they don't think that the woman or their
partner is gonna be into it whether they
think the partner is going to think less
of them for expressing this type of
fantasy or if the other partners
insecurities and their inability to
provide the sexual fantasy where all
these things are gonna lead to a
deterioration in your relationship
whereas I can really speak to the
opposite I mean no more honest and open
you can be about things better so how do
people go from we've now normalized this
in our head everything with it is okay I
wanted to act out on this what do I do
oh just one thing before we get to that
that I was thinking about as you were
speaking was that something I found in
my data was that men more so than women
felt shame and guilt and embarrassment
about their sexual fantasies so so
there's a gendered elements in sexual
fantasies such that men actually feel
worse about their fantasies than women
do which can make it even harder for
guys to talk about it and that's all the
more reason it's important to have this
sex education where you can learn to
feel normal especially for men right so
this is my this is like my my whole
reason and having the the sexually
related podcast you know I talked about
this with dot with Miller and Leigh and
you and I'm got some other people lined
up to is because my main goal is well
besides having people come together have
 great sex but my main goal is to
reduce the shame factor and factor in
men and to and to help them overcome the
shame that people pound into their
brains so take me take me from being an
afraid person who's on you know would
help me get to realizing my sexual
fantasies or at least you know some
steps in the right direction mm-hmm so
you know where I start in the book is
just sort of with all the statistics and
data you know and I think that when you
start to realize hey my fantasies aren't
this weird abnormal thing that that I
always thought they were that's a really
good starting point for just coming to
some level of self-acceptance and I
think if you want to get to the point
where you can actually tell your partner
about your fantasies maybe even act on
them you have to have that
self-acceptance first because if you
don't feel good about yourself how are
you ever going to put yourself in this
position of vulnerability where you're
just gonna lay all your fantasies out
there on the table because when you
start sharing your fantasies your
partner might judge you or you know
those there there are all these other
things that could happen that you kind
of need to feel good about herself
approaching you have to you have to you
Vollmer book and I preach this all the
time
vulnerability is an essential component
to being a human therefore it's an
essential component to being a male lots
of things take vulnerability leadership
takes vulnerability creative expression
takes vulnerability entrepreneurship
takes vulnerability speaking at all in
America today to some level of
vulnerability and you need to be you
need to have strength vulnerability
comes from strength and you need to you
need to get your mind right and your
body right and your soul right in order
to become truly vulnerable in order to
get what you need so I think we've got
to that point so you need to be
vulnerable and then we're and then what
are we gonna do first we need to be
strong and then then we need to be
vulnerable and then and then what and
then you need to be good at talking
about sex right you have to establish
some kind of sexual communication with
your partner and a lot of people just
you know they start having sex without
really establishing any kind of
communication around it and so
that's part of the reason why I think a
lot of people grow bored with their
sexual routines because they find
themselves just having a lot of mediocre
sex and it's in part because they aren't
talking about it and then as a result
they're never mixing it up and in doing
what it is that that everybody would
would rather be doing instead so there
are ways that you can start establishing
a norm of sexual communication it could
be you know maybe you play some sexy
games with your partner could be that
you know
truth or dare or would you rather you
know there all kinds of ways that you
can just sort of open the door to having
those conversations about sex and the
more that you get practiced with that
the easier it will become later to start
sharing your sexual fantasies okay
so let's let's just be I'm just dumb
this down okay so I'm supposed to get my
girlfriend over and we're supposed to
play truth or dare that's how we're
gonna get there no I mean that's it's
it's it's hard it's hard right I mean
we're joking but like it's this is cool
and there's a there's a real risk-taking
element to this right so like what what
is your advice to somebody who is afraid
to tell their girlfriend that they wanna
nurse on her breasts like a you know
infant or something to get a rouse like
you know that doesn't seem too crazy to
me so like how do you go about like a
man it's risky right it is and and I
think you need to start by first picking
the right time and place to have this
conversation you know you don't want to
do it out at a restaurant or you know in
other settings where people might
overhear and where you or your partner
might be concerned about that so pick
the right setting and then when you want
to start talking about your fantasies
try and do it in a state and your
partner is already sexually aroused so
maybe when you're not in you know in the
midst of sexual activity or maybe you're
watching porn together or an erotic
movie something that happens when people
are in a heightened state of sexual
arousal is that their disgust response
lessens and so your partner might be
more receptive to talking about their
fantasies or hearing about your
fantasies if they're already aroused for
that reason all right I I was I go ahead
oh and then I thing when it comes to
sharing your fantasies is you know start
low you know don't jump right into
breastfeed me thing but start with you
know something that you think your
partner is likely to be into and then
think of this as sort of like a
progressive thing where you can build up
over time to your more intense fantasies
right that's that's exactly right that's
that in fact that's what I was gonna say
right then which is start small guys
don't jump into the 50 women in the palm
fronds and the pickles that's where I am
we had 49 last time so in that fit next
times 50 you got a start you gotta start
small you got to start small and even
you know me you know as crazy as it
sounds I think that there are some guys
out there you know and I've done a lot
of research in that not only in my
practice but like I'm so inquisitive
with the women that I've been with I ask
them all these same questions to get
their feedback about the men that
they've been with and like I think it
would be not a crazy thing for me to say
that like a lot of men might be afraid
to even acknowledge that they want to
like suck on their girlfriend's breasts
it's like you gotta just start small so
guys like analyze where you are or in
women I mean I just say guys generally
analyze where you are in your current
practice and then like try to go like
one or two degrees in the direction that
you want to go don't just bring the
chains immediately right you know let's
start with just like a little smack on
the butt or something or you know
holding her down on her shoulders or you
know just little little things where you
can start a progression and assuming you
know you're in this in a relationship
for an extended period of time and you
want to work up to this stuff you know
you can build towards it and as long as
I've you know with any human endeavor as
long as you're making progress in the
direction that you want to go generally
that's fulfilling right and like
achieving the goal isn't always as
fulfilling as beginning the process and
I found that with all kinds of stuff you
know you think you're gonna get to the
end goal and just be like overwhelmed
with the sense of amazement and
accomplishment but really going from 9
to 10 is like just as good as going from
from 1 to 2 but going from 0 to 1 is
probably the most exhilarating part of
the whole thing so just start slow guys
and you have to there's not a lot of
guys out there talking to guys who are
saying communication is key but like I
can tell you you have to be able to
communicate and that comes from a sense
of vulnerability that comes from a sense
of strength
so in order to be a good communicator
you also have to be strong you have to
have developed your mindset you have to
have developed your inner strength and
you have to develop your sense that you
you have to be able to take small risks
so we've we've covered trying to get rid
of the shame we've covered you have to
take a little bit of risk we've covered
taking little progressive steps is there
is there anything else did you talk
about in the book like what happens when
the moment comes with all 50 women in
the pickle show up or how to deal with
it afterwards or you know do you have
anything to say about that part of it
yeah so it's important to plan ahead you
know and maybe do a little bit of
research so if you're thinking about
exploring non-monogamy or you think
about exploring BDSM maybe get a
guidebook to like read a little bit up
on this so for so for example if you're
in de to group sex or not monogamy the
ethical is a book that I often
recommend to people that kind of will
get you thinking about some of the
things you might not have otherwise been
thinking about like how are you going to
manage jealousy if it happens to pop up
in that kind of sexual encounter so so
plan ahead but also realize that you
can't anticipate everything things might
not go according to plan and if it
doesn't that's okay it doesn't mean like
the end of your relationship it doesn't
mean the end of your sex life right you
you can communicate afterwards figure
out what went right what didn't and then
try next time to do something
differently so be prepared for the
unexpected and and you have to keep
communicating the whole time and it's
important to do that debriefing
afterwards as well so you can be even
better prepared for the time after that
yes definitely the debrief is very
important in my personal experience I
know that that is where the progress
comes you do the thing you plan the
thing you do the thing and afterwards
you got it you really have to break it
down you have to be like well how did
you feel about that could I have done
something different could you do
something different how can we enhance
this do we even do it again the debrief
is an essential part of an evolution I
wanted to bring up one slight variation
on this which is you know I've dated a
bunch of girls that tell me that
gangbangs like their number one fantasy
and they masturbate to like the whole
soccer team taking them in the shower
and all that stuff but they don't really
want that to happen they don't want ten
dudes them coming
all over them right but they want to
fantasize about it so I think that there
are also there's progress to be made
where you can just talk about your
fantasies and sort of fantasize together
right and like you can have an enhanced
sexual experience just being in the
moment together and sharing those
fantasies together and even just acting
acting like it's happening can be a very
fulfilling way of enhancing your sex
life and it doesn't always you know
their fantasies for a reason in some
cases right you don't have to act them
out and if you're not acting them out
you're not failing right what like
incorporate a new layer of shame for
guys like oh man I only have 48 at my
last one I feel a sense of shame come on
Jack standards are too high here but no
but seriously just even talking about
your fantasies with your partner can
really lead to an enhance sexual
experience and so don't be afraid don't
don't think that just because she has a
fantasy she really wants to do it like
we've delineated between a fantasy and a
desire and even an urge and a lot of
times fantasies are just that they're
just fantasies and that's and that's
okay but it's fun to talk about them
with somebody that you trust and that
you love and that you're having having
great sex with yeah no that's something
that I often tell people when I teach my
workshops and so forth is it fantasies
in and of themselves can just be a great
form of dirty talk and for some people
that's all the further it needs to go if
you you need to think within your own
moral values and and what's feasible and
practical for you whether acting on it
is the right move but just just starting
with that form of dirty talk is
sometimes enough for people yeah
absolutely absolutely I agree with that
so my one last question for you is what
after doing this work after he was like
4,000 people right you must have read
you must have read just a ridiculous
amount of sexual fantasies yeah and
you've learned a ton about people's
sexuality and of course you're going
around the country talking to people
you're engaging with people who engage
with people about their sexuality you've
learned a ton what are your hopes for
our collective human sexuality like what
what do you wish
would change would grow would evolve you
know five years from now how would you
like to see our national dialogues be
different our practices be different
like if you could you know a wave a wand
like what are your desires for us as
Americans you know in humans in terms of
our sexuality mm-hmm
oh so many desires um what is that I
wish we could move past this debate over
abstinence only sex education right
we see in the data that it just doesn't
work when the only skill you teach
people is just say no to sex it don't do
it
we see that in states where they have
more abstinence programs they have
higher rates of teen pregnancy more teen
sti's more teen abortions and so if you
want to reduce all of those things
comprehensive sex education can help
with that and we know that there are
models for this that work I've taught a
study abroad course in the Netherlands
for the last two years where I've gone
and met with the people who have
developed the curriculum that they use
in Dutch schools and their program works
you know they teach people actual sexual
communication skills and they have the
lowest rate of teen SDI's teen abortions
teen pregnancies in the industrialized
world you know so we need to start early
on teaching people how to communicate
about sex and that will make it a lot
easier for people to communicate about
their fantasies later on and I think to
establish happier and healthier
relationships so I think you know my
goal is we want to start with the way we
approach sex education early on and that
could eliminate so many of the problems
that that we have in our sex lives and
relationships related to that you know
parents also need to get better at
talking to their kids about sex you know
they're expecting the schools to do all
the education but the schools aren't
teaching the kids what they need to know
and then the parents aren't answering
the kids question so you also as a
parent need to do your job and step up
and talk to your kids about sex so that
they don't have to go through the same
anxiety about sexual communication that
that you did right learn more talk more
yeah
what's a I think that's pretty good
advice for pretty much anything but in
particularly in this Mis field when
there's so many
human happiness condition factors you
know play into sexuality and and and
real-life issues teenage pregnancies
abortions oh my god abortions if if
talking about sex and helping people
have more fulfilling sex lives and being
more knowledgeable about sex could lead
to fewer abortions and and I think
you're saying the data bears that out
yeah you know then this is this is like
a morality like a something that we have
to do we should be compelled to do it
and and I feel that same sense of
responsibility like I want to do mid I
want a harm reduction and harm
mitigation combined with mind-blowing
orgasms and awesome sexual
adventures so I really really thank you
so much for taking the time to talk to
me to get this information out to maybe
an audience that wouldn't ordinarily
hear what you have to say and to keep
spreading spreading these words of
communication and honesty and lack of
shame and knowledge is power and can
lead to more favorable outcomes for you
personally for us as society at large
and you know just thank you really
pleased that you're able to bring your
expertise here you've been a wonderful
guest where where can I point people to
find you to learn more about you to read
your stuff like what's the best way to
get the you know somebody better in
touch with you I've run a blog called
sex in psychology and get to it at sex
and psychology calm and I blog about the
latest sex research a couple of times a
week so it's a great form of ongoing
adult sex education and you can find
links to my books and other writings on
there as well are you active on Twitter
do you have a social media presence how
do you do it whenever I am on all the
social medias so I've got a on Twitter
at Justin Lee Miller le H Miller and on
Facebook Instagram YouTube I'm trying to
do it all awesome or I'm very curious as
to what a sex researchers Instagram
looks like so I'm gonna happen I'm gonna
have to check check that out but the
title of the book is tell me what you
want the science of sexual desire and
how it can help improve your sex life /
help improve
health outcomes across the world yeah
and again Justin Lee Miller PhD at the
Kinsey Institute thank you so much I
really really truly appreciate it guys
if you want to learn more about me to go
to Jack Murphy live.com sign up for the
mailing list I send emails regularly
with exceptional content I'm on Twitter
active there at Jack Murphy live
Instagram as well Jack Murphy live Jack
Murphy live everywhere all across the
internet Jack Murphy live podcast Justin
Lee Miller thank you so much and
hopefully we can do this again soon
sometime I'd be happy to thanks jack
all right my pleasure
[Music]