so welcome everybody to voices with
rebecky it's my great pleasure to have
Mark Vernon on again some of you
probably had the privilege of seeing the
previous discussion I had with Mark
especially are connected to the work of
Barfield and transformation of
participatory knowing very good dialogue
but I thought I'd give mark a chance to
introduce himself to you guys yet so you
know who he is where it's coming from
so mark welcome again it's a great
pleasure to have you here again Thank
You Joan as well and I'm very glad to
come back and pick up some of the themes
perhaps which we discussed before but in
a way I asked you about a number of
things and how you feel they fit in with
your work yeah and but maybe just to say
something as you're suggesting and Who I
am so I work as a psychotherapist I'm
based in London I have a background in
philosophy as well as physics I've
matured a PhD on Plato and in somewhat
in some ways what really interests me
and maybe this is a good way into what I
hope to ask you a bit about today I was
very influenced by this chap Owen
Barfield who we talked about the floor
and one of his key insights was that the
human experience of being alive their
participation in the world and they're
even perceptual capacities has
profoundly changed over time
and I got into this because when I was
doing my my PhD on Plato
I spent the whole time feeling I didn't
quite get to grips with what plato was
talking about I could sort of make sense
of Plato within the sort of logic if you
like a particular American philosophy
and so I examined this dialogue and I
made it stack up and so I got the PhD
but I felt the whole time that I
couldn't I wasn't I was really having to
sort of strip away aspects of the
dialogue in order to make some sense of
it rather than treat
as a whole and it was when I started
reading Barfield that I realized what
this party might be about and because
both Phil bases big point that when you
read someone like Plato yes be very
careful because it it feels a bit like
they share the same worldview or life
form as you and in some measure they do
but in important measures they don't
yeah and he actually got of this through
words so he some quiet arresting
observations he makes are for example
you know Plato just doesn't have words
like analysis or like quantity words
which you'd think would just be basic
for any philosopher certainly a
philosopher who's popular popular you
imagined to be one of the most of a
rational philosophers who's ever lived
and then you realize that he weaves
things like myth into his dialogues
rituals in vacations are there there's a
whole kind of richness going on and it's
only after reading Barfield that I began
to be able to make some more sense of
this particularly through this idea that
our consciousness you know meaning our
perceptual capacities do radically
change over time now he Barfield
develops a kind of there's a reason for
this in the sense of there's a sort of
unfolding or purpose which would be one
way of taking it but I the thing I sort
of was thinking about after we spoke
last was in a way can some sense be made
of these changes through thinking about
the notion of spiritual intelligence and
whether the idea that there's a kind of
spiritual intelligence that say is
different from other kinds of
intelligence certainly different from
artificial intelligence as it's normally
conceived if you're nervous at this
point I know that I'm speaking to
someone who's very much at the vanguard
of expanding the notion of artificial
intelligence but you know that's
customized get to speak to you yeah but
I mean it's also a real question because
I'm partly involved in
project at Cambridge University and
we're working on how artificial
intelligence tends to sort of eliminate
various kinds of intelligence which are
actually basic and we use all day every
day but spiritual intelligence if we can
define such a thing would be the kind of
the the outlier and that but that would
be really important to try and get hold
off if we can yeah so that's so that's
something of what I wondered if we could
talk about today this is fantastic
oh wow what a great set okay well let's
see how it goes well first of all I want
to dress both of these and I want to
dress them in the situation you did so
I've just been I'm actually on
somebody's area committee
I'm the external laminar and he's doing
work basically tracing the connections
between good far field and Steiner
and so this is opera most in my mind
right now
and to the end of the dialogue with
cognitive science I think is really
important but but
so one thing we there's two things that
they come up with that you know
Garfield's particular argument and then
the more general claim that we can you
know that there are you know deep
fundamental changes and what I often
call the cultural cognitive grammar by
which people make sense and so I want to
talk about back that's great and then as
you said this idea that because of our
particular history and our particular
default mode which I would typify by
what I call the three Manos so it's a
it's a monolithic mode in which all
knowing is reduced to propositional
knowing
it's a monophasic mode that says there's
only one state of consciousness it gives
you access to reality and it's mono
logic that reason is proto typically
something you do in your head on your
own and the prototypical example is
writing the treatments right and of
course plato violates all of those right
Plato clearly violates all of those and
so
so you know and degree to which that
historical view of mind is being taken
up unquestionably into the project
that's called artificial and talk this
is an argument I've actually made
explicitly I've got to talk about this
about you know that we are we are we
fail to take into account what we are
embodying in these machines that we
think we are just that there is just
this thing almost like a substance
intelligence that we just know what it
is and we can put it in and I'm
particularly think that what's happening
in Florrie cognitive science is showing
well the inadequacies of you know are
very strictly computational
propositional modeling of what
intelligence is and intelligence less so
I have a lot to say about that and so
you have really I mean this in a good
way there's usually something meant to
be something negative but I need it
really positive you pushed a lot of my
buttons and the first day I'm very
interested in the 4e approach and how
that is reaching out and where the
connections can be made as much as
weather very much so let's start with
the I did the wonderful example because
as I indicated I think Plato clearly
violates this cognitive grammar cultural
cognitive grammar that we have that
locks us into this there's three
dimensional models above mind if I could
put it that way
and and this is a question you know that
people like gadamer they've got but also
people and you know it some of these
people within the Platonic literature
like Gonzalez and I've RFA and I'll into
Harlan right you know this was back to
clear marker that the the weight Plato
wrote the mix of myth and the drama and
the dialogue and not just the
argumentation is actually central to
Plato's philosophy that if you if you do
the project and abstracting the
arguments out and then treating that as
what philosophers care about in the
dialogues that I think you miss it
platonic dialogue that's
I am so engaged in this project so just
let me make this one point now I'll turn
it back to you I'm so engaged in this
project that I'm calling the project a
dialectic which is the psycho technology
both intrapersonal and interpersonal
that allows us to realize via logos and
that takes it to the point which is the
degree to which we can like I don't
think we can get back to the Platonic
world or anything anachronistic like
that but the degree to which we can
reconfigure practices that do what
gadamer calls the bridging of horizons
right that we set the text within a set
of practices and that transform us in
ways that we can say are at least
proportionally analogical to what Plato
was talking about so that like that we
see things exactly as Socrates those are
played over the best but you know what
I'm trying to get out there there is
well there's a bridging of horizons
there's a people there's at least a deep
existential resin resonance possible
between us and so part of what that then
brings out right it is exactly the other
Barfield endpoint is how deep is this
evolution of consciousness is there such
a thing how deep is it does it forever
make the previous places inaccessible to
us right or is there something more like
a deep continuity between and so that's
what I'd like to start exploring with
you yeah well I mean just on that last
point and then I try to come back to how
Plato's working I mean I think actually
that the last points relatively
straightforwardly answered actually
myself it's that far field and I think
people like Steiner and so on as well
they haven't basically a u-shape yeah
yeah of kind of you know consciousness
development and so the point is not the
oldest states of perception become
completely impenetrable but that
contemplating them
actually sparks a kind of new version of
them if you like
in fact as up all this happens in
between times and so expands the present
in relation to the past so yep they're
bridges of a sort but they're kind of
there I know that they have a catalytic
quality I think oh yeah so I think the
idea is that I know I was I was reading
and Roberto Colossus latest book the
celestial hunter I didn't read him he's
a wonderful kind of cultural writer and
he he writes these these long books that
we've ancient myth you know modern
perceptions and this this one he eats he
focuses on the idea of hunting and how
the notion of hunting might have changed
over time and he starts off with
imagining our Paleolithic ancestors and
you know the old question of why they
painted bison and Oryx and everything on
cave walls and his assumption is that
because back then and this fitted very
nicely with their ball field bar field
in perception of things and there wasn't
really a sense of difference between the
animal and the human and they were both
beings of a sort maybe spirits of a
thought maybe they could metamorphosize
and change so there was a kind of
continuity of being and so and when
you're in hunting it was a religious
event because um it was about a kind of
an encounter with being and rather than
you know say a modern factory farm which
clearly rests on a very very different
experience between what is to be human
and what it is to eat meat and I think
the point about that and to imagined
past is can we imagine a new
relationship to animals in the present
and going into the future you know and
it feels like it's that's not a
straightforward question to answer at
all but it feels like it's worth doing
because it opens up possibilities that
if you didn't do the imaginative
engagement
you would never begin to conceive really
you just go around in kind of every time
to epicycles strike trying to stretch
what you kind of knew already maybe
bringing in this case ton of ethics that
just makes you feel guilty doesn't
really feel very creative you know it's
just about managing your exploitation a
bit better perhaps so it yeah but so
there's something about I always forget
where I started and make off along these
riffs but yeah and yeah that business
about what the you know the ratio
between the past and the present and so
on anyway and the youth shape that's
going on so that's interesting because I
personally you seem to be resonating
with my proposal that you have to engage
in a set what I often call an ecology of
transformative practices if in order to
read these texts you very much
can't read them just by being informed
by pushing care about telling people
what to do what I'm saying is but you
can meet but if you just read them to be
informed by the propositions rather than
being transformed by the set of
practices that but they were it's at
least analogous to the set of practices
in which they were embedded that you're
actually not going to get what the text
is genuinely trying to say so that seems
to be landing ok with you that's a
general idea because then because then
because because because I want to I want
to link that to the possibility that we
might have resources a very powerful at
our disposal the years since I want to
sort of put 40 coxide into dialogue with
Barfield because another part of it is
Barfield he does the phonological
examination looks at certain terms
he says notice how you know new map
right which we can either translate a
spirit or wind but we can't mean someone
can you sleep are the same thing and
then he uses that as kind of like
something like a fossil to argue
what what like that's been left in
language I think he uses that metaphor a
couple times even right to try and
explicate with the previous state of
consciousness
so let me be clear what a nonsense I'm
not saying that that there haven't been
fundamental differences in our cultural
cognitive grammar but I wonder if and
this is why I talk about participatory
noise
I wonder if we're really cut off from
participatory knowing so let me let me
try and explain what I mean let's take a
look at I know you know you're familiar
with a bit of this work here let's put
together so on one hand the world world
of the work of Leacock and Johnson which
I criticized in print so I I'm not like
an unquestioning supporter if it were
and then the work of Michael Anderson
and Dehaene and others and the idea here
is the is the idea that we are all we
also often use many terms that have
double meanings without making a clear
distinction between them so you know the
classical classic example of you know I
attacked your argument I attack the
castle
one is ones that are physical thing
wanted but it's not really clearly
distinct in people's mind right and they
sort of lead between them and now laid
off in Johnson have a particular theory
about that that's metaphorical and I
think that's I think that's inadequate
because what Anderson's idea is and it's
it's really challenging they're sort of
sort of penology quick cartography model
of the brain this idea is that we either
in biological evolution but also by
their hand and by oldman and others also
within our own development we can do
something like excitation we can take
circuits that and that have evolved or
have been learned for doing one thing
and we can exact them for doing
something else so notice what I'm doing
I'm doing all this good gesture well
that's because Broca's area which we we
we we originally labeled it what does
language syntax
all originally
was for doing fine control and
coordination right now I haven't lost
that use of Broca's area yeah I'm doing
it but I'm also using it right now when
I'm speaking and is that a metaphorical
relation no but notice and this is what
golden meadow shows my use of gesture is
not an ornament like I can't I there's
certain problems I can't solve or solve
as well if you prevent me from gesturing
the rest the gesturing is not an
ornament and it's not just a metaphor
right it's the two things are Co acting
together almost like distributed
cognition and that that Co action
actually enables me to solve many
problems and to learn many things I
couldn't solve now that seems to me to
be something no at least deeply
analogous to what bar feels talking
about but this is this is not this is
not something that we used to do in the
past you're doing it right now you're
gesturing and I'm just you see what I'm
and that's just one example for how you
know the cerebellum has been exacted
from physical balance to managing any
complex set of contingencies and that's
why we use it well that's why we use
balance when we're talking about justice
but we might actually be activating the
cerebellum because it's really good
managing the complex interactions
between many contingent variable begin
that's not a metaphor but it certainly
seems to be a different kind of knowing
than just propositional and you see what
I'm trying to get at so let's be clear
when we're done I'm not disputing that
there are historical differences that
are cultural causing of grammar I agree
with that but I'm wondering I'm trying
to like you know it's like other stages
like piagetian stages junk junk to
Barfield or is it much more well like
there's a layering right and we still
have a lot of participation in fact for
a cognitive sciences emphasizing right
how much our cognition is actually per
spekt fireball and participatory and
enacted in just the way I'm describing
so that was a lot I hope that wasn't too
much yeah well the thought that I have
is whether or not Homo sapiens say has
developed a new cognitive methods or not
and I'm not sure that's quite a question
that Barfield asks it's more what is has
Homo sapiens become more or less aware
of over time it would be more like that
so yeah so you know so for example if
you look back to ancient Athens again
all things that's really quite
surprising is the amount of time and
effort that was put into what we would
call religious practices yeah you know
whether they be personal rituals that
shaped all day every day and whether
they be the great festivals of the city
you know the extraordinary effort of
putting up building and buildings like
the Parthenon you know which way seemed
completely excessive compared to
anything that we would do now you know
with no kind of financial return and so
on and and so I you know you I think
it's you could say you know that like 40
or 50 percent of the activity of an
ancient Athenian it's more or less
incomprehensible to us it just seems
like it would normally call just sort of
like superstition and but that that
seems to me to be not very satisfactory
way of approaching it and it's it's a
it's a sort of it's a parallel of when
you read the platonic dialogue and thing
why is he described you know like a
whole tenth of this dialogue has got
what we would call a near-death
experience in it I think bother doing
that and so for me that the challenge is
more you know have we really lost a
perception of a great chunk of the world
if you like and if that is so what does
that mean now if you don't just say it's
just superstition and you know thank God
we've said it all okay that's really
good so that's really helpful
and so let's pick up on this so
so part I mean so it strikes me that the
two things that are not actually even
like whether you were it wasn't even
presenting them as in conflict but
they're not even text opposed because it
strikes me that a lot of what we're not
seeing is what like I did it called
ready hair that's what I was talking
about but we're not actually seeing the
gestural nature of our cognition we're
seeing through it but we're not aware of
it and so it's there's a large degree
and what you're saying is I mean it's
something they have to correspond to
each other and simultaneously losing
awareness of aspects of reality in
conjunction with losing awareness and
identity with various faculties it
doesn't mean those faculties have sort
of biologically ceased to exist but that
they are not properly taken up into my
awareness or into my sense of self is
that their way to sort of try and stitch
these two together yeah maybe it is I
mean again perhaps it is trying to
identify what Colin was talking about
but as you were talking there and
actually a bit of William Blake came to
my mind and this phrase Blake's uses
about the doors of perception yeah and
you know this is often now read as a
kind of hippie you know psychedelic
aspiration or hope that somehow
something will you know come into your
mind I think Blake actually meant it
really quite precisely because you know
as that famous encounter when he was
asked what he sees when he sees the
sunrise you know do you see am affari
ball about the size of the Guinea and he
says no no no I see the heavenly host
singing holy holy holy and I think that
um what he understood was that when he
looked through his eyes he could see a
whole lot more because of his acceptance
really of his imaginative capacities and
that's what it was for him to step
through the door that's why he said
doors of perception not just like
windows of the set yeah yeah yeah yeah
yeah and yeah and so there's something
about well
I mean let me let me put another example
and see what you make this I mean I was
recently reading plato's the Phaedo you
know which is the one in it where
Socrates dies and I wanted to read it
again because death is quite presents to
many of us right now with the global
crisis and I was thinking you know what
what does this what is reading the
dialogue in this present moment show me
that I maybe wouldn't have seen if I'd
read it you know 10 years ago and there
was I what I realized was that um what I
took Plata to be doing was he realized
that if if death itself is present which
it literally is in the dialogue and you
know it's sort of set up in the dialogue
because you know that by the end of it
Sox is going to be dead and he's gonna
stop breathing there's gonna be a kind
of cold waxy body there and what does
that enable you to perceive that you
perhaps just couldn't have perceived in
any other way so there's something about
both our imagination and perhaps our
awareness of what's present that sort of
takes off in a whole new direction and
the possibility there and I could say
more about what how I think Beto's feed
is actually working there but maybe
that's enough to to be going on there is
enough that's very helpful so any
reading this thesis and no Blackman
talks about it they forget this book
here
you'd probably read this mark I haven't
read it but it was in the thesis and so
I'm intending to read it I think taking
appearance seriously the dynamic way of
seeing in good debt and European pot by
barckhoff or a hundred a hundred
actually no yeah yeah and so this whole
way of seeing uh and and and that's
resident and you know and because the
what you were talking about there came
out in the thesis was you know how how
good job rejects the content distinction
right so car cars right sensations are
like we were passive in their face and
and then thought is spontaneous and free
but right it has no content so when it's
on its own it just as empty metaphysics
and sensations
we're completely passive with respect to
them and that passivity actually
guarantees their realness although it
content really doesn't but whatever and
that what good to see to and you know
and then it just seemed to argue I mean
you probably know more about this than I
do you know for know know that there's a
way of seeing in which that dichotomy
between imagination and perception is
completely transcendent and what's
interesting is again that's something
that 4ee cognitive science and
particularly enacted with you know an
active versions of what's called
predictive processing is showing that
the machinery so let's talk first for a
sort of you know somewhat pedantically
and then let's break it back up to this
existential phenomenological level but
pedantically what it is is you know the
machinery that you engage when you're
seeing something and I need visual
perception a very similar machinery is
being engaged and activated when you're
imagining seeing and that imagination is
so it's not a separate thing it's it's
more like the top down so the metaphor
this values is bottom-up and top-down
it's more like the way to top down you
know sensitizes you and the bottom up is
more how
the world is challenging you it's much
more dialogic so the distinction between
imagination and perception goes away
such that it makes good sense to say you
know you should practice doing a lot of
imagination because it will actually
transform your perception down the road
you know things like that in fact I
often use that phrase when I'm teaching
Tai Chi Chuan I said we use imagination
to Train perception right and and this
gets much work imagination and the
imaginal sense rather than imaginary and
so I think all of that makes a
tremendous amount of sense and so I
guess what's worth I take it back up
when you're reading these things it
seems like what you're now saying is
you're you're trying to and that's why I
brought the book up you're trying to
invoke this way of seeing that it's
difficult to realize because we have
this cognitive grammar that the
cartomizers subjective objective your
imagination perception mind and body me
in the world like all this or and but
there's a state if I understand you
correctly that is kind of between that's
even the wrong predicate it's wrong
adjectives between and beyond right
there's a there's a way of seeing that's
also a way of realizing it's also a way
of sensitizing that's also a way of
attending that's also a way of
conceptualizing but not as a distinct in
your head thing
it might is that yeah yeah and I mean
again the thought the case when I just
we're talking there is I don't know to
bring in something else that I hope was
illuminating you know in in the medieval
world and and I think it's even in in
the ancient world as well it was quite
standard to realize there were kind of
several levels of knowing and maybe with
this you know there's the literal
knowing the allegorical knowing the one
that's interesting me now is the
topological the one where something
starts to turn and change to to gain the
kind of an ego get yeah so
I suppose the other the other thought I
have is that um I you know I wonder how
it's interesting to track as you say the
kind of the various cognitive systems
and I you know I noticed the metaphors
of the Machine sort of come in and so on
and and so and see how there are
parallels and how they even the same and
but I mean terms of your perception of
the world things can be very completely
different you know dramatically
transformed and so it for me it becomes
a kind of metaphysical question as well
which is you know will tell you you take
something like death you know death can
be something about which you can't think
what to say at all it's bewildering you
know and so you get a certain kind of
analytical philosophy will say well you
know why you even buried about death you
weren't worried about being alive before
you were born so why would you worry
about not being alive after you died you
know which feels like a completely
misses the point although no no satisfy
some people and but they may be
satisficing because they have to stay in
a certain level of kind of awareness and
then you might get a second level which
says that I'm you know death must be
kind of avoided at all costs I can I can
feel it's a real thing it's a kind of
it's a monstrosity and you know we'll
use all medical science you know we're
trying to build computers that we can
download it load ourselves onto whatever
it might be you know and to try and
avoid it that might be another level a
third level might be
I know death is the kind of is a
terrible tragedy and we it intensifies
life because of the tragedy the tragic
experience of it we want to sort of
celebrate the lives of people we've
known and that you know that this is
very different from saying death is
nothing at all but then you might get
the kind of an aggregate level which
would say well actually you know
treating death as just a kind of moment
at the end of your life that's the
mistake yes that life is and the
continual was as TS eloquent you know
I'm the time of death is every moment
and and that and the reason why that is
appealing
not just because it reconciles you to
death but because you realize that is
constant stepping into new life yes now
that is a very different perception from
you know more sunny from the silence and
you know this this matters I think
because people it completely changes
people's lives and you know and I think
you can even say there are kind of
different outputs that this this arises
from like for example Plato's Phaedo I
think if Plato hadn't himself had that
perception which you know by the end of
by the end of the dialogue I think
basically has Socrates saying look if
you um sit before death and try and come
up with your arguments that say you
survive beyond death and watch them fall
which is essentially what happens for
the first sort two thirds of the
dialogue and they say you know maybe the
soul floats off from the body well no
that doesn't make sense and you know
maybe the soul is like the music and the
lyre but you still need the lyre
you know they come they have all these
dip kind of and he all of them falls so
much oh they kind of reach a panic you
know just over halfway through thinking
my god you know the greatest forces ever
lived is about to be unable to answer
the greatest question even as he's about
to die but that it's that kind of that
precipitous moment that becomes
topological and eventually you know I
think in a way in a nutshell what
Socrates are saying that is now what I
see if I never possessed life to start
with it possessed me and you know my
intelligence was just a sharing him but
the divine log or say you know and so at
every moment that I've let go of my own
perception of my life I've been stepping
into that wider perception so now that
I'm about to die that is just continuing
what's been going on all my life anyway
he's trying to say something like that
and the truth of that I mean I've tried
to express it in you know sentences but
I think the truth that ultimately is
something that is felt and that you know
it directly and you I know you mean you
know very much wantonness of course but
yeah so
well I guess all that point yeah it's
about this it's not just how to how can
we understand cognitive processes if you
like it's about what do we actually
again I suppose I've said this you know
what do we actually perceive and that's
why I think I'm altima interested in
this this this evolution of
consciousness because uh yeah you know
wanted to reach sort of reservoir expand
enable me to step through the doors of
perception like yeah so that that's yeah
that's great like I mean I like that I
mean I'm actually been teaching in my
meditation class lecture Davina this way
of read it that is not about information
is about transformation and the goal is
a great relationship with being with
yourself rather than having the right
answer which it's a very different thing
and I think what you're talking about is
yeah the fatal event properly because I
think all of the arguments for the
immortality of the soul
they're all questionable and the ones
that Plato says well they might work
they're they're not what we typically
want immortality they're not personal
immortality they're sort of maybe that
part of you that is conforms to eternal
truths is eternal it's like so in that
sense it's not going to answer right
it's not going to give you the right
answer but I think what you're saying is
it's more like no and I've been
wrestling with this idea
no not Facebook the idea of you know
being faithful to reality entering into
right relationship with it and
transforming and I did not intend and I
don't think you mad at that buddy but
just to be clear I did not intend the
cognitive science to be exclusive and to
say this is what I was trying to say is
could we instead of it instead of these
tube discourses taking place separately
from each other I think they come
together and precise the end as I said
that this new way of seeing is a new way
of
and that gets me in to write this
there's a connection but there's a
self-knowledge there's a self knowing
until knowing more about knowing and
again not just in the propositional
sense but in the kind of knowing that
affords by relationship that perspective
or the participatory transformation I
think that could only help I think that
could only help so that I wasn't yeah I
wasn't and I completely get by yeah and
I am that's precisely why you're
developing before he approaches and so
on yes exactly I mean I think the
ultimate motivation at least for many of
the people that I know are seen
especially those who come out of the
high daguerreian tradition that the
ultimate motivation for this is it just
scientific but it's ultimately
existential it's ultimately about can we
transform our account of what what it is
to know the world and know ourselves in
such a way that we can undergo and
afford that kind of transformation
you're talking about in a response to
nihilism I think I think I think the
cultural undercurrent of a lot of ori
cognitive sciences the meeting crisis
where they're coming into prominence of
nihilism and I often use you're right I
have to use the machine metaphor because
that's the language I was taught but I
would say that for example this is a
classic pointed 40 that we have to
ultimately think about not machines in
least in the Newtonian sense we have to
think about autopoietic adaptive they
have to think about living things that
our primary models shouldn't be
mechanical in the physics sense they
should be biological models that there
is a deep continuity and so even there
that that's relevant to this because
you'd mentioned that you know the issue
about what's getting left out of an
artificial intelligence I think both
below and above is being left out what I
mean by that is because of this the
three mano we're leaving out I think
really good work the
and data you know evidence that's
mounting that you're not going to get
anything like intelligence
you know artificial intelligence unless
it is rounded bound up with autopoietic
adaptive autonomous life Arthur to put
it in a kind of a little bit over
simplistic statement but artificial
intelligence will depend on artificial
life it's missing below it's also
missing above you don't want to give a
system just artificial intelligence you
don't want to just give it the capacity
for being a general problem solver
because although general intelligence
predicts a lot of things you know what
it only weakly predicts it only weakly
predicts your capacity for dealing with
self-deception for overcoming the way in
which your problem-solving techniques
deceive you and cut you off from
yourself your projects in the world so
we have to also go about we need what I
would call and I don't mean just logical
argumentation by this you know that I
don't mean that we need artificial
rationality as well as art of it like
you're only going to get artificial
intelligence if it's sandwiched between
artificial life really deeply met I
don't mean just a mechanical body
I mean artificial life and artificial
rationality and so I think that III
think that the attempt to make
artificial intelligence is actually
systemic like the way it's currently
being pursued although it's being
challenged by all the stuff I just said
all the furry stuff but it's very much a
symptomatic of the kind of metaphysics
that has produced nihilism so even even
if I have my I might you've seen the
technical questions I kind of a
commutation relevance realization I have
all of those but even outside of that
scientific kind of critique I think this
is becoming apparent and and and that's
where the scientific critique blends
back into a cultural critique which is
you saw the way you're conceptualizing
this which is really subjective at the
very powerful scientific critique is
also bound up with a metaphysics of mind
of metaphysics of self-knowledge of
metaphysics of being that is actually an
exacerbating the median price
yeah so a thought in response I mean
that for making juicy to that and the
thought that occurred to me is how you
know what you're talking about the above
and below I think when you get these
kind of trop illogical moments and you
see this in as in psychotherapy in my
own practice and let alone just by sort
of personal observation or or personal
practices it's the moments of of real
change that whole think as it were comes
together it's both it's a both an
important moment and a kind of lift of
consciousness yes yes it's a Eureka
moment it's not incidental that
Archimedes you know leaps out of the
bath and runs down the street yeah it's
not that it's not incidental to his
shift of consciousness in that moment I
think I exactly what Celia even his
self-image even his public persona all
of that has now been radically refute
yeah yeah I think that that moment when
you get right and that's what that's
what I mean when I'm trying to talk
about that dialectic isn't just its
importantly interpersonal but it's also
interpersonal and getting that stack
right like he just did you know then
when all those things click together
this way that you and I are clicking
together this way right and there's a
there's a third thing that opens up
between them this is work that Chris and
I are going but when this if you'll
allow me these gestural metaphors to
them right and this resident are
starting to mutually important resonate
then a third turn opens up between them
and and that that is I think that's
that's kind of like the Annunaki field
that's where like because this is
exactly happening when you have the
horizontal and the vertical then you get
the ear afford it and a Gog and a
powerful powerful way and that's what
I'm interested in because I think it's a
whole network of practices one forget
Socrates is also going to the gymnasium
let's just take a man's it right he's
done martial arts
literally that's also taken for granted
he's something new like music that's
taken for granted right so there's all
of this stuff and all these practices
and then trying to get up you know
well can I understand what dialectic is
so that I can read the dialogue
dialectically so that that third factor
opens up yeah it won't be it what I'm
not I'm not claiming what it will be for
me is exactly what it would be in
Plato's place but I think there's a
proportional analogy between them so
that I'm reading Plato at least look in
that deeply transformative equally
relevant manner other than just whether
or not have been agree with certain
propositions so let me add something
then because I think that another thing
that's intelligence would adds again to
put it rather crudely but would be that
that those protocol moments are also
receptive moments put it like that
there's a reason why they change you
it's not because suddenly is that were
your neurons reorganized and another
fantasy becomes possible but because you
become more resonant with wider reality
you know so actually let me just reach
for a book if I can just find it quickly
I'm so and we thought last time about
I'm Gregory shores book on theology in
the soul oh I wonder if you've seen this
eventually our divine double I talked
about it repeatedly in the series I
didn't well I didn't have the consent
the perceptual I'm gonna use read it
myself yeah I thought was really
fascinating book I really just come
across it and but this idea of the
divine double it seems to me to be one
way of thinking about how it's a
reception of intelligence you know
experience and so on as rather than the
sort of other self
yeah a big fabrication or something or
and you know in the richest but then in
the poesis sense the author paresis
sense but they also although all that
auto pieces has to happen
and but ultimately in order that you
know the metaphor might be you know that
like a tuning in the radio or something
the law frequency can come down or
whatever it might be but that's exactly
one of the me I talk about divided
double a lot in the episode and and I
try to integrate it with Agnes coloreds
work on aspiration this little again is
funny but you don't know his stuff are
now Dionysius
I highly recommend as well Dionysius the
Areopagite but let's look at this point
about a 2 min and resonance but that's
exactly again I don't I don't want to
sound like I'm just beating a drum but
this is one of the central moves that
for any cognitive science is trying to
say your mind isn't in your head right
through that lid back right right you
the mind is pregnant well it's it's
cognition is actually the ongoing
attunement me of all the achievement
between you in the world its co-created
by you in order says that's what I mean
about that's going back to the winter
it's not just spontaneous projection
it's not just passive reception it's
it's the to earn right the the the
resonance picks up on both of those
that's that's what I've been trying to
get out with the whole notion of trans
Jack tivity that like you have your I
think that's what good was talking about
but you're simultaneously right you
simultaneously reaching out with it but
with the autopoietic change as afforded
you by a new way of seeing them but that
is inseparably bound up with a new way
in which the world is disclosing itself
to you and challenging you and you can't
separate those at all it's not in your
head is found in the world it's it's
between you in the world and a
fundamental way which I think it's like
what you are also doing with the
confrontation with death it's not like
you it's not like well now I know I'm
you to doubt that sort of like this and
it's not like oh I'm so hot it's you
entering into the right relationship
right and you're getting different
aspects to disclose themselves to so
this is one of the fundamental that's
what the that's what the embedded you
know yeah yeah yeah to knit metaphor
right and that cognition is much more a
self-organizing process of attuning
yourself to the environment that it's
often happening some representationally
sub propositioning who then it is inside
your head to running all these
calculations and then you're just
sending out motor commands and receiving
sensory postcards from your senses or
something like that they're very very
different you it's it's deeply embedded
deeply did I mean better so I mean so
you know that the book the divine double
is you'll know that talks a lot about
amends are talking a lot about
betweenness yeah who's intact shoot up
my leg alright things I really enjoyed
about the book was the the seeming
metaphysics in patinas about the one
becoming to and so on he I think
exciting this is that this really should
be understood as a myth and a difference
it would be is that it's a way of trying
to capture the experience of being part
of this movement from warm yes I really
like that yeah so one of the one of the
things that's exemplary for me about the
tires is again how all of these
dimensions that are talked about a
dialectic
are present so when you're reading -
you're reading an argument but you're
also going through a spiritual exercise
I mean so those are similar - right but
in Plutonia said so like and the
interweaving of argumentation and
conceptual analysis that's a bit of
anachronism Aziz doesn't do analysis
something like that working with you
know conceptual intelligibility and then
the invoking of transformative practices
so for that's why it's on my life but
especially because basically Theory X
thesis the gnosis the OREA right there's
a
there's no deep distinction between
theorizing and theoria and then and the
purpose comes on and adds on and also
fear chip right and so those three are
just yeah and so when you see that's in
the in it'll happen now just gonna say
so in you know in Plato's Phaedo the
reason why the arguments for the
immortality of the soul fail is
precisely so you can have the kenosis
you know to the more sort of Fratto
rational mind it looks like a failure it
looks like a disaster and those around
Socrates start to panic a bit and then
they realize that there's something
that's absolutely crucial about that
happening to come and this lead to the
where we got to on that did you yeah I
get that
just say the last thing you said I was
just really wise who he was jumping in
and saying this is as were the the am
agog ik realization about the way the
dialogue the Phaedo is functioning that
what seemed at first like a crisis of
rationality like it can't answer the big
question about life or in death in the
middle point of the dialogue they
realize it's the cannot account yes in
return us you know and it's actually
necessary that it happens in a way the
reason itself has to kind of die in
order the this new perception can have a
space to come through yeah and so yeah -
I think what kind of side views is
continuous with Plato
of course there's four scholars would
dispute that but I think there's real
continuity a real tradition their
tradition in the Catholic Church or the
Eastern Orthodox Church
doesn't mean they're identical but
they're but there's a continuity and a
tradition binding them together I
dislike the way the knee replacements
are often dismissed on terribly - I mean
I agree I think that you know that the
the evolution of consciousness idea
helps me understand that because it took
as it were
five six centuries for what had begun to
become clear to Plato to really become
clear for betweenness which is which is
precisely the one you know there's it's
kind of obvious place I can talk about
the gue beauty from the true and wonder
about how they all relate and do they
kind of it really one form at the end of
the days that were but it's only becomes
possible for katanas to really see it
and so therefore begin to articulate it
in the way that he does and what place
constantly reminds and exemplifies and
affords is that realization is something
that can't be undertaken just with the
dying you know but it kept me at it
guess within discursive reason
description he's not anti intellectual
that would be a big mistake right defect
he says
so he's internalizing the point is you
take the description reasoning as far as
it will go because it's like what you
did with door son of window you look
it's a portal there portends that
transports you into something beyond I
and so what you have and then what kind
of says is well it's like it's like in
it's like in the Republic yet you go up
but he consciously goes out to them goes
up to or out to the Sun but then he
returns but I even turns back to the
text back to the argument so like
there's that that constant movement back
and forth between the OREA to get your
diagnosis and and theorizing and I find
out really really exemplary in a very
powerful way yeah yeah well I mean it's
often missed but it easy it is in very
and Plato again I think partly because
the details are often over you know read
over but you know the Republic for
example yeah you know well-known for the
myth of the cave which seems like an
ascending metaphor but of course it's
opening words are I went down to
glorious yes the point is right for the
word go and go to inter and that young
and so that's wonderful cause that that
afford to be circling back to something
so we're 22 the cave and this for
this sort of resonates with something
else right you know I'm off repeated and
I think therefore it might be getting a
little bit cliched and I want to try and
revitalize it think from Zeena's you
know when I first started studying Zen
thousands were mountains and rivers and
rivers and when I was doing Zen
mountains weren't mountains and rivers
weren't rivers and then when I was done
Zen mountains were mountains and rivers
were rivers but you know that although
it's the same it's also totally
different than the first time all right
and so that brings me around to you know
that you returned back into the cave you
go through disclosing aspects of the
world but the point isn't for them
ultimately to be special or different or
weird right and this is what this seems
to put - the point is like go out but
you also have to know how to come back
in yeah yeah I mean so this is different
I mean I think you know that that's true
personís and again another thing that's
often not remembered about Patronus is
that he was quite active in politics
even was to build a city named after him
and all that kind of thing yeah yeah
make maybe put this so slightly
differently so really better Dante here
because that you reminded me of data
with you up with it with the dissent in
the a sense because of course the whole
of the Divine Comedy is structured on a
dissent and then an assent and I think
that again if you the more you've I read
it the more I realized that and a
descending moment is also an ascending
moment yeah and it's something about its
activity sort of psychologically I think
it's not until Dante has a sin has
descended too so you know so the point
where he can't really descend any
further and because all those he would
in a near photonic sense he would just
sort of drop out of being altogether
but he he does that because then he
becomes increasingly aware of what as a
world lies outside of the descent that
the holes and contains
what he is descending into so that's
partly you know he realizes the extent
of his own darkness which at first feels
overwhelming and but then gives him this
sense that well you know for for Dante
as well for modern psychotherapy that
the love that keeps things in motion is
actually bigger than the hate or
whatever else that would stop these
things turning over and that would trap
people I see I think there's something
also again about the the the topological
the unanswered Romeo moment as you all
put it you know because it's very
striking that in the narrative at least
which of course has a narrative as well
as things repeating in every moment they
don't find their way out of hell by sort
of is that were walking back the way
they came and they find it where I've
held like climbing onto Satan's body
yeah you know it's very dramatic and
suddenly thanks they realize it's even
as their own
you know Satan's left buttock or
something but they've they're now
actually they started to ascend um even
as they're still climbing across Satan's
body and I think you know that there is
a deep psychological truth about that I
mean when it Donald Winnicott who we
mentioned before who I'm very influenced
by I think he understood these things
and he did he did make comments like you
can't really know about love and so you
know about the extent of hate or um you
can't really know about interdependence
until you know about the relationship
between competition and cooperation
again you mentioned thirds and I love
the idea of thirds appearing and you
know this would be the in other way
pretty would be the conjunction of
opposites yeah yeah the new the new
possibility so you know that's at least
one take I think on what you're talking
about there and again I you know it's
the point is that it is literally
imperceptible
until you've gone on the journey once
you've gone on it as you come back to
your point and the world I think you've
seen
you know the mountain in the river far
more extensively I would I would I would
put that but it but you you but you are
you know with the mountain in the river
from something like that I would say
it's something like I think it that the
more expensive or the deeper seeing was
always but that's not a new thing about
the mountain and the river nor is it a
new thing about you there's the idea you
know there you don't all totally achieve
Buddhahood in nature that's that's the
wrong way of thinking about it you know
that's that's a difficult one to wrestle
with but I think part of what they're
trying to get at is this sense of you
know and this is very clear and because
the finest are use the whole structure
of realities like that
that the procession from the wine and
the return from what these are not
historical moments these are eternal
these are eternal structures right that
are like the grounding principles I'm
struggling for words here for
intelligibility and being itself because
the one is beyond beer so I take it that
that's what they're trying to get out
there that notion yeah well I mean again
I think there are there are parallel
experiences in psychotherapy so you know
you saw might come to you and you know
with very tangible struggles with life
of one sort or another and you go for a
long process of engagement with that
maybe even be quite so long as sometimes
it is you know we are learning how to
get the body more involved and so on
there's no doubt about that but
nonetheless you know a long old process
say
and sure enough things change but then
you asked a person so what made the
difference and they might say to you
something like well I just know myself a
bit better yeah anything is but why did
it take so long you know but it takes it
takes a long time just to know yourself
sort of marginally better yeah but that
in a way that marginal difference means
that for example the anxiety or
something has a whole load more space to
be held with in yellow and so decreases
I would imagine that it also means that
aspects of the world are now disclosed
to them and possibilities of relating
are now disclosed to them that were
weren't available to perform yes I'm
trying to get out what it means when
people say you know what changes they
know how to feel stop right yeah I mean
it can I mean you might be that people
trust part of their experience more and
they know them particularly unbolted
experience they know it's got meaning um
it's it's not just incidental and I
think their experience of time expands
right yeah and they go that's another
thing that is really crucial in Dante is
that he starts to realize that all the
souls in hell don't have a present
moment and they're fixated on the past
or the future because it's in the
present moment that change is possible
which is another thing that's deeply
embedded in spiritual practices of
course you know the Zen question and
what is this or something like that yeah
caps on to the present moment so I think
time changes I think just the sort of
trust in a life actually as well changes
that people are prepared to they're
they're more they're more able to dis
identify with a narrow sense of self and
identify with the wider sense of flow in
life for example so that's an extended
mind idea I guess so I mean we're almost
at a time for me to go yeah so you wait
your truck before we start recording I
have sort of issues with the idea of the
use of the term intelligence here
although I I think you're trying to use
it the way the plane is used in
collection which is a very different
thing for my modern meaning
I'm not very happy with them that
terminology which is not to say again
that I'm disputing the phenomenon of the
year referring to and so but it is is it
what is the capacity for undergoing this
is the capacity for I don't want to say
doing it participating right this moment
of transition where you move into an
agog it and things are opened up is that
is the capacity you're trying to put
your finger on with the term spiritual
intelligence is that what you're putting
your finger on with that term you know I
think I think it would be one way into a
kind of cluster of elements say that
you've you've you say you come across
routinely in figures like a scientist so
for example you know another one would
be simplicity and and one thing that one
thing that the the topological the
cannot ik moves into when it moves into
the am agog occurs also what the x would
call simplicity and that's not a
breaking down into parts it's precisely
the opposite and where the whole has a
kind of cogent see and that can be seen
now can be experienced I mean if they
kind of say the ecology of the cosmos
might be able to be perceived the
experience you know in other way pretty
would be subspecies its own its artists
you know a timeless view of the moving
images of eternity you know as Blake
puts their I love Blake's for expression
eternities in love with the productions
of time you know knowing what that
really is about so there'll be the Trop
illogical would certainly be part of it
but and I think the idea of a unity a
simplicity would be really important
which again you know that they have
their parallels in spiritual practices
they you know the in the non-dual sense
of decided the turnover of thoughts and
becoming more identified with
and the awareness itself the presents
itself you know I think that there it's
it's that kind of cluster and that word
the phrase spiritual intelligence which
I agree with you is I mean it's only
used because there's artificial
intelligence though it's just a foreign
suggests which run a tease something out
here you know there may be as in
captured certainly by regular
problem-solving artificial intelligence
in that state because a lot of courses
you know Spinoza especially the like
version that you just quoted thanks for
L ative to Co determining with you know
scanty Intuit Eva which is again this
because the simplicity is you said it
doesn't mean homogeneity
it doesn't mean singularity because you
know the one is also you know the
pregnancy for all of the forearms and
for all of the extension right
and so it's one yeah it's getting to
denote crushed nor there's a lot of goes
back to what we're saying about this way
of seeing in which you know each part
you see the whole in each part and you
see right the part in terms of both both
like there's complete there's a complete
interpenetration of the parts and the
whole I mean that's what it is in
Spinoza and again it's comes back to the
new way you're reading the ethics and
it's very tempting because you're
reading your here's a theorem and here's
an act and you're reading through all
this argument and you just get caught up
in the sequential sequence and but what
happens is you get to a moment where you
get it like you you see and then you see
each premise in terms of the whole
argument and then you see the full
argument right impregnating each premise
and and you get to enter into atiba and
that's that's more work for those is
after than any of the particulars
inclusions on keep something you get
that moment and it's like it's a really
really powerful moment um and so I I
think I mean I'm very interested in that
sorry that means in selling a specimen I
don't mean it that way at all right hi I
am interested in the cognitive scientist
but I'm also good
I'm deeply I do Sophie I'm deeply in
love with what is it but is the capacity
within us and the capacity the
corresponding capacity and being that
affords this that makes this possible
for us
that's question I keep circling back to
again and again and again and again and
again not in thought but how to like
what are the practices that go with the
thoughts that make this that make me
sensitive to their supporters yeah well
here's another thought that I wonder how
fit how it fits in because I think
another key thing the spiritual
intelligence for Negreanu expression
with would say which again comes from
many different wisdom traditions is that
you actually know something better by
loving it despite of knowing it yeah I
have that then but in terms of you know
the experience of that is it means that
you your stance towards life is one of
more about noticing and waiting and
anticipating and and and intentionally
moving towards that the love enables you
to do and rather than being outsourced
or conjuring up or hold on s whatever
you know doubts I made the point you
know so again I'm a bit of noise Blake's
lovely expression he who binds to
himself the joy does the wing idlife
destroy he who kisses the joys it flies
there's an eternity sunrise yeah that
kind of shift and take a lifetime to
really live of course kind of knowing by
loving which is I think the most
important way in which we get bring
wisdom into participatory knowing I
think yeah I mean and that's again that
that's the faithfulness you have when
you're in love with somebody like you're
not trying to force something on them
you know trying to come to a conclusion
about them if you have any sense of
finality and that you know you've got
them I got you now I know you are
you doomed that relationship it's done
right it's done it's over
that's what context comes in and there's
nothing that ends it but relationships
can come back from betrayal and anger
right but man trying to get a
relationship come back from contempt
that is really really hard
well you know that better than I yeah
you know where you'll say you don't want
to know them exactly exactly
yeah it's okay it maybe it's what one
more element I think is quite important
just part four because it's come come to
our mind it's it's also the notion of
freedom in this and how there's a notion
of freedom changes and because it's you
know it's very striking when you first
say read spiritual traditions and it
feels like they describe freedom in the
opposite way that you would think it you
know so for example freedom is described
as service or freedom is described as
submission or freedom it's described as
a yoke and yet again after this trouble
logical moment what you realize is that
it's a yoke because you yokes your self
to the place that's truly free good and
all your previous ideas about freedom
say to do a choice or whatever it might
be were so the poor and lesser notions
of freedom be again there's got to be a
kind of sight a perception and the the
good the beautiful in the treatise the
Platonic terms is the place of true
freedom and that you want there aligned
with that you want to die towards you
want to submit as it were so again these
all these things which felt so difficult
and weird and is completely nonsensical
before start to make some sense I don't
know if you've read Frank Forex one of
the reasons for love yeah yeah the idea
that you know they're in love which he
calls a voluntary necessity because he
you know the ladies playful with words
without bullshit it one thing Frankfurt
is never going to do is bullshit you
yeah but
yeah yeah because I often say to people
because when people typically kind of a
freedom of the will they're talking
about that second thing that you
mentioned they're talking about freedom
of choice and I'm unconstrained and I
can do whatever I wish and I say well
what I actually want is I want I want my
thoughts to be as determined as possible
by what's true my actions by what's good
and my sensibility by what's beautiful
if I could get it so that I was
completely determined you know I
obviously have undermining the use of
the word that right determined by what's
true and what's good and beautiful in
love that would be for me blessedness
people often like a life because I think
the notion of freedom that is talked
about a lot and that you're calling into
question I think very important that
isn't really it's ultimately a purely
instrumental notion of freedom and then
you are moving to a different sense of
freedom which is not instrumental it's
about that voluntary necessity the fact
that I feel absolutely no compulsion but
I'm also simultaneously completely
conforming to something beyond myself
yeah which is it so it's creative you
might say see again in the baton say
it's the overflow it's it's that kind of
almost can't help itself kind of freedom
exactly exactly exactly
I like that notion Leeman Pascal news is
that talks about the overflow and that
is ultimately as you rightly point out
that suppose a metaphor for Proclaimers
that's his prime is fevered metaphors
for the one it over devote itself it
overflows and it it's not in any way
being compelled because nothing can
cause the one but nonetheless it can't
not do it
there's a voluntary necessity and it's
overflow I think that's exactly right
and when we most emulate that we are
coming into conformity with it I mean
platonic what I do
we're coming to conformity with the guts
of reality a profound kind of way yeah
well I mean I I feel that we've had a
echo of that in this conversation
because it's about trying to you know we
be I feel like the conversation and I
appreciate what you're doing is in a way
I think you're trying to be
seriously in the service of reality of
experience you're not trying to you know
confine air traffic and you are trying
to engage with it more richly and that's
why practices and dialogues and so on
absolutely part of the exercise as much
as trying to do the more in you know
intellectual work or that you know the
experimental work and so on yeah yeah
thank you for saying that
that's very encouraging to me because
what you just articulated is whether or
not I achieve it is one thing but it is
polluting what I aspire to clearly what
I aspire to so thank you mark I
appreciate you saying that I wanted to
say like the discussion with you I mean
it's well it's for me what if one day I
sort of the the touchstones of true
Villalobos is two people get to a place
they couldn't get to individually on
their own and you bring insight like it
was like you bring insight on and
everything like wow wow wow they have
all those moments with you and I so I
really really appreciate that well I
feel like while I'm talking with you
yeah well thank you and very practically
I appreciated it with this project at
Cambridge in the back of my mind because
I think it does it it's gonna help me
find a third position in a way relate
that so it's not like one versus the
other how can the these two
conversations in a way find the moments
of connection that then reveals a third
that's beyond both conversations in a
way excellent that's exactly that's
exactly that's great thank you thank you
so much and I would if you would like I
would like to have you back on again at
some point in the future I feel like we
at like starts as we were just
abandoning the conversations we don't
finish them much more I think there's
much more I want to there's much more
richness there much more much more more
innocent sexiness that I wanted to
really explore with you so I'd love to
have you back on again well when you
when you love a subject there's always
to say yeah exactly well that's exactly
you know there's no closure there's no
closure in love there's no closure in
love yeah well thanks
well maybe grab toys come back delighted
sir yeah thank you okay