time we went through some very difficult
stuff and we have a look at two
mechanisms that might be at work within
insight we looked at the definition and
how self-organized criticality could be
operative to get insight then we went
through the argument is to help all the
new mathematics in order to get a new
way of measuring and theorizing phobia
and implications of that I'm topicality
at least is a plausible candidate for
being negative in that looking inside
and we saw how that connected us to
issues like feeling of warmth I actually
stood up with moderate distraction with
an intubation etc then we took a look at
issues with a wiring and network theory
and we looked at Schillings theory of a
inside state when a regular network is
transformed into a small world network
that would change the network's
functionality in incorporate reviewed
and proposed that she could be
integrated together that inside oneself
or the county transforms causes a
transformation a later network into a
solo network with the cars an increase
in efficiency without much loss of
resiliency and that was the experience
at increase fluency and that connection
to fluency at insight what's already
roasted or
kolinsky and rebirth and throughout and
saw how logistical notions of efficiency
and resiliency were playing a dominant
role in describing and understanding
these kinds of mechanisms the 98th an
extensive discussion of the nature of
dynamical systems theories and we went
through the world of ELISA Herrera that
we saw that what central to a dynamical
Systems Theory right is the discovery
virtual engine that regulate a process
that has feedback or cyclical causation
and a virtual engine is a systemic
relationship of two kinds of constraints
where constraints are different from
causes and that constraints are
conditions that shape the possibility of
a possibility available to a feedback
cycle and that there are a few types of
constraints there are selective
constraints that work in terms of
efficiency and enabling constraints that
we resiliency of what they do is in a
constantly shifting manner alter how
things up how the feedback system is
reorganizing itself reshaping itself and
we took a look at that in terms of
Darwin's theory of natural selection as
an example of a powerful dynamic Systems
Theory within science and biology and I
believe that is where we got to connect
directly because most of you by that
time work deep legal people now it's
going to get harder and thank you okay
the hardest part of all still needs to
be done so this is the somewhat strange
lecture not for me to give kisses where
going to have to be lecturing about a
lot of my own work was that I did which
is bizarre and of course can be
narcissistic in self aggrandizing and
I'm not going to be a singer and try my
best so I just did not that's the best I
can do it I'll try to presented is
rationally responsibly weekend so what's
listed what the issue the issue is can
we address the central mechanism that
still unaddressed that was at the core
of why we started investigating insight
which is relevance realization zeroing
in on relevant information moreover can
we do it in such a way that it
integrates with this machinery that
we've discussed in the previous lecture
can we understand relevance realization
in terms of an available Systems Theory
and that makes use of ideas like self
organize including supplemental to the
Caribbean small world networks because
if we could do that then of course we
have the potential not the full
actuality but we would have a potential
of a formal logical theory an integrated
theory of what's going on so what I want
to do is try try to presented theory to
you comes from basically three papers
[Applause]
there's also a manuscript unpublished
manuscript that is not sort of picking
out a life of its own in a circulating
to the Internet I'm not totally happy
about that but so it's not beat it nikki
purvy on connections to technology
realization and periods of general
intelligence so but it's out there and
we wrote it around the same time as this
was being with us so this is not a
publication date that's been putting it
in brackets sort of it was right around
2010-2011 sometimes things get out of
your hands right
okay so what's the idea we need to come
up with an account how relevance
realization works and in way they could
be theoretically and also importantly
empirically as a formal mathematical
measurement and prediction integrated
with the machinery we've been talking
about that's at the core of insight so
this will be hard for bit and then we
will shift to the topic of creativity
which is much more open much less sort
of like that okay so the main thing to
ask yourself is what would what we want
to do is we want to course might analyze
the phenomena relevance realization we
want to try and see we want to try to
explain it in terms of more basic
processes and then hopefully we can
formalize our visualization in terms of
those make some more basic processes and
then of course hopefully Megan either
show that our conception of this is more
accurate by putting it into a right
computational neural network to machines
and see if we're starting to create the
phenomenon rather than just explain and
state and all of that is being done for
example vladats when it this is some
little craft who was one of the
designers of alphago some of you know
this is the system that recently built
beat go masters which is considered was
considered a very recently something
that an artificial intelligence could
never do is feed a human being at time
ok so this stuff is what I'm talking
announced its ongoing it's happening
right now ok so one of the things is you
try to get the right level at which
you're going to study relevance
realization now one of the levels were
very familiar with especially in
psychology cognitive psychology is
representational level super level which
we have representations we have thoughts
about things you know we
honorably make statements about things
we make pictures about things I do
suppose this is the representational
level and the problem with the
representational level is it's not the
correct level to find explain relevance
realization this has to do with the fact
they simply an argument that comes from
violence or Cyril pointed out that
representation are inherently a sexual
in nature interestingly not this can be
used to make connections between well
virtualization and consciousness and
some of you seen argument elsewhere
which what I'm going to do right now
because consciousness is terrifying but
sometimes physically okay so what's the
idea when I form a representation of
something I am NOT encoding all of its
properties the number of properties that
any object possesses is of course
comment or explosive so of all the
possible properties I select a subset
and of course the not Jack eyelid and I
can't go into great details when you
already know this from independent work
on the psychology concepts or concepts
are not featureless they have a
structural functional Gestalt and hold
them together
so probably how the pieces of
information are taken out as relevant
it's also how they are relevant to each
other and then relevant to you so I see
them to the can right I see this is akin
and there's a sense which you already
know that that's a very misleading dress
because there's no such entity in
physics or the can
given the physics of things you can't
derive this is a cat so the point is and
the point of this argument is that you
actually need a lot of relevance
realization in order to generate a
representation because representations
aren't inherently at structural no
representation celac are all the
possible properties a relevant subset
they impose a formulation extraction
functional organization on that subset
and that is not done just abstractly it
is done in a way that makes that
information relevant to us and some of
you notice argument Ward's and
oppression from 312 when we talk about
how this is out working in Pablo in and
operant conditioning okay now what that
means is of course you ultimately can't
explain this in terms of this because
this presupposes this you always have to
analyze in terms of something more basic
right so this is more basic than this so
you can't analyze relevant realization
in terms of their competition now I'm
talking about a theoretical point here I
am NOT saying that your use of
representations can't alter what you
find relevant or anything like that
they're talking about the order of
explanation here all right so now by the
way that tells you something really
interesting right away right I mean it
tells you that there's a deep sense in
which the propositional level is not
going to be the level at which you're
going to find the machinery of insight
because it's just not the right kind of
machinery for explaining like relevance
realization and the tree to a
twelve-inch realization isn't
essential aspect of insights I mean that
a probable view is read which this level
we not going to be adequate to
explaining that are captured yes on what
is the relevance relationship baggage
realization is this ability to zero in
on another big information party right
from the beginning of the course
avoiding combinatorial explosion
converting ill-defined problems into
well-defined problems okay now in
fairness to the serbs inference
framework you can say well they weren't
actually talking at the representational
level they were talking at the
computational level and so john maybe
your criticism is in that sense
misdirected and in what sense you're
right so the computational level is
about being information being included
to abstract symbolic proposition and
manipulate eventually according to
logical rules we talked about this so
the main thing here is right
propositional structure not the content
and content is up here
it's propositional structure its logical
syntactical structure and then the rules
operating
[Applause]
okay now of course there is a lot of
discussion about the metaphysics of
computation some of you might think
forces of Brian campus mental and but
this is a pretty standard notion of what
the computational level is okay the
problem and this is the problem was
pointed out by Turing voter who is
actually a starch he was one of the
generators and staunch defenders of the
computational due to mind
so he actually advocates for the idea
the cognition is computation so him
putting forward this criticism it is
very lacking of the pay very careful
attention to this is not criticism from
a hostile critic this is criticism from
a loving generator and father of this
whole theory okay
although it is kind of odd to describe
three quarters of it because he gets
really angry okay but of course one of
the ladies love expresses its office in
anger because love isn't an emotion
right you know that right love isn't an
emotion is something is because it is
expressible there's almost a emotion you
can think of you can express your love
by being angry you can express your but
by being sad if you express your love
like being happy you can express your
love I be in no way almost anything you
can do can be an expression of love love
is not a basic emotion you want to do
one of the many errors of romanticism
romanticism said love with an emotion
and then emotions or feelings and so
love is appearing and that's just a
ridiculous to the dataset now let's go
back to the earth
okay voter pointed out that the thing
we're talking about the relevance of a
proposition can't be captured in its
structure and in this he was actually
consonant with an independent argument
by Chania on a book called miss minimal
rationality now I know you may be saying
this when we talk a lot more about both
of these things it's like the exam you
won first we talk a lot more about
rationality and its relationship to
intelligence it can't do all of that
right now like I said we have to teach
312 370 and 371 is one borough of course
now what is what they both said is a
fundamental reason why you can't capture
right the relevance of a proposition in
its structure is because there and what
you see is that the relevance of a
proposition is basically your cognitive
commitment to it I mean how much time
and energy and effort you give to it so
the what gives with the propositional
structure when the logical structure of
a proposition does is indicate all
possible implication relations and
that's what that's what that logical
structure roboticist indicates all
according to the rules of others would
have overall the implication relations
now what how many how many implication
relations do you think any proposition
actually has logically possible become
any combinatorially explosive you can -
this is Jerry axe point you can't check
all the implication relations share any
idea thing where he said linking the
edges 138 logically independent
propositions and you could check an
implication relation in something like 1
1 1 thousands of a second you still
couldn't do it in the entire history of
the universe
it's that combinatorial explosive which
means what you have to do whenever you
are thinking of a proposition you have
to decide but of all of the implications
which ones you're going to draw and
which ones you're not going to drop
which logical connections you're going
to make which ones you're not going to
make which potential contradictions
you're going to worry about and which
ones you're not going to worry about
that makes sense and charity Act even
goes so far as to say what you do is you
only to be rational is to not make all
possible logically possible implications
but to only make me guess that the
relevant ones which means your
propositional right relevance can be
captured by your propositional structure
for your propositional structure defined
on combinatorial the explosive space and
the full point of relevance is to avoid
comment or explosion the propositional
you can't have I mean this is kind of a
weird thing to say but it's just giving
you a very tight argument you can't have
a logic of relevance it's not a logical
now what about the rules maybe at least
the rules but quickly have the rules for
deciding all of this deciding our
cognitive commitments that and we could
make that into a computer
the problem with rules and this is an
argument to go suspect that they can
shine although more recent version of
the title Brown is a lot better and to
give everything credit ultimately was
not aerosol but has the specter discord
complaining because we have most of what
Aristotle wrote we don't have the twenty
years where he was a disciple to play to
all of us one loss which is kinda
convenient okay what's the argument the
problem with rules is they do not
specify their own conditions of
application so let's just pick our rule
they've got more wolf as those are sort
of obvious to you okay so I think if
this is a moral rule you know be kind
yes how many of you try to follow this
rule so I'm worried about those of you
who don't don't visit me late at night
okay now the profit this is an argument
again we talked a lot about is also in
371 argument also weren't develop more
recently by Schwartz and sharp and there
were contract to the wisdom the point
about behind is right it means one thing
I'm being kind to my younger son Spencer
my behavior towards him would be right
certain kinds of things but be kind
doesn't mean acting that same way right
to Sarah my partner because she would
find it inappropriate if I treated her
the way my twelve-year-old son needed to
be treated what he needed to be shown
kindness she find that insulting and
inappropriate if I treated honor who's a
student why do I keep either Farah
Spencer that's creepy as an appropriate
I didn't pick John with that gross right
and if I do it okay like if I treat a
stranger with the kindness that I treat
her as somebody I know have a
professional relationship that's also
presumptuous and inappropriate you see
the point you can't now what you might
say is what I'll do is I'll make rules
for how to apply this rule and what does
that track you eight combinatorial right
but you get into in a bit of a dress so
what brown are the things very
convincingly is that all of this has to
terminate in something other than a rule
we called it the skill of judgment the
skill notice the language we talk about
it we have a shift in procedural right
there skill of judgment and of course
the skill of judgment I mean I can't
give you this argument detailed you want
to be my thesis where a student what we
do the skill of judgment is the ability
to zero in on relevant information for
all the relevant implications exception
Center okay
what does all of that show all of that
shows that this level presupposes
relevance realization in order to exist
which means you altima t can explain
relevance realization and computational
terms now again I am NOT saying that
computation can change or alter what we
find relevant just to keep reminding you
of that what we're trying to get out is
what is the correct theoretical analysis
and explanation of this phenomena what
are some things so we know if it so the
Philosopher's in cognitive science it's
called it the semantic level the level
at least for working in terms of meaning
the content of things they call this the
syntactic level because this is the
level of work
worth reviewing with sort of the logical
structure of how we encode information
and so yeah the point is well
visualization is lower than the
semantics in the syntactic over a couple
of things we also know about relevance
realization we know that it's recursive
self-organizing in some sense it beats
that by itself because that's what's the
phenomenon inside shows us so we do know
that our R is in some sense recursive
subsets up organizing and we already had
some independent evidence for that last
week
another thing about relevance
realization is it has to be what's
called scale invariant it has to be
something that is happening both locally
and globally in frame because looking
what you can't do is you can't have
write a central executive just to use
two terms over the blue right where
let's say this process that has to make
decisions about what's relevant and it
has to send that to here like this
Central Executive to make the decisions
about what's relevant right what is this
thing actually going to space well how
many different layers and possible
combinations are there of all the things
all the information processing going on
in your brain is combat really explosive
right you have we need something that's
going on simultaneously locally and
globally what's what is now being called
scale invariant because whenever
information is being processed relevance
issues are coming in sometimes it's
global concern sometimes it's local
concerns okay we're going to the app
now before we go on there's a major
roadblock that we hit and I sort of hear
that myself personally when I start
doing work understand that I hid it in
1997 when I wrote my thesis and I
thought about giving up my academic life
and the weather's nice because you can't
have a scientific theory of relevance
[Applause]
and then doesn't mean it doesn't exist
not progress another part of this
argument to show you the justification
here that kind of appeared so something
to be able to be good so we all know
that science works by making inductive
generalization you get a sample of
things and then you try and draw general
conclusions from your sample so you make
a class of things a positive and lots of
objects and then you try and drop
inductive generalization that's the
chorus line
you can't even that the generalization
in other science okay now in order to do
inductive generalization your class of
things have to have certain properties
and this goes back to work done actually
a long time go to Ball State science
page as know and others
so I want you to consider it this is
Mills example is I can group a bunch of
things under this right horses and I can
also put under this white things
[Applause]
okay so let's first of all do we agree
that horses exist and do we agree that
white things exist so white things
aren't like witches of the celestial PC
or so really are white things right
yes okay now notice if I study a bunch
of horses that will give me a lot of
information about other horses that I'm
going to find I will be able to make
inductive generalizations right you
study a bunch of horses and you realize
oh this kind of medicine works when they
get this kind of sex I don't have to
study I can just study a beautiful
horses and thatif it allows me to do
that we'll call that systematic import
[Applause]
forces share a lot of key features and
ws point argue that was all the left of
the notion of essence all right they
share a bunch of key features that allow
us to make a lot of causal predictions
about horses that's why we can do that
now suppose you study five or six or ten
or 200 white things other than knowing
that the next thing is going to be white
and the thing because you draw any
conclusions about the causal properties
of the next thing yes properties don't
you know about it away
like how i just said that i just said
other than driving the implications are
going to be widely correlating you can't
like if you know that it's white you
also know like in those life things in a
certain way give me things that don't
mark ways of defining white okay I will
turn it you keep it flexing mr. pointed
in a secure definition of what you not
to talk about like the heat absorption
as far as what we mean I like to but
other than if those are all based on it
being white other than it being white
what is one of the things one of the
properties were always big ship so there
are things about being a horse is that
all the properties you know how being a
horse it depends the works and we
decided by those properties as well
where what ways would be saying we'll
look at other things can you tell me
about this white thing of this white
well the thing can you tell me but
that's the point
all you're doing is telling me some
properties of white which are not ah but
is this what what kind of properties are
right it's not just brown right I can
tell me all the different things about
it you basically agree with me you're
saying that this definition allows me to
make a whole bunch of different kinds of
inferences and this one only allows me
to give you all the different ways we
talk about what I don't need to examine
any of the white things at all to tell
you that about like you I but I have to
examine all the forces to figure out
what the properties they are Bishop one
is definitional the other requires
empirical investigation yes did you
argue that white is like horse so like
the second part of white thing rather
than just white well the problem with
white right is it's not in and of itself
like a thing me study it's part of how
we study like light reflectance
now I think that light is the kind of
thing we can do is sign a song
and we can but doing I mean we have a
time to voices I mean that's the easy
way to trust us doing how about top of
these of all be involved
we have balaji science of being involved
other going to being grounded you can
bounce it there's no other important
properties doesn't tell you anything
else about it
you can't discover anything more about
the world at most and this is the point
most of our concepts don't pick up
things we can do science on so just
because we have a concept doesn't mean
we can do a science on yes I understand
what you're saying about why things do
anything about them that we don't
understand being quiet is important
however look ball you can also
investigate differences in size we
cannot simplify by being upon sure to
look at horses but whether things of
turns it affords a lot of things that
people so understand is a definition of
horse already have definitions in it
such as like DNA and try to deny they
should come about as we were able to do
a science on horses something that's
part of the definition of metal it's not
weak at that definition and it turned
out that the key to the science it could
be back in to the definition you're
arguing in a circle you're saying it has
a scientific definition which is the
point well we know it doesn't white
things don't go changing when I'm
copying available I think of what other
than telling me that they're white what
can you tell me about them I don't need
to tell you about anything else you've
just been telling me that other than
what is being horrible other than big
enough okay first of all when when we
fix things other sources we didn't know
everything
explosives right okay so they turned out
that was a way of cutting up the world
so that we could discover what kind of
parts they had what kind of DNA they had
and like that they actually mail
discovering one more things about horses
so it's got a bunch of white things book
I picked out a bunch of things by
rainbow you know my wife picked out all
those things what do I learn about those
things nothing I already do their wife
is that's how I take so much yeah but
then you also already knew that the
first quarter no I didn't he knew about
horses before we discovered everything
we discovered about horses do you think
back in empathy where they say they're
the worst they knew everything you learn
about horses white they also didn't know
like the properties of shaking why there
is nothing we can just no no that's not
the point
I used that just as a way of picking on
all the things there's nothing I can
find that all those things have in
common other than their bite and then
they're biting Oh what are you going to
start with more about one more left like
me but then I'm not talking about white
things I'm talking about white light and
yes I can have a science of white light
I'd admit it back to you there's a
difference between the science of white
light and experience series of sides of
one thing you keep talking about white
light and one part about white things
okay so the point you want to play a
tiny gap right is that when and you
don't know what this is and that's the
whole point of science we don't know
which of the groupings is going to turn
out to work this way but what we would
have to start to happen according to
know is we have some reason to believe
that right the classification is going
to be homogeneous it's going to share a
lot of undiscovered properties now what
else can be right you need the
properties that you're doing your signs
on to be intrinsic properties okay see
what's the basic difference here okay so
here's an attributed property this is
you treat this as money it's only money
because we all treat it that way if we
stop treating it as money it's not to be
any money okay now some things aren't
enough let's clear set this being a can
is only a can because we attribute it
that way if there were no human beings
using it at the can it wouldn't be a can
it would be this object with this map
and notice what sucks that's why we can
do a physics on its mass and itself in
its structure but we can't do the
physics on being you can there's another
reason why I don't buy the way you can't
do a science or everything that you can
label because not everything we label is
an intrinsic property many times what we
do is give it the Trinity properties by
labeling of the living
[Applause]
all right
so the class has to be homogenius the
members have to share many many
properties that allow you to discover
more things about other members of the
class those properties have to be
intrinsic and of course it has to be
stable the set of properties absolutely
stable you can't make your inductive
inference is across time or across
contest it gold was constantly changing
across time and across contexts we
couldn't make conclusions
generalizations of the nature of gold we
couldn't say you know gold is behaving
this way right on you know some sign it
in some other solar system right but we
can't say go to hit this way back in
your 4000 BC eight coldest is in some
sense fundamentally stable that's gear
okay so the class has to be homogeneous
Oh sir give me that's it okay now that's
that that actually really feels soft at
the interesting question because you
can't put functional property cannot
with muscle property you can see like
ultimately the physics and this function
is defined in terms of purpose and we
sort of decided that physics and
teleology don't act on purpose now
there's a dispute about because maybe
biological things act on purpose but if
you say that you push it too strongly
you get into that whole issue we've got
the cons that maybe you can't ultimately
talk about living things in in a
scientific way money like that money if
we stop treating it
doesn't mean the Stephanie don't have a
label right um so if you might want to
say that ultimately anything that's
attributed is ultimately also not stable
because human beings might disappear
I get that argument but the other way
around but it doesn't mean that
everything that is stable is necessarily
like intrinsic about how so what are you
pointing to your point you like this is
a goal and property so you have to make
it stable right
oh I see what you're saying how is it
possible to ever have stable with it I
thank you don't you guys table without
be intrinsic that's okay I'm not sure
that we think that also intrinsic things
are necessarily stable across all times
in context something like a singularity
of the Big Bang probably you trinsic we
existed but it don't make me think it's
a stable thing so and then that's why in
a technical sense you can't do and
that's part of the difficulty you can't
do a complete science on the singularity
because we don't have any concepts for
classes to apply to it which is why it's
kind of crazy to try to talk about okay
that's one longer than I thought it
would normally go the basic idea is and
GM is pointing towards this your class
of things has to be homogeneous
intrinsic and stable and as she already
indicated that doesn't work for the
things you find relevant thank you other
than you finding them relevant and we
can do a lot about that
that's good before the point right you
don't learn anything they don't share
any torque properties all right yes
they're not really
that's right my army and I believe it
but that's exactly right so what did we
give up we gave up trying to have a
theory of insight problems and what did
we shift theory things like problem
solving I know that there are simple
problems don't seem to believe this all
right none of their stable crystal
something you found to be an inside
problem when you're poor you probably
all find opinions at all now and as you
already indicate yourself their top
clearly knowledge in you okay which is
why right I think why burns crisp and
then I am decided at the party now you
can see why is criticism is so
penetrating it's not like it doesn't
happen it's just a long way to go you
can't have a theory of that but that
just is reinforcing evidence and effect
the connection I wanted to make with
thank you that's why you can't have a
theory Rutledge realization for all the
same reasons but sorry you can't have a
degree of relevance what you can do it
you can have a theory of relevance
realization you can have a theory of the
process being to go teach you how
relatively new lies even though you
can't have a theory of relevance just
like we shifted from trying to come up
with a formal theory of insight to try
to come up to a formal period like
inside problem-solving this is what we
need to do here - we need theory of
relevance realization now so one and one
strong connection I may just make if you
could probably think of another one that
we made last time right because we know
what those kinds of theories look like
right
so for example remember I pointed out
that Darwin gave up the project of
trying to find a definition of fitness
because if you take the class of 50
things some are big some are small some
are thought some are slow some are hard
something like there is no acids to
being thick and remember what he did was
instead of trying to find the perfection
that the Nationalists were looking for
he looked instead for a dynamical
systems theory of how design was
constantly evolving for previous
instances of design and again we forget
how insightful that was that was a big
huge move it was brilliant like I said I
think the theory of evolution by natural
selection is one of the top five
theories ever produced in science but
here's the idea what yeah what if that
how we should be thinking of relevance
realization what let me start it as an
analogy but turn it something into
something more like a derivation right
what yep relevance realization is some
kind of virtual engine of cost functions
that regulates the feedback that like
the informational feedback between your
brain and environment such that like
your problem-solving abilities are
always if you'll allow me first as an
analogy ml trying to specify are always
evolving they're fitted 'no student or
to use language from the course then in
addition to heuristics there are cost
functions and virtual additions of cost
functions that constrain the
problem-solving space so as to regularly
avoid combinatorial explosion
what would that look like well
interestingly and this is part of what
we were talking about here you're
talking about a convergent framework
that was emerging more and more people
are talking about these logistical cost
functions these cost functions and their
logistical norms regulating all of right
all of intelligence for example right
now you might have heard attrition first
empathise arguably calls the free energy
principle right basically the community
fixity he called he said it's a
potential beautifying theory for
cognitive science so it's probably for
the best
the free energy principle I won't go
into I will go into because there's it's
a very he doesn't a lot of work with it
all we all I need to do this is one
example and there are many and you can
read the paper in these thinkers to find
all of these examples what is basically
arguing is right there's a that
ultimately your brain is trying to avoid
being surprised all right and why your
brain is trying to avoid ultimately if
you think about that why your brain is
trying to avoid being surprised it's
trying to become as efficient as it can
in its processing so the basic idea here
and this is the point it's a scale of
very principle all of your brain
processes locally and globally is trying
to be that right is and designed by
evolution that you'll allow me the
antropomorphic language is always an
appropriate right to try to be as
efficient as possible now that's a cost
function it means the brain is not just
logically processing information it's
legitimately processing information it's
constantly looking for right how much
cost time effort metabolic energy right
evidence the brain does opportunity
calculation right all of this is going
to how costly is this how much am I
getting audited it's constantly trying
to if you'll allow me initially because
we're not have to qualify this maximize
its cognitive profit in fact there's a
theory of relevance which i think is a
mistake that started with let's leave
our expert on Wilson and it look
entitled balance then argue just in fact
that that that's what to find what
you're doing with your seeking relevant
information if you're trying to find
information that allows you to make your
processing more efficient yes well
that's the problem and the problem with
this and many versions of this is you
don't want efficiency to be your only
logistical norm what did we talk about
last week what you also always need
resiliency if you need a trade-off
relationship between them so you don't
want to maximize efficiency Barbara so
they see you want to optimize the
relationship between them right and we
argue that one of the ways of optimizing
the relationship between them is to do a
self-organized opponent processing right
now this sort of this including is
deliberately this serves the time or
more tightly to what we talked about
last week because of course the way you
try and make your processing as
efficient as possible is you want
increase generalization this
generalization means I can use the same
function in more and more places and
that means my functionality has become
more and more efficient where I could
generalize right but what was the what
was the important thing you needed to be
able to do is remember that discriminate
differentiate and you know you know this
in psychology we're always trading
between generalizability and individual
differences generalizability of
individual differences in fact what I
guarantee you at any conference if
somebody stands up and says walk walk
and proposes some generalize with some
generalized function somebody in their
hand the audience will put up their hand
then either ability is is there a lot
about individual differences with the
ba-ba-ba-ba
and everybody goes on yes that's really
yeah because that's just part of the
deal right yes there's like
generalization like discrimination right
there's a generalization like upon
discrimination no I'm not using
discrimination in the political sense oh
no no but like that's because like you
can't generalize oh my job these are
relative so if I generalize a function
it means I can interpolate and
extrapolate it right hmm so what does
that mean how is that discriminatory
because like if you if you generalize
like all courses have these
characteristics you're differentiating
that both horses from let's say like
like ponies were Wow but then you're not
generalizing when you're descriptive way
you're differentiating courses from
zebras then what you're what you're not
doing is of the larger classes of that
coin you have differentiating them into
two subclasses okay so because ation has
subcategories that word is what way of
thinking with as you move up this is
only one instance this is not everything
I'm saying as you move up a taxonomic
hierarchy you're generalizing and as you
move down you're discriminative like a
joy addition this Commission bless look
laughing more like like a process that's
exactly the point
yes okay now some of the work I did was
about how to talk about this and if you
want the specific than the map look at
the 2012 paper I'm not going to move
that on you guys now but the interesting
thing here is the way you get
generalization is you're doing a data
compression
I just did it like I'm going to talk
about this you have to scatter fought
and you do the line of best fit so you
can interpolate an externality so that's
what data compression does right so
whenever you're trying to generalize
you're running some kind of regression
function of it on that worth like weight
decay or something like that there's
many different ways doing it and it's
unclear which one the terrain is
specifically music I in general that's
all I need to talk about right now I
mean up the level of the biological
level I'm not talking at the functional
level
it wasn't the need for the opposite
thing in the literature we invented it
but people now seem to be using it so
call it particular ization oh this is
when you try and write and when you try
and over fit to the data rather than
interpolated why would you want to over
fit to the data what does it allow you
to do what kind of function does that
allow you to create it allows you it
allows you to create a special purpose
machine that only works in very four
varies for a very limited data set
sometimes you want special purpose
machines okay
so what we have is we have this these
bio economic right as we talked about
last time while an economic logistical
norms that work in terms of cost
functions and we can talk about write a
system up constraints in the brain all
right virtual engine now what's
interesting is you seen this before
remember what did you see it before
switching the gradual well that's part
of it and that's that's at a very high
level but more abstractly what did we
see this one it's time this is just self
organizing opponent well criticality
because what happened is when the
neurons are finding sympathy they need
to be new date compression they oughta
latch they differentiate this to degrade
out particular eyes so that new and then
they recompress imagine they're
constantly oscillating between these
this is self-organizing propellant
yes also farm up and scale invariance
that's right it's recursive in scale and
variance
now that's right it's right be careful
when we originally do this this was a
prediction that well the business was
going to stay we originally prediction
and then they tended to post actually
they received a beautiful combination
okay so arguing that this could
implement this right yes so I organized
a panic allottee does this and this is
the way in which the brain in a sense
can be constantly optimizing right its
logistics so that it's constantly
evolving it's fitted this for problem
solving in the world
now what this course says argue is that
this is the core of problem solving and
the core of problem solving right and
problem solving is the court of
intelligence right so that you to be
intelligent is to be a general problem
small but that's how we started this
course
again I can't give you the full argument
here you can see more of it here leo is
psycho psychometrist he does
intelligence a stimulant so we get work
right building this argument but I've
already given your version of this
argument so there's more there basically
what we're measuring when we're
measuring intelligence is we're
measuring existence the property
development railroad which a lot of
people are converging on this standard
is for example in his recent book what
intelligence test myths makes the
argument that what we're measuring what
we're measuring intelligence is
basically the ability to deal with
computational limitations that isn't
what common explosion so again a lot of
convergence on this idea so if this is
all right if this is self-organizing
criticality can implement all that
realization
intelligence realization is the core of
your intelligence in general
intelligence what should there be
between this and this what kind of
relationships are there make sure they
should they be uncorrelated
I'm sedate which are going to be
independent they should be highly like
having correlated and now we have ways
of measuring this and of course we've
had centuries of getting ways of
measuring map so that's my contribution
maybe you know that measures of general
intelligence are the best constructs in
technology ok that's exact saturate out
2008/2009
I'm getting this graphic I think em
number this is he here or not I'm pretty
sure there's hunter it out basically
they're more flexible your rate is that
sock the more intelligent one there's
been quite a bit of work since then you
can look at that if you picked I
mentioned last week about sort of why
that would be the case it's sort of
zeroing in on this now that's kind of
cool because right the right we're
getting an account of how the brain is
probably doing relevance realization
above and beyond heuristics and other
things like that from the beginning the
course of never denied it right above
and beyond the heuristics there are
virtual engines of cost functions like
that are operating listing
there are really constraining the search
space but in an ongoing involving manner
now we also said there was something
else that optimize for the relationship
between efficiency and resiliency last
class do you number what else it was
small Merlot small neural networks to
remember small road networks optimize
between the efficiency add resilience if
you remember that so small world
networks would also in with the away of
implementing relevance realization yes
the relevance realization is the dynamic
optimization between efficiency and
resiliency right and small little
networks are doing that as well then we
should be able to do the same thing we
should be able to do that right
so the more your brain is wiring like a
small world network is still in very
manner the more intelligent you should
be yes that's the nothing language I'll
2012
[Applause]
now what I'm showing you what we what we
argued independently of climate inside
over here we're just trying to solve
this sort of core problem is at least I
mean there's other machinery that's
going on in relevance realize this and
this is one talked about other things
like what a processing between exploring
and exploiting and stuff like that but
here's what we did talked about and
what's interesting about it is it's
getting more and more empirical
conformation this were just the first
two right and what's deeply I think very
interesting for this course is that very
same machinery the machinery had
independent people we're talking about
to explain inside we have the
possibility right of a genuine formal
theory not insight it can't be such a
thing but what's going on in terms of
problem solving
inside problem solving possibly as we
talked about a lot of time was right and
there is a fundamental relationship
between this kind of violating this kind
of wiring insight is making use of this
machinery but what was missing from the
theory of insight is just but how's the
relevance realization going on about
machinery there is how what's going on
in that machinery
the same machinery that we use to
explain insight is part of a deeper
theory of explaining how the brain
avoids combinatorial explosion how the
brain does relevance realization how
above and beyond heuristics it
constrains the search space this is the
hardest part of the whole course but not
interrogation
so the gradual increase in criticality
in a sense yes what I mean so one of the
things you can do is you could train
your cognition to get better at creating
greater and greater integrations of
things continue wait hang on eyes but
you also have to train it at getting
better better breaking those up now
where are we seeing a kind of practice
that does that for you what army I
didn't hear what you're saying yeah
mindfulness now here's where you can get
it to theoretical problems and Senator
Chuck she wrestles with this again I
mean she says you have a lot of a lot of
piece of you want does that mean we're
changing our intelligence the problem is
if we do not then we're blurring a
distinction that he thinks is very
important we should reserve the term
intelligence for this stable sort of
biologically given basis of your brain's
ability to avoid combinatorial explosion
right he says instead when you use your
intelligence to develop improved skills
of problem-solving like hey you acquire
skills right then we should stop talking
about intelligence we should stop
evoke rationality and see and then
you've got a full argument about the
fact that you can show very powerfully
that you can get just as strong positive
manifold for all of our rationality
tests as you can for our intelligence
tests and then what you can do is you
can take those two manifolds and you can
ask how tightly are they correlated with
each other our best psychometric test
all the rationality tests cos we've been
doing rationality tests for about 40-50
years they all strongly manifold
together we already know from by
intelligence that these all strongly
manifold together what's the correlation
between the intelligence manifold and
the rationality if they were the same
thing it should be a very high
correlation right but at maximum 23 so
your intelligence is necessary but
nowhere sufficient for your rationality
yes one of the things you can rely on
right yes yes yes yes and that's what
he's that's the whole point about the
book what intelligence test meant is
they don't measure rationality and the
thing is when he goes on to argue with
although IQ is a great predictor you
know it's a much better predictor of how
well people do in their life rationality
now you have to broaden your notion of
rationality you have to take into
account this course right doesn't just
mean improve inference it doesn't just
mean being logical because we've seen
that nationality should also be improved
problem-solving it should be an
improvement of your insight abilities
one of the ways of waking yourself more
rational is that she said to practice
mindfulness
no no of course not there's other things
you have to improve your inferences you
can acquire the skill of actively
mindedness which teaches you how to look
for the wait heuristics are biasing your
inference and how to improve right how
to work I guess and reduce the impact of
those heuristics and biases your
inference and thereby improve your
inference that also makes you more right
allows you to better use your inference
machinery to solve problems the kind of
thing we do in 371 mother well you can
just let it learn anyone you can just
say well any improvement in
problem-solving is intelligence and
that's fine okay he doesn't have a
metaphysical or unit again stuff he says
but if you do that then we lose like
these different kinds of predictions
we're capable of making and that's all
that's all we get ever that's the only
basis we can ever use for justifying the
distinctions we make in science well
those are the four different kinds of
predictions yes
so you understand what I'm saying it's
not like I'm saying God is above and
saying no this is intelligence and this
is nationality he's saying like we keep
them apart because that way we avoid
theoretical confusion and we get
empirical clarity is that okay okay
people there are there studies they show
over time that people of intelligence
change like invisible IQ they're really
not measuring up changes brush Valley so
which measures you mean within an
individual I mean across generations
like this one of them I feel like
physically people take it and get
different result that will stuff like
the likes of Aaron saying it okay yeah
so yeah there's a lot of controversy
about how stable it is or not there
seems to be some education that you can
do things so take it like this that you
focus
right there seems to be some indication
that people might be capable of altering
core working memory capacity which would
make an impact on your fundamental
intelligence don't know okay here's what
you do by the way another thing that
correlates very well with measures of
intelligence are managers of working
memory but why might that be the case
given what we're saying here what's hot
he talked a bit about this and there's a
two different models of working memory
okay so one model is the tabletop model
right at the Miller model you have a
limited space so it's like your counter
looking memory your counter and your
long-term storage is your kitchen
cupboard and you bring stuff out you put
it on the counter if you do stuff and
then you put it away and then you have
limited space the problem with the
limited counter model mrs.lin hashers
workers saluting somebody sit tool stop
what does it is explain how can you get
more stuff through working memory
chunking and what is it to make a chunk
to find pieces of information relevant
to each other and then you subjectively
organize it which is code for saying you
make sure that it's highly relevant to
you you do lock the relevance
realization her model is that working
memory is a relevant filter it's a
higher-order relevant filter lines up
with all of this
ah sure she's here at your feet she's
brilliant what she can tell me the
coolest research is that and this is
this could go towards supporting what
Chloe was just saying and maybe messing
things up even more but it's exciting
and interesting not because we had this
sort of standard model that as people
get older they get stupider because
their ability to like keep things out of
working like the hope like food like to
avoid distractors Goes Down and all of
that is disaster right because again
right you're thinking of they're
emphasizing one side of this what is
turning out is and she's now they've
done several studies there was one that
was just in the news last week right it
was actually meet that goons Wow right
but a lot of its converging on the idea
that older brains or wider grins
because what they do is they don't as
rapidly screen off a lot of stuff that
has on depend on them to bring in I
don't want that I look at alcohol I did
work better than your coffee but older
brains actually don't screen off as
rapidly like they don't ignore as much
irrelevant things and so what happens is
once if our older brains tend to be
wiser they could just see connections
and have insights that younger brains
aren't capable of doing especially get
this in ill-defined messy social
situations so we shouldn't be checking
our people away after all so there's
you know again that's of course that's
going to be affected by how nasty they
are interest they are how horrible new
life is gone and all that stuff but the
research is right there's been now
several studies okay we got it we got a
stop soon okay
yes um I guess like looking at this like
unless I don't impose that on I
registered but I've talked about how
philosophy majors have like one of the
highest IQs on a book at nature and it
just like it's occurred to me that like
philosophy acquires a lot of like
grading frame making frames and it would
make sense that like a person who's like
could have philosophy would be better at
like relevance realization therefore
they have a higher that's the old
argument I mean we do this a lot of 371
the idea that job what the primary job
is of philosophy is to Train rationality
where again I'm asking you not to hear
the word rationality as meaning logic
its meaning optimizing your imprints
optimizing your insight optimizing your
intuition optimizing your ability to
internalize other people's perspectives
these are all the things that ancient
philosophy talked a lot about and so the
degree to which you're doing those
things in philosophy is that reads which
you're training the abilities now just
to be a little bit more self-critical
and I have a degree in philosophy so
long to do it there's a lot of criticism
within sort of academic philosophy that
academic philosophy has not until very
recently been concerning itself very
much with wisdom it has gotten locked
into conceptual analysis and has has
only recently gone back to the ancient
idea that the primary function of
philosophy is to Train rationality again
broadly construed in the way that I just
indicated so I would say yes to you but
with that important qualification all
right okay so we're now done talking
about inside
what else is our kitchen I mean there's
more science to do but what I mean is
what I tried to show you is that we're
sort of beyond both to search inference
framework and additional framework and
we're increasingly using a cognitive
science theory of the coast of pure
psychology theory there's all these lots
of psychology what we've been doing but
neuroscience and ideas from artificial
intelligence are playing an increasing
role in trying to figure out what the
core of our problem-solving abilities
yeah the question I run Eternity wins
and get going and then we'll take a
break in event right is the question
that was brought up in one of the
previous lectures and then was
specifically brought by the market Boden
who comes out of the search efforts
framework the computational framework
this was you know a book originally a
1990 Margaret Bolton and this is the
question whether or not creativity is
anything above and beyond inside
[Applause]
so what both in fact argues is her
theory our creativity is basically read
she made the distinction between
personal and what she calls historical
creativity personal creativity is
basically when you change your problem
space because that you're capable of
coming to a conclusion that you couldn't
come to before historical creativity is
when an individual does that for a
shared problem space so there's also the
problem that a bunch of us can't share
somebody comes along go no but we can
figure the public space this way we go
ah and then we can solve our problem now
I don't think she would disagree with
this what I'm going to say basically
what she's saying that is creativity is
just deep inside creativity is you
couldn't think of something restructure
the problem space and now you can think
of it that's it that's creativity
I'm not saying she's right I'm saying
that this was this question was brought
up and I'm using her as somebody an
important thinker in the field who seems
to advance
I think you make it a strong
interpretive case that she's dancing the
thesis that creativity is just a synonym
for insight we can get a little bit
clearer what creativity is with what
we're trying to emphasize sort of you
know how radical these insight is sort
of how influential or important it is to
you as an individual or to a group so
that brings up the question then or is
that it is that all of the common
machine eree that's going on in insight
now what I want to do okay so obviously
you already know and I told you this
ahead of time there's somebody who jumps
on that bandwagon and says there's
nothing to creativity it doesn't really
exist it who might that be right Bert
that's where he has papers on that run
when I take the car to the movie but due
to cars releases okay so but what what
does instead do the opposite because
although many of you are immediately
shaking you're doing this not even yes
there's much more to creativity trying
to get that going and establishing that
turns out to be really hard
so whatever totals to you the first
hypothesis we'll take a look at and then
after give you the proposal to take a
break and then take a look at it okay
here's the first hypothesis is that when
we're talking about creativity we're
talking about another process that is
used to trigger insight so nobody denies
let's be clear about this nobody denies
that insight has an important role in
creativity it's possible to be creative
without it being insightful yeah there
is insight required like expressing the
problem you can solve before then you
solve it right so it can be creative
without having a problem right right and
so that's a good point and that'll
because - so let me what I should have
been more clear what I meant by
everybody thinks that insight is in some
sense relevant to creativity Zoe's right
so it sounds like really close right
because what some people will argue will
see this later is that although
creativity is using the shame machinery
of insight is using it in a
fundamentally different way that we
wouldn't call them sight so we'll come
back to that but the first proposal is
this idea right that so what creativity
is is basically the use of analogy in
order to provoke inside
and this is a very popular idea now I
although there's a distinction between
these two terms the distinction doesn't
turn out to be highly relevant in this
discussion so when I say analogy I'm
also thinking I'm extending it to mean
things like metaphor as well even though
they're not the exact same thing I got
that but but here's a theory of
creativity creative person is somebody
who knows how to use analogy in order to
provoke insight which sounds very
documents is that - with a lot of
discourses of creativity so here's the
first thing the first time you're going
to look at this is to say right yes
instead just playing a rule but instead
is much more kind of the result of
creativity it's not identical to
creativity there's creativity zooming
analogy to provoke inside ok so what
this DV depends on of course is an
independence of analogy insight and the
capacity to be able to explain how an
old analogy causes insight correct yes
I'm talking about well I don't know I
was going to answer you then I thought I
know how you think what we said come to
know how you think what do you mean by
that well as opposed to like
sure it is you're solving all kinds of
problems when you're trying to make are
it's not right okay so but why does it
have to be the case so if it's not about
solving problems does that mean that any
random generation of new things by the
financial environment is creativity
okay then there is a product that is out
there it's not a proper part of
psychology and we should stop talking
about it in psychology it's quite
physical chemistry right that's what I'm
asking you
okay the problem is if you if you remove
it if you remove the idea that you're
pursuing a goal then you have to give me
another way of distinguishing it from
all the other non-role directive things
and don't just say a human did because
that's to the bestest model in the very
point we're trying to clarify the
problem area is usually like one crank
okay now you're saying something better
keep going across people we're all gonna
look for the same sort of solutions
where is it you gave a bunch of people
the task of making that particular
sports signal well no I mean to some
degree I mean it has to have Sami
intelligibility right like I can't just
call something and that that's enough
right so is that weird
so then so what you're not suggesting we
should say that gives an idea the month
wedding miss and of course or maybe
creativity is the kind of problem
solving in which multiple solutions are
available to you now that is a good
thing to say but then we have to how do
we distinguish that just from really
easy to solve problems because one of
the defining features are really easy
really easy to solve problems are that
they have many equally good answers
because that means you can get to your
goals take many different pathways to
the search space and you don't want to
say that creativity is the same as
solving easy to solve problems it might
be harder okay so now it's tricky now
you got to tell me how it can have
multiple answers and yet still be harder
than an input problem yes yes so I think
one thing is you're saying if it's just
a random generation of things that's not
really creativity it's not useful I
think some in some ways crazy it's the
random generation of things does it have
the effect because we don't all think
that the same things are creative it
need to be useful so mother art painter
might be like oh this is so creative and
so moms like no that's terrible why
would who pay money for that because
they don't think it's creative cuz they
don't think it's useful true so then it
is in sense like one part right of
generation 1 part personal
interpretation based on usefulness which
is already like they're not clearly
defined parent which relates to
relevance cooking also determined how
it's not necessarily solving a problem
because you look at the person is just
creating stuff I mean they're also
creating it so people to them so it
could be a problem hoping that they're
making but it helpful like well ok well
you said many different things that I
can't respond to all
but one thing is I'm still having
difficulty seeing how the random
generation that somebody finds useful
would be a good definite because that's
happening all the time it's happening in
this room all there's lots of sort of
random happening and you can find
some of it useful that we just put a
mine story is that all we want to say
creativity it maybe we did it and
finally death and then we should stop
talking about it in psychology because
it's not part of psychology it's part of
the chemistry or physics but presumably
that's not what these people want to
talk about yes picking out their asses
so I mean are you even are you going to
pass or am I being separate here are you
even ok with that because if it's
randomness then is it make sense to call
an individual creative so they're not
random that they're reliably generating
useful novelty oh yeah ok so if you want
creativity to be something in psychology
that you could attribute to people
you've got you've got to tighten up what
you're talking about it if you don't and
we like this is ultimately a semantics
debate class for how we look here able
to do do we want to talk about it as a
psychological property that individuals
is that then we're limited in how we
have to define if we don't want to
that's fine but then we're no longer
doing it's not a proper part of this
course very idea that you have to
recreate it implies that you're
but it could be that you are solving a
problem without realizing without
bearing the problems in mind
sure so of what you were saying which is
some other people say is that what
happens in creativity is the goal its
background it's not for gravity but then
not when you're talking about that this
is another important factor to bring
that is now we're not saying the
cognitive machinery so much is different
but the motivational apprehension of
what you're doing is different and
that's one that's one theory of
creativity that basically you're using
the same cognitive machinery but your
motivation your motivational framing of
what you're doing is different than when
you're square you're doing more pursuit
by the way before that goes on that's a
big thing right now this is a big
distinction between public and
auto-pilot behavior right so even if the
machinery is the same the process has to
be different because when you're trying
to solve a problem you have to I guess
you have to a mental representation of
that problem but in creativity is not
like a thing you start with annajura
meditation you start by making something
or do you like a cup so I know a lot of
efficiency will here simply and then
start writing it so absolutely
also like me people would argue and it's
going to be important to determine the
topics definitely one of the most
creative forms of music is jazz but if
you talk they do look you can't be good
jazz and we've done a lot of fun music
thing it's sort of randomly sort of
switched and go to the Condor okay so
you're interested so in order to make
this work we are going to have to take a
look at their analogies most theories of
analogy our responses to in variations
on probably dominant theory of analogy
in psychology which is neither gantner's
theory of analogy which is known as the
structure mapping theory the structure
mapping theorem and once I explain it to
you what it is it would become readily
apparent how analogy might be the engine
driving insight and then this would give
us an account of what creativity is
created people know how they have the
skills right in order to use analogy and
I don't just mean verbal analogy tango
pictorial analogy pictorial metaphor
Israel acoustic all kinds of mixtures
analogies and music as you know
eccentric cetera okay so when I hear
that when I say this word don't just
make verbal analogy okay the property to
use analogy to drive into so feed you
get there and the structure mapping
theory
all right so let me first of all a
theory up for you intuitively and then
how she formalizes it okay so the main
idea is that what you're doing in an
analogy is you're trying to find the
important relations within mumuga okay
so good luck just Energon source and
target okay so of course is where I know
or what I'm using in order to try and
change how picking about something else
so let's make a concrete your brother
for Boris you're trying to figure out
the structure of the atom and what
happened is and you use the solar system
okay so this is the source solar system
yeah it turns ugly wrong by the way is
you not know right you know that right
you know that little solar system model
of the atom is right mostly wrong kind
the right and certain circuits entries
you do all kinds of hand waving below
okay okay so let's first of all do it
linguistically and then formally so
here's the idea right this is from
ganders work that you would get
something like this on attracts the
planet I know it goes both ways but let
me just write this way okay planets
orbit
son right and there's equilibrium that
stands for equilibrium between the
fracture day or the day or at least
long-term pseudo equilibrium okay so the
idea here is right so there's the source
target the nucleus of the atom
not quite often it is tracked electrons
alright the electrons orbit and there's
equilibrium between orbiting sort with
the first order like an attraction in
order
[Applause]
okay so this is getting mapped over this
is getting mapped over and then this
whole thing is getting knocked over okay
we're going to formalize this in a
second to person so the idea is what's
getting not when I talk about the
structure what's getting map is this
relation this relation and then this
relation of relations so the structure
what your right is just intuitively
we're going to make it more formal
distinction for this mic doesn't get too
equivocal right what's going on is right
I'm leaving the content of the solar
system behind all I'm picking up on are
these important this red relation and
relation of relations is a system of
relation that is getting mapped over
okay I'm having this over and then of
course this talks about orbiting and
attracting and a mapping for mating and
attraction over as well so the idea is
theory again persecuted Li right is that
you know Bohr has this knows this
doesn't know this sounds all sort of all
the data you know all the empirical data
he's trying to figure out how to
structure it to make sense of the atom
and then right make this analogy Maps
this structure over and then right at
the inside oh the other there's like the
solar system
and that would counted as an instance of
scientific creativity which of course it
was because he created an important
theory
okay so now how we make this a little
bit more formal so what Hitler does
right is tactical predicates and
arguments and then I'm going to suggest
we change so this is a predicate right
and then an argument I think is a
particular object proof that predicates
could be applied so that's a way of
representing that the ball is round
okay I need calling this an argument is
it deeply confusing a stupid thing to do
because it's not an argument is an
instantiation don't want it I don't know
maybe psychologists just just do a
little bit more logic cleaning I don't
know what to say about that it's not an
argument it's an instantiation it's a
fast proposition always output a single
proposition cannot possibly be an
argument the whole around right okay so
conscious it's on good term
okay so we'll talk about predicate and
instantiation okay so all right then
when you have is that attributes or
predicate that can like have can take
one instantiation
okay so here's an example large X all
right so I think what many things in
there large elegant large ball large
power large ego including a promo
and powers and competence okay so write
back an attribute a relation is a
predicate can have two or more of those
there it is so write collide x1 have to
be two things that get instantiated for
that predicate can't just have one big
colliding okay so very good when you
attribute some property to something is
that okay so accepted little bit of
logic of the rest of the course because
we what we're getting into
okay attribute it can take one instant
Nation relation can take two next
distinction we have to make a
distinction between first order and
higher order predicate first order and
higher order predicate first order and
higher order targets first order
predicate our predicate right let's take
objects as their instances
okay here's what we're sort of prank is
accredited to take objects and their
instances higher-order predicate take
predicates as their instances they're
meta predicates in that sense
higher-order try to get to a predicate
education right so this is an example
again also from again this is gamblers
example not mine I know why emphasizing
this when I put it on the board
okay I'm going to comment on why she
used it maybe she was having a
particular tactic glide truck car rank
woman man okay so these are first-order
bracket
here's a higher order predicate
okay so this is a first-order predicate
it's taking objects as its instances yes
this is a higher order predicate because
it's taking two privates as its
instances okay
again predicate attributes one instance
relation to lower order predicate right
take objects that they're instances
higher order predicate are also by
definition relation right and they take
predicate and they're instances yes okay
so the truck collided with the car which
caused the woman to strike the man
that's for example mama
I guess they're maybe she had a really
bad drive into work the day she wrote
this okay
so perfect okay so we have the distinct
predicate that is interpreting
attributes in relations and the
distinction distinction between
lower-limb predicates and hire or
etiquette and higher-order predicates
are always relations because they take
at least two because okay let's get
going okay so now that what you can see
is I can turn all of this into a formal
representation and then you'll see what
the structure is given that tell me
representation so this start that stands
for equilibrium okay
so if I go here right Xfinity on and
watch them for planets but we go here X
stands for a nucleus and wife and two
are electrons but I can use this same
now here's the again the same structure
exists in both okay so what I have is I
have a higher order predicate right that
is a relation between two lower order
predicates that are relations what's
common between the source and the target
is that structure and what we do in an
analogy is you find the structure in one
thing and you map it on to the target
right so far and one person is
responding like I'm I can't go forward
in this argument on this this makes
sense to you because it was all okay and
nothing will matter okay yes like I get
the general argument so I don't
understand these I think I do or go back
for a bit okay so sine attracts the
plants yep the planets orbit the Sun and
there is equilibrium between the
attraction and E for more video clinics
but I can go over here right the nucleus
attracts the electrons okay the
electrons orbit the nucleus and there's
equilibrium between the attraction in
the orbit focus on them in the structure
could be untouchable that's right the
structure is exactly the same okay well
I understood that times to know
didn't understand how interpret the form
of the actual para I just taught it to
you yeah okay so alright so what you're
getting is you're getting what's
happening an analogy is you're mapping
okay yeah I don't need to keep this up
anymore do it yes what because here it's
Nicolas attract electrons here electrons
in orbit the nucleus just be yours
that's all English syntax work it was
German we wouldn't care about the order
we have inflections at the end but we
don't want to do German inflected
languages are really hard to as any does
anybody know a language that's lonely
and English in this class it's an
inflected language like German or
something like that I just want to know
what it's like to try and translate an
inflected language into symbolic logic
because inflected languages don't rely
on word order to specify logical
relations party okay so what is that you
learn symbolic logic
I know it's logic but never the twain
your back no I'm just thinking even when
you're translating English into like
lism before well what part English is
weird
I'm just saying the order usually
doesn't say the same anyway like
sometimes if you want express a
complicated English sentence
yeah you order and the problem
that's true that's true I'm just
wondering if there was a difference in
difficult with the translation problem
given a syntax ordering versus an
inflected syntax I haven't tried for my
assurance well that's why I was acting
you just learn the Waterhouse one you're
the one the one that has to structure it
[Music]
you deserve the English order and I'm
trying to it's very free right but that
I understand that well I'm just what I
wear it's like to go for a non-infected
language directly to symbolic employment
because the translation problem is the
hardest part of logic because that's be
able to find part it supportive asically
test you on they teach you all this
stuff about your class and then when
they test you on each ability of public
transit if they do some derivation
completely stuff like that but it's all
the translation is the tricky part
because what I would like that an X or Y
to think like objects of Italian order
oh sure sir
I just want after your 10 bucks I'm just
wondering it just occurred to me I
should have measured this better I will
never fit okay so now here's how can we
use is this or maybe lb lb wonder
children claims to use this to solve a
problem that we've seen before the
selection problem okay so the selection
problem so one of the things you can say
is well why did or choose the solar
system for yon and then say well because
there's a similarity to treatment
there's a problem with similarity some
of you know this
from other courses right is that
similarity this goes back to no
statement okay so you know that some
Sesame Street one of these things is not
like the others these are tiny other
thing so similarity is kind of distance
which means partial identity so things
are similar to the degree to which they
share some but not all property the more
properties they share the more similar
there that's the standard interpretation
of what similarity needs so the logical
similarity is the more properties you
share the more similar you are and then
Nelson different argues that
similarities it's completely backwards
it explains nothing because eighty two
things sharing an indefinite number of
properties so the chair above below will
be existed after the time the dinosaurs
both open on four legs or they're made
of organic material both depend on the
earth that those have a quiet gentle on
the significance of the figure metaphors
those that use this political symbol
ninety one is carnivorous neither one
weighs with lasting a paper slash etc
etc and out of two properties that I can
attribute to go to them is common a
clearly explosive which just so you know
that's why when one of the things they
test you on is similarity judgments in
psychometric testing because what's
actually being looked for is not logical
similarity but your ability to zero in
on the relevant factors of concerns so
in addition to the logic there's a
psychological process of selecting which
of all the shared properties are the
ones you're going to give your attention
on fine so the point about similarity
and where it is that it requires some
selection process if you want to compare
two things
you can't compare all of the true
properties they share right you have to
make that selection there has to be some
selection mechanism Gander proposes a
selection mechanism from her structure
mapping theory so again it proposes that
the selection of the relevant factors of
the person which we would call
predicates skin gender system the
relevant factors of comparison are these
exactly which is called systematicity so
systematicity is an ordering of
preferences for what predicates you
should pay attention to systematicity is
an ordering of predicates right the
terms of how you should pay attention to
it you're basically giving an order of
attention predator connecticut's you
should get preferential treatment when
you're directing your attention ok so
what the systematicity say ok you should
prefer higher order predicate over lower
order predicate and you should prefer
relations over attributes
so higher order predicate has
systematicity because they are a system
right there predicate the president's
that's what she is the term
systematicity so the higher order the
predicate the more it should be
preferred because the more systematic it
is right you should for the same reason
you should prefer relations over
attributes now what's this what's the
sort of reasoning the idea is because if
I bring a higher order predicate I bring
all this structure with me like that
organizes it's very efficient and
effective it organizes a lot of
information very readily so it's very
like this very sort of tasty thing for
your mind to allow me about a fourth
describe a theory of analogy so the idea
is what's happening is the following the
brain is going to compare Tuesday is
look great sort of looking for to
promote an insight it looks for
searching and it assigns a comparison
that has high specificity it will
attempt to map that if you can map it
then what is that done from the source
we have a system of brackets it gets
mapped over it gives us a way of
structuring the target that of course
you should say we that's probably going
to help problem formulation you that
it's going to help about restructure how
you're setting up your problem it would
help more to restructure the problem of
how to best represent the atom and that
is the way in which analogy would drive
the insert you would write suddenly
thought what she called the structure
mapping engine
engine that just means structure mapping
engine it's part of your process trying
make comparisons it looks it looks for
systematicity it grabs what's most of
somatic transfers it over and that
causes the restructuring that is central
to inside and the idea is there will be
something like this creative people are
very good at doing that they are very
good at finding systematicity and then
doing the structure Malik I'm going to
criticize this today a lot but first of
all do you understand what's going on
yes for the saying that like your
problem has one sort of problem
formulation and then you go to search
for all these possible analogies and
then you adopt the system of the analogy
into your problem therefore changing
direct usually translated by side
perfectly so so it's basically saying
that like you don't find the analogy
that has the same structure so rather
you're finding an algae and then fit
your so what you do is you finally when
you go oh here's a shared probably kick
and this over here this predicate has
high systematicity I should import it
here and then I'll get high
systematicity in my problem well if I
don't give you an independent account of
my systematicity is useful just what I'm
trying to do for about right so system
it so right systematicity just means
that when you find a higher order
predicate you give it preference and
then what will happen in a system of
predicates will come over and have a
guiding what
well because it imports a system of
relations which gives you a very
powerful way of restructuring your pure
party okay
how do you realize which because I think
you bring your finger on problem we're
going to discuss how do you realize that
what okay so I have some property I know
it'd be something I can say at least one
predicate of mine my source and then I'm
searching to my bank and I here's
another thing the chairs that had a kid
and over here that predicate is highly
systematic it's a predicate of predicate
that you know it's structural phenomena
so right
I then important this over because they
have to have to share predicates and
then it pulls that way how do you know
how do you already understand for
example the solar system and you you can
you know that it has this systemic
relation ever right but but but that's a
vague way of talking to be prepared
together she's trying to give you a more
formal clearer meaning of what it is to
say that you have a better understanding
and one since it is and so okay well
don't go to give up because there's a
problem I think you're putting your
figure on came up the ground but first
of all you have see how this is the
theory updating it says creative people
are basically good at searching for
systematicity that then allows them to
import a powerful structure that allows
them to structure something that was
previously not well structured they
create intelligibility perhaps where
there was none before a little before
they create a problem structure to
perhaps replace a defective one etc now
we need people have pointed out that
there are some difficulties with this so
Palmer did this and may disgusted in
1989 and funk like somebody has paper
with Liliana clear Dan Jaffe also 1997
they went on to do some beautiful work
with John Kennedy brothers the problem
is right and this goes back to the issue
of talking about earlier which is the
translation issue the same property can
be represented by either an attribute or
a relation see this whole formalism
depends on the distinction between an
entre Bute and a relation so and I
sometimes think that a lot of debates
and metaphysics sort of hang on in an
undiscussed
cognitive move so here's an attribute
and of course I can equally we describe
it as a relation
you can do that almost for anything
revelations and doubt reviews how to
abuse in relations now when you do that
your systematicity is everything's going
to shift around because the whole thing
about systematicity is dependent on the
distinction between attributes and
relationship but there's nothing in
right in the allow me this language
nothing in reality that distinguishes
those we can describe any property as an
attribute of order relation you
understand that's important because
she's made a logical formalism and I'm
making a logical point that's completely
legit ok Ganter knows this this is it
was pointed out to her by Palmer in 1989
I'm going to read you a direct quote as
Gantner and Clement 1989 in this this
but States is our intent is not in all
the ways domain could logically be
represented but in how it is
psychologically represented at a given
time now this is a disaster move because
what she's saying is in addition to the
logic there's some psychological process
that selects how things are going to be
represented why is that a disaster
because this was originally supposed to
address the difference between the
logical representation of similarity and
the psychological selection when what
she said is you know how you make the
psychological selection over among the
logical selection over here you make a
psychological selection over above the
logical connection which is a nice
incident regrets
now what am I not saying obviously we do
it till she's saying something true
that's not the point I'm making it's
obviously true that there are
psychological processes that determine
that you're going to describe it this
way or this way this is if you play
dough this is if your aerosol whether
really it was before
milk here's the EULA morphism and
Western civilization has been an
interminable argument as to which
metaphysics is ultimately correct I
think the answer is neither taxes watch
okay so you can't get out your
explanation for how you overcome a
logical problem with a psychological
process is to say well I overcome the
logical problem with another
psychological process that I don't
explain - that's not an answer
[Applause]
now if I'm starting to point towards and
maybe you guys are already seeing it and
this could be possibly with Memphis on
the circularity is that what's lurking
inside this theory of analogy is an
unexplained capacity for problem
formulation how to best represent the
phenomena so that it can be transferred
and used appropriately to solve the
problems because that's what she's
talking about that either
well I psychologically choose the best
representation so then I can transfer it
and solve a problem that I couldn't
solve before that's what I'm trying to
show you is that the part of the
explanation of analogy is this
phenomenon called insight and for
appropriate processes we should be able
to see similar issues that we saw in
insight we did
another problem with Cantor's theory
also pointed out by Palmer and ninety
bd9 command power must register and also
the young a different D are not calling
beyond the ovens also meant it is noted
the grain size wrong also known as
resolution see sort of the example of
given everything and yet there's example
of my presentation of a proceeding
because what I did is I picked a level
at which to represent the phenomenon I
picked a level of abstraction and
generality in my predicate that mountain
that made what happened in the solar
system the equivalent and not long -
yeah see if I do this instead of saying
attraction if I do this I know it's more
than this there's the nuclear blah blah
worth nothing good winter but we now
think it's actually visit Jupiter a weak
force is actually one with the
electromagnet to look sort of like it
should all be capitalized okay okay so I
do that there's no ship writing but
that's true right that's the truth that
that's more accurate description and
attraction the mapping only occurs
because I get the right level of
abstraction in my predicate
representation
but that means that I've got to get the
right sort of positioning between the
Gestalt on the seat well how much don't
be to talk about the right scale the
right scaling of attention is being
presumed here not being explained
[Applause]
okay so when these problems are pointed
out that you have all this machinery of
formulating the information for
appropriate transfer and right
appropriate problem-solving which gender
responded as to how she actually saw the
structure laughing engine working this
is a quote structure the structure
mapping engine operates by first finding
all possible relational identities
between the base of the target it then
assigns to each of these matches
hypotheses on evaluation based on the
structure closest of the latch and on a
kind of local systematicity by what a
given pairing of matching predicates is
assigned higher evaluation if the parent
also matched so she's basically saying
you're doing sort of pat down and bottom
up between like this processing while
searching everything now I hope I taught
you well enough that that's not how it
can happen so what she's please
supposing at all that she's proposing
the relevance realization machinery the
attentional machinery the gali need to
formulate something well so that it
could be transferred an appropriate
manner to solve unsolved problem namely
she is presupposing all of the inside
machinery that we talked about in this
course
I think what I'm trying to show you is
that this is not the relation analogy is
not apparent to us her language use the
language calendar to incite their
siblings the interpenetrating each other
there's as much of insight going on in
analogy if there is analogy going on
inside so this will devolve into the
claim right that creative people are
good at inside which would that be to
lose the very distinction that you are
trying to establish we're trying to
establish the distinction to creativity
from insight by using analogy to say
what distinguishes creativity from
insight is that in creativity analogy is
driving insight but what we found is
analogy is not reliably distinct from
insight and the analogy is not a lively
distinct from insight you know what you
can't use it to do distinguish
creativity from inside the analogy is
not reliably distinct from insight you
can't use analogy to distinguish
creativity from inside
[Applause]
now I've spent a lot of time on this
because this fear okay this theory has a
lot going for it right I mean you can
shrug your glove image that people do
once you give them a description of the
predicate they you prefer systematic
ones once you give them a representation
of a level etcetera etcetera I hope
that's not my primary reason my primary
reason is that many theories of
creativity ultimately are versions of
this that we're using something like
finding a similarity finding an
analogous connection blah blah blah then
we transfer and then get the inside and
that's what creativity is what I try to
suggest to you is that this is the best
version of that theory to have and it
doesn't do the job for logical reasons I
didn't have to present any miracle
evidence to you just for logical reasons
it cannot do the job of distinguishing
creativity from inside just can't do it
just not set up doing just not set up
the right way
so what we need right what we need and
let's look it up okay
what else might be at work I think one
area that is probably the second most
prominent and it was pretty much like
came up quite rapidly in the discussion
with you is to look for motivational
differences between creativity inside
many of you were trying to do that in
terms of well I'm not more into but I'm
goal-oriented
or I care about it is this is back
rather than this is for granted and I'm
not saying that there are differences of
but I'm trying to lump them together
because that is another main sort of
step families a family of theories we're
trying to talk about creativity that
what distinguishes creativity from
insight in some very significant and
relevant motivational differences so
this also has a long-established
or a research tradition attached to it
okay so there's a conference on
creativity held I'm just looking for my
notes to head up Operation Blessing 1962
it was held in Colorado where a lot of
these kinds of conferences seem to be
held on creativity and there was an idea
from a bigger name ten lay the original
proposal with the idea of attached
devotion which sounds like the beginning
of the ending of your relationship
attached devotion there is the correct
sort of attitude and motivational
relation that people have when they're
creative they're detached from what
they're doing but they're also devoted
to it
so the idea right is you have intense
passion and commitment that is balanced
by capacity for critical detachment and
that makes you more capable with
insightful problem-solving or generating
for finding instances that people find
insightful conception so Rushfield took
that idea also right in 1962 and made a
distinction between ego involved or
extrinsic motivation even if you played
it like you printed a motivational term
see the person that sort of took this
vague idea from Han Leia in the
conference and he framed it in
motivational terms so Eagle involved or
extrinsic motivation that's two words
for the same thing versus versus right
intrinsic motivation or tasks involve
motivation so on one side is ego
involved that's physics I basketball
in service and the main idea was that
what what happens in creativity is
people are able to become right
intrinsically motivated and they are
task oriented rather than goal oriented
in ego involved and some of you
articulate is out which is why I was
sort of like not trying to debate you
too much because this idea is as almost
as all to be and when you're older than
so this idea has been around for a long
time in psychology now there's quite a
bit of work going on about this
and the problem is this became sort of a
problematic way of talking about it
because we are not really clear on what
that term means okay and so a good rule
of thumb is don't use a more model and
controversial thing to try and define
your models in a controversial thing I
put it define creativity with it's
equally muddled and controversial
construct the ego and so what happened
is if the emphasis became on extrinsic
versus intrinsic motivation and then
that was defined in terms of whether or
not you are sort of goal oriented or
categories which is again to be fair the
language many of you will use it today
okay so this was taken up by Teresa
amiable
so you sort of had a lot of discussion
through this sixties in the 70s and then
like I said it's sort of gelled in her
work if she had what she developed what
she called the intrinsic motivation
hypothesis the intrinsic motivation
hypothesis so she put it into a testable
form hypothesis etc intrinsic motivation
hypothesis okay I'll read you out the
hypothesis and then we'll define some of
the core terms within it okay
the intrinsically motivated state is
conducive to creativity whereas the
extensively motivated state is
detrimental now it's interesting because
this is kind of eerie parallels with you
know propositional processing versus
procedural processing it's not the same
at all but it deals like the same time
it's structurally analogous right now
the intrinsically motivated state is
conducive to creativity whereas the
extrinsically motivated state is
detrimental so what's the intrinsic
motivation intrinsic motivation is the
motivation to engage in an activity
primarily for its own sake so sorry to
be graphic but the prototypical example
that's usually given it sucks and
sometimes like you engage in sex
extrinsically because you try to have a
kid man talk about one thing that will
really kill your suchlike is that so
then you extrinsically our focus it
really removes a lot of the creativity
from the endeavor I'm trying to speak as
neutrally as I can so the motivation to
engage in activity primarily for its own
sake because the individual precedes the
activity is interesting involving
satisfying or personally challenging it
is marked by focus on the challenge and
enjoyment of the work itself
okay that's it yes but don't be both
respectfully enclosure
so the elderly it's not but that's
tighter is something that's done in the
task you take pleasure in the task you
don't take pleasure on the result
produced by your activity like when
you've done it's all over you
development our lives better because the
goal state of post sucks has been
achieved the pleasure is India if you're
interested involved in getting pleasure
from the process itself eating kale is
presumably extra yes immune example
because I agree with you we're going to
come back to that point shortly but I
want you again because we've it's a
better example in life
project but you pick a topic you really
like so you obviously your experience
motivation to do the projects that you
really enjoyed in a lot of things like
that am i working towards goal okay so
to be fair to Emma Beale she's not
denying that that exists her hypothesis
is about how creative you will be and
her art opposite is more intrinsically
motivated you are to more creative
you'll be and the more extrinsically
motivated you are the less created one
thing you could have like a balanced
issue and then it's not simply happen
kind of it's not that easy but yeah so
just to be like there's another way of
finding this there will be a little bit
more problematic for area but the way
you're framing it isn't your challenge
Turkish you say but I don't deny the
existence of this pass I'm just making a
prediction about creative people G year
those tests which is I think Barry
Michael did you want to Sigma
there are like three different level 15
well we'll get a they have made like the
station yes well um that's not quite
right you work well under certain levels
of arousal that have been properly
framed about you but the cramming
technology likes to turn that into the
simplistic constructive credit of
pressure so this can somehow like just
being sort of like because it's just not
the case that like cramming is effective
for achieving the goals you want to live
and I know some of you saying oh no your
honor works for me so continuous study
is way better than cramming sorry just
every single time we put them into
competition continuously so start study
this would I do this with Jason stark
University first year you know he's
getting nineties in high school 50lakhs
you're gonna clock it must get a crash
you had to start working different if
you continue to say from day one
start reading their material like making
questions going home practicing
generating questions and answering them
for subsequent to that everyday
continuous study don't just study the
two or three days of protests continue a
study you can do it kept coming to you
by making Suspiria at his mark ii and he
comes to me these are annotated do you
not know what I didn't say you took part
250 with me about you in one quarter
statement if the problem is the student
to write the problem is our study
strategies are not motivated just by the
goal of optimizing our academic success
our struggle for any strategies are also
motivated by the goal of alleviating our
anxiety and so typically you will
mediate anxiety by moving to more
primitive familiar functions right and
that's why people think planning works
like people think that smoking relaxes
them the relaxes on the head of initial
stresses them so they feel insane right
so
the notion of pressure I think is too
simplistic we have to break it up along
with various variables and popular now I
think you have an intrinsic motivation
to reduce anxiety which is separate from
your often extrinsic motivation to get a
good market of course the problem for
many of us will return study the
intrinsic motivation to reduce anxiety
you just want to do it for its own sake
they're overwhelmed the extrinsic
motivations are worse so here you avoid
behavior and the new planning as a way
of trying to address the anxiety sorry
that was just an opportunity for me to
again say why you should do continuous
study rather than coming and the
research shows that you will all now
ignore me though there is aspects of the
inside ever that are in the queue top
okay okay so obviously as you can gather
from what an extrinsic motivation like
the motivation to infuse an activity
primarily order to beat some bull
external to the work itself such as a
seeming expected reward winning a
competition of eating some requirement
is marked by focus on external reward
external recognition and external
direction of one's work okay so and what
happened in the 80s is that MBA was able
to get quite a lot of experimental
evidence to right support the intrinsic
motivation hypothesis when people are
physically motivated they do seem to be
more creative and whether it's just a
signal related to creativity that seems
to go down now what happened is
there was some challenges to this yeah
and then there was also two things were
happening to touch each others as well
one was the question about whether or
not this was a clear contra and the
other question was an explanation as to
why should work why should it be that
intrinsic motivation improve your
creativity
whereas extrinsic right in and of itself
is a very expired for it like people
sort of not know yes but that not
usually indicates familiarity with what
we talked about rather than being able
to provide an explanation as to why the
intrinsic motivation words right
facility creativity and extrinsic would
be detrimental okay so in answer to the
first problem people have started to
point out that it wasn't clear there
were certain things that not done the
next thing I was doing develop but there
were certain things that it wasn't clear
if they were intrinsic or extrinsic
motivation so while that one of them was
mild one that Hannibal used in her
definition of extrinsic which is
achievement is cheap achievement
intrinsic or extrinsic like because is
it something that is pursue right like
when you're sort of achieving something
and that's something in this that's
intrinsic to the task you're looking to
achieve in what you're doing them yeah
but it also can mean extras of what
you've achieved some status to the
notion of achievement right was sort of
very vague now in order to try and get
clearer about that the second issue was
addressed and the mechanism the most
likely or most plausible mechanism
proposed by an appeal as to why the
intrinsic motivation were selected so
much about how intrinsic motivation
facilitates creativity it was about why
extrinsic motivation was deaf
to it and this was the idea that
extrinsic motivation divided attention
divided attention
so you're just spending less time
attending to the task that you're
spending more time attending to the
external goal state that you want to get
we could okay now that that 'mobile and
I deal is now done for a moment speaking
their baby is going to see on rock and
not I'm not trying to put words into his
mouth but I'd say we're stuck we could
potentially do strengthen it the more
you are focused on the task the left
Luxor the more you focus on the external
books the more you're focused on the
internal goal the last chance you will
step back and look at the problem
formulation of your task
right the less chance you'll have for
transparency to opacity shift this is
not a deal this is using stuff we've
developed in this course the last chance
you have of looking at your problem
formulation a task means the greater the
champion is going to operate
automatically and automaticity could
significantly reduce by creativity would
significantly reduce the capacity for
insight and innovation so if I increase
automaticity and reduce the
possibilities for insight that could
plausibly be why creative is reduced
again I will then say any of this I'm
trying to make a case stronger River all
she said was to provide attention now in
another sense I mean that's also part of
it because we did we know that simply
dividing attention and to reduce
performance but that would be sort of a
general thing why might one specifically
reduce the creative aspect of your
performance yes well that's that's just
the general idea that's what I meant
about the general thing about dividing
attention so dividing attention
generally reduces the cause it's a
cognitive load phenomena and I yes I
admit that's part of it but we would
want to try and make it a little
explanation more specific and so that we
could specifically explain what
creativity is being reduced and that's
why I was bringing in this more specific
machinery of increased automaticity
right decreased cognitive flexibility
okay okay so we could black dress what
she's saying that way
ah so some people picked up on that
Sternberg and Newbridge yes the same
standard the DES although we're cutting
site and other stuff that eventually
forth so they talked about rather than
calling a intrinsic and extrinsic they
talked about tax focusing versus goal
focusing motivations and they got this
published in the paper and I really okay
isn't that just kind of well I'm again
meant by intrinsic and extrinsic focus
versus goal focused anyways an appeal
that also came back in 1993 and made a
distinction between types of extrinsic
motivation so she refined it and she
wanted to say this not all extrinsic
motivation was detrimental okay so why
okay what kind of extrinsic motivation
could be beneficial well if I take my
eyes off the top and look at the goal
but that gives me critical feedback
survey then take back in order to
reformulate my problem that can actually
be beneficial to my system so you can
use extrinsic motivation in order to
reformulate how you're doing too fast
you get critical feedback
so she called this synergistic extrinsic
motivation it provides information which
app which acts in concert with and
supports intrinsic motivation so if
you'll allow me an analogy right it's
kind of like right the returning after
father's is to leave and come back and
you're capable of reformulating your
house
now obviously what's left of course is
non synergistic motivators right so
there's non center distich extrinsic
motivation this case your eyes off the
top focuses along the goal but does not
afford you any kind of critical
information for reformulating your task
for the Ottoman target you just worried
that you're not at your old date
yes communication so synergistic
extrinsic motivation gets right is
actually synergistic it helps creativity
because although he is taking your
attention off the task by looking at the
goal you need with them up with critical
feedback that you then used to
reformulate the task and that improves
your involvement with your taxes
increases your flexibility perhaps etc
yes
kind of like a conviction that's what I
met with the analogy okay so around this
time what happened is that people were
now starting to look more and this is
the language that was used I'm not
including this language on not the
framing a problem but the framing of
motivation because pro-russia talking
about here right is where we're
directing attention what is being for
granted what is being backgrounded and
how much flexibility we have enough
so what says that happened is that
people were trying to come up with
accounts of what you may call the
cognitive aspects of notation we're
going to find it then a hot button of
course will just introduce it today we
want next week is the work of Michael
after in what's called reversal theory
reversal theory now what's interesting
the movies my thinking is it's a lot of
important connections but he also starts
from the gestalt heritage of one candle
the effect also explicitly does so now
he has what he calls a meta motivational
theory on matter motivational theory
the basic idea is that motivation is a
framing of your level of arousal and
then that framing of your level of
arousal has an impact on how your
attention is directed which then have a
new topic in problem solving and then
this would be a more comprehensive
motivational theory creativity so I'm
going to only have five minutes and
floating farther than this will be
irrelevant I only stay for four o'clock
so I'm going to answer yourself and I
have to lead up for so a healthy
convergent question but what we're now
moving towards is how what is the theory
and okay is that the basic idea is you
have different medical better
motivational modes and only one of those
modes is actually conducive to
creativity so what we're going to see is
how you frame your level of arousal
significantly impacts how you direct
attention which then has a huge impact
on your problem-solving and that would
then be right and motivational theories
of creative creative people to motivate
themselves in the right way to get
themselves need to write the right
framing of their own arousal so that
they direct attention in a way that is
optimal or none of it exists
I don't think that time is ready I don't
think so
all right thank you for your attention