hello and welcome to the psychology
podcast with dr. Scott Barry Kaufman
where we give you insights into the mind
brain behavior and creativity each
episode will feature a new guest who
will stimulate your mind and give you a
greater understanding of yourself others
and the world we live in hopefully will
also provide a glimpse into human
possibility thanks for listening and
enjoy the podcast
[Music]
Daniel it's so great to have you on the
show today I'm happy to be here thanks
for having a lot of things we can talk
about you're a very a very interesting
guy which is why I wanted to get you on
this show I knew there was lots of areas
that we could discuss I'd like to first
start talking a little bit about your
childhood because you had a very
interesting educational path isn't that
right or a different I did have a
different educational path different and
interesting yeah both yeah tell me a
little bit about it and inserted how you
solved the education system yeah I
didn't know much about the education
system because I wasn't exposed to there
was a I was home taught growing up and I
went to public school for a very brief
period a few times as an experiment and
few different private schools but the
vast majority of my childhood education
homeschooled and the reason was my
parents were kind of educational
philosophers and were interested to see
what would happen at the kid didn't have
any fixed curriculum and was just
exposed to all the things they could be
exposed to and then their interests were
facilitated so it was a very kind of
constructivist idea so that was it I
didn't have a certain amount of social
studies and geography and math and
handwriting in English I it really was
just a facilitation of questions
fascination and interest so the few
times that I did go to school there were
obviously gaps in knowledge that
everyone else was learning like I had
never shown much interest growing up in
American history and understanding
states and capitals that kind of thing
they were areas where I was
setting things that were well outside of
the scope of anything that would
normally be touched in school and so we
didn't it didn't translate very well
what was of course wonderful about it
was I got to not only go very deep in
the areas that I had a main interest but
my actual interest in life itself was
fostered by having the interesting
topics supported and not being forced to
be focused on stuff that was of interest
yes it sounds like you were a pretty
curious person and you got a chance to
actually run with that as opposed to
being held back by that BA the term
curious person and child are synonymous
that's a good point that's a good point
you do see individual differences though
in curiosity and maybe that is partly
environmental supportive and as well as
I think genetics do play a role you know
in terms of dopamine production and
their genes that code for dopamine but I
think that that's a good point in a lot
of ways from evolution perspective you
need curiosity right you need or to
adapt I mean if you but child who's not
gonna explore their environments at all
you know the child will not be able to
adapt at all what do you study in
college I studied the math physics
philosophy and undergrad psychology more
philosophy in graduate school but then
getting into ecology biology medicine
complex systems most of that wasn't in a
formal academic situation it was in
independent studies and research
environments for instance medicine was
working with some different diagnostic
laboratories working with medical
doctors and clinics on complex cases and
working to try and find insights that
were outside of the scope of what we
currently had insights on well what was
the college you went to undergrad was
Mauri University in what our University
worth it looking it's in Iowa Fairfield
Iowa it was a very kind of unique school
that was focused on studying the
sciences with a deeper thought process
around subject/object relationship cool
so when did you start to think about
putting together this neuro hacker
collective how did that come about
now hacker is a relatively recent
project we started it about three years
ago and I have gotten into integrative
medicine
and kind of diagnostic medicine
therapeutic medicine especially for
cases that both allopathic and
integrative medicine didn't have
adequate solutions yet partially because
of my own diagnosed illnesses that
didn't have adequate solutions that I
had to work on and some of which had a
neurodegenerative component so I got
deep into understanding how neurological
systems work how dysfunction worse and
because there weren't any adequate
solutions offered anywhere of course the
only like meaningful option was see if
novel insights can be generated by
approaching it differently and so I
started applying cybernetic theory how
do the bottom-up and top-down regulatory
systems in the human organism work and
whole systems and complexity theory how
do all of the different comics and all
the different body systems interact and
have cascade effects and etc and it
ended up leading to a set of hypotheses
about how health works how aging works
and how illness works and then how
illness in a case like mine could have
worked led to me being able to do some
kind of unique research Diagnostics
find things out that traditional
medicine had not that led to me actually
being able to treat and reverse the
conditions I had that were you know
reverse autoimmune antibodies reversed
things that are not usually medically
thought of as reversible which led to me
then doing that with a lot of other
people who had you know working with
various integrative doctors who had also
what are traditionally beamed as
uncurable cases and getting to see that
we could reliably reversed some kinds of
pathology and then this was very
meaningful and that we could address not
only physical pathology but meaningfully
affect people's cognitive and
psychological function because with
chronic disease with autoimmune and
neuro degenerate capacity and their
emotional status is always affected and
its affected in ways that have to be
supported for them to be able to do what
it takes to actually do the rest of the
treatments to have the focused drive etc
to do generally a meaningful amount of
work and so that's what really kind of
led into an integrative approach to the
future of psychopharmacology
psychoneuroimmunology psychiatry and
then starting to look at not just
addressing issues to come up to baseline
but also we end
and Space Lab so this is kind of the
intersection with biologic transhumanism
can we do fundamental bio optimization
and that then intersected with the other
thing tank work I had been doing while I
was working complex systems which is how
do we support the major transitions and
civilization writ large that need to
happen for environmental sustainability
for major macro issues that we're
addressing and there's economic shifts
there's governance shift there's
infrastructure technology shifts that
have to happen but there's also
recognizing that all of the major issues
that were wanting to address are human
behavior mediated and all of the new
capacities were wanting to bring about
are also going to be human behavior
mediated so then looking at the human
physiological and psychological
predispositions for more Omni
considerate or shittier behavior and
what can we do to be able to predispose
on the physiology side predispose human
Hardware towards increased complexity of
thinking perspective taking capacity and
prospective synthesis capacity emotional
resilience etc all the things that would
decrease the predisposition for harm
externalizing behavior and increase the
predisposition and capacity for on the
considerate what do you think are some
of the aspects of human nature that's
getting in the way of compassion and
kindness where some the biggest blocks
it's going to be a very deep question
that we're probably going to go into a
meaningful rabbit hole if we do because
the topic of human nature versus that
nature is expressed is a very deep one
what is human nature if by that we mean
genetics who cares because genetic
expression ends up changing radically
our genetics largely predisposed
neuroplasticity so we can be radically
mimetic creatures
if by nature we mean that which is
inexorably unchangeable well that whole
concept is nonsense in a genetic
engineering world one of the things I
love about CRISPR even though I actually
don't think we're nearly as close to
being able to utilize CRISPR safely as
we can learn but one of the things I
love about it as a thought experiment is
as soon as we are now realistically
thinking about being able to change the
genome or whole idea of nature change
conceptually it's a great thought
experiment to say well
even if we did evolve to have inexorable
competitive or whatever traits now
do we want to keep those or not when you
have that level of exponential tech
where you can change the connect don't
change the genome the level of
existentialism and ethics to say what is
a desirable set of traits becomes poor
right you have to address it the core
science doesn't do desirable right it
does what is not what about historically
so how do we actually make a
scientifically commensurate ethics and
existentialism as part of the core of
our work but if I was to just pass
forward over all the subtleties I
wouldn't say what do I think are the
aspects of human nature that are in
ignorantly problematic I would say none
I think there's a lot of aspects of
human nature that lead to problems when
the right conditionings there but I
think other sets of conditioning lead to
fundamentally different expressions of
that same nature and so there is a
propensity for human agency for the
impulse to self-actualize if that is
growing up in the context of zero-sum
games and finite games from a game
theoretic perspective that can look like
lack of empathy pathological competition
selfishness if you're growing up in the
context and your neuro plastically
wiring in the contexts of positive some
games where winning doesn't require
others losing which then requires and
loving to the pain of others losing ie
shutting off empathy and in infinite
games where you are not winning to win
but you're winning to keep playing right
what does it mean to keep playing so you
can't externalize harm when you change
the games here at our constructs I think
the fundamental impulse to agency
self-expression naturalisation and the
fundamental impulse to communion
connecting with others can be
simultaneously optimized without any
fundamental dichotomy so the problems
are the game theoretic level which means
an economic worldview mimetic structural
level not a which in effect of course
genetic expression but are not
fundamentally at a genetic expression
model sure I definitely heard you're
saying in it as you know I'm a big fan
of Abraham Maslow's thinking and you
just used the term self-actualization
and you know when he talked about is man
fundamentally good or bad he says he
thinks it were neutral and you know it
just depends on what are the sort of
conditions that are getting what needs
met and what needs not met so I do like
to think of it from a nice perspective
it looks like you kind of would agree
with that sort of perspective of
neutrality in a way or what part of the
human condition do better in a highlight
I think that saying neutral is fair
meaning we can have an environment say
we go to some part of North Africa where
female genital mutilation is ubiquitous
or we go to the Dark Age we're burning
women as which is which of equities we
can now look at that from outside or
retrospective as a like liquidus
insanity right of the insurable
population they were like infected with
a psychopath logic said it means we when
we look today at the fact that we
externalize harm to the environment with
almost every single action we do and we
still think that war is a reasonable
solution to differences and we step over
homeless people while we go get more
 future generations will see us as
we pick with ously insane psychopath
logic mmm ethically I'm sure that and
yet of course when anyone's in there a
big widow psychopathology it's just
called normal so we obviously have the
possibility for a level of terrible
terribly like scientifically optimised
torture that no other animal had we also
have the capacity for levels of insight
and rapture and charity and selflessness
and no other animals I mean we're these
just radical potential capacities but I
wouldn't say we're neutral because
universe is neutral the nature of
evolution itself is that it selects for
more orderly complexity that has new
emergent properties and it doesn't
select for the opposite right like there
is a macro Tilos directionality to
evolution that goes from non-life to
life from prokaryotes to eukaryotes from
plant to neurology from reptilian
mammalian etc so life isn't neutral
change is moving in an orderly
complexity direction and with humans
right now look we're at this very
interesting place where we can actually
understand that because of our capacity
for abstraction and choose to
participate with it and our
technological capacity is big enough
that if we don't
self-destruct and so we're at a very
unique point right now at the beginning
of the escape velocity on exponential
tech where we have existential tech
right nuke was the beginning but now
it's becoming decentralized existential
tech so we will either have the negative
traits that we have had for a long time
self-destruct us where we will emerge
into fundamentally net positive traits
because it's the only way to make it
through so this is cool
so we do have existential tech and
you're in a lot of ways developing the
office of that what do you call that
what's the opposite of existential tech
technology that enhances us in a way
that makes us more pro-social and
cooperative what is that call you can
call it on the considerate Tech Omni
consideration is a term that you could
apply at different scales when we're
thinking about working in human biology
medicine well being on the consideration
would mean what are all the pathways
that are affected by this chemical or
this therapy other than the ones that
were intentionally infecting which are
usually what we call side-effects and
how can we be considered across the
entire system including what will the
effects be in the future are we down
regulating an internal regulatory system
or are we operating its capacity or so
I'm going to consider it at the level of
human physiology would be just factoring
all the externalities progressively
better on they consider it at the level
of the environment would be factoring
all the externalities what affects the
whole supply chain environment Romney
considered at the top level is
recognizing that we are not really
separate parts that can think of our own
advantage and disadvantage and win lose
games separately but we in effect each
other powerfully not only in fact the
biosphere powerfully enough that we are
all really emergent properties of the
biosphere emergent properties of the
whole so we have to think about the
balance sheet of the whole thing right
of civilization and the whole how do we
support that that's Omni consideration
applied to tech and choice-making writ
large
we had Dan Siegel on this podcast where
we had a very similar conversation about
the interconnectedness of of all life
forms but the thing is I mean it must be
frustrated you must be frustrated you
know I mean you you see something you
kind of see it true that I think you
know you're quite right I think a lot of
people take this for you as well I think
a lot of Buddhists
take that view I mean kind of see that
but there's so much in the world of
people that refuse to see that view I
mean the American politics Patel is you
know one example of this polarization
seems to be hot right now you know for
lack of a better word and it so must be
really frustrating and what do you think
we can do to convince people on the
level which they will be receptive to it
how can we have them see that you're me
main protaganist slightly differently
American politics isn't just
dysfunctional it's broken right it was
breaking for some time and last election
we got to see the Republican Party not
put forward good qualified candidates
the Democratic Party take people's
favorite candidate and not support them
and support someone who is highly
unfavored we got to see the two-party
system as a whole break down like it was
the beauty of what happened was what
only a few people were really acutely
aware of almost everybody became acutely
aware which is that it is a no longer
adequate system for how we do governance
and so we see this kind of increasing
chaos there and not just in the US but
with brexit with issues in crudo with
chews in Russia like around the world we
can see a movement towards nationalism
because of problems with globalism but
also problems nationalism like we didn't
have 7 billion people ever right we only
hit a billion pilla 1815 for the first
time after two and a half million times
and we didn't have this level of
technology per capita in the world this
month resource capita so we're in a
fundamentally different scenario than
we've ever been and we needed a
different kind of decision making a
different kind of economics and it would
take us a while to get into it but in
the next 15 years 30% of all jobs will
become obsolete from technological
automation that is a that will be a
complete failure of capitalism unless we
do something like a basic income because
not only you won't be able to move
people to other jobs because AI will be
automating other jobs so you've got guys
like Elon who are famous capitalists
saying go to basic income which is not
capitalism and it's also not long-term
sustainable the critiques of it are also
it's on the path to something that is
not Marxist socialist capitalist but
fundamentally new stuff it's mediated by
new technological capacities we didn't
have in previous levels of economic
theory so I don't think it's just about
motivating people to see something
different because the the thing that we
need to move to hasn't been sealed right
it's emerging it's about now actually
developing what solutions for a
ongoingly viable civilization in the
presence of the technological power we
have what that actually looks like and
then building that so it's demonstrated
success creates an exodus from the
failing system to a viable system I mean
there is a in terms of the seeing aspect
and seeing different perspectives I mean
something more fundamental and that's
just seeing the value of not being
selfish there is this innate human
tendency that to be selfish and I mean I
hear you talking and I hear someone
who's making abstract arguments that are
not implication of you and only you but
people I just see a lot everywhere I see
people who were making decisions solely
based on them and only them and that's
obviously problematic for them in the
long run ended the rest of the planet
but it's hard to convince people of that
because of these strong ego protection
drives you notice that as a kid they
might think about them and only them and
then maybe as a parent they think about
them and their kids right as someone who
steps deeply into a religious
organization they think about them and
their people whatever their religious
group is if they become nationalists in
a deep way as a citizen they think about
them and their people as a citizenship
or as a race so this movement from
egocentric to ethnocentric to rather
there's identity of who we are connected
to that expands and the direction of
evolution is more inclusivity into a
world centric and cosmos centric how do
we recognize more that we're
interconnected with and include that in
our circle of care and choice making I
think the key thing to recognize right
now is and this is a hard one but
civilization the main ways that we have
done civilization so far are coming to
an end and fundamentally new systems
will emerge if we are to continue
you making it if you talk to people who
are studying coral and ocean
acidification dead zones in the ocean
ocean temperature rays etc they'll say
we have a very short number of years to
make the oceans cooler than they
currently are or actually dying slowly
at the current temperature and we depend
on them you existing right off lankton
that supports the atmosphere the same is
true across so many you know it 15 years
to 30 percent of the jobs found that
means a switch off of capitalism in a
very short timeframe where climate
change is not a Chinese issue or an
Indian issue or a u.s. issue it is a
human on earth issue and more than human
right it's like a mammal on earth issue
so is nuclear disarmament so are the
threats of exponential tech we've never
had a time in the history of the world
where all of our issues were
interconnected global and existential
you had like Gandhi dealing with an
Indian issue you had people leaving
Britain to go find some new lands start
America there's no new land to go find
somewhere else you can't leave the
problem and you can't say somebody else
can continue to be problematically any
country continuing in the wrong
direction with species extinction or
climate change strategies is enough to
take us over the tipping point so we're
at this unique place where our global
interconnectedness and power is such
that we either all collectively identify
that we're in this together on this tiny
little bitty spaceship called Earth
floating through this vast cosmos and we
up regulate how we do everything to have
no externalities to be Omni positive or
we all don't make it together basically
win-lose games are over because we are
too big for the playing field what it
takes to beat the other guy actually
destroys the whole playing for them now
we move into either or lose those games
but there it's one of those to win win
or lose lose yeah in order to have that
perspective that you really have to take
the long perspective beyond yet you have
to be able to imagine the planet and
care about the planet beyond your your
very puny 80 years max if you're lucky
you know or a hundred years in max you
know perspective yet you have to think
about beyond that and and I don't think
a lot of people really are thinking
beyond that if you look at the fact that
we're looking at
geoengineering which could have radical
consequences to our atmosphere in the
world for many generations because we
are so desperate about temperature
chains in the next few years the issue
of coral is being addressed in the next
five years it's not years the issue with
everyone losing their current jobs the
next 15 years this is this is if people
have children before their children grow
up they won't be growing up into a world
anything like the one they grew up in so
you actually don't need very long reins
thinking you just need to pull the
ostrich head out of the sand actually
have a look and say stop what does it
actually take to close the gap between
the trajectory we're on and on we need
to be in to know that's fair there are
certainly are issues that are that we
need to be awakened to within right now
no I definitely take that point we talk
about the tropics and define that that's
going to be a new term to a lot of our
listeners so I don't want to just throw
that word out there can you explain what
that word means and what people were
doing in that space
sure no tropic as a term it was defined
with the development of molecule called
piracetam the beginning of the research
in this area really deeply which means a
chemical that can enhance some aspect of
cognitive capability beyond normal
baseline without meaningfully negative
side effects and it's a rough definition
but that's still generally how it's used
so some aspect of parliment enhancement
could mean short-term memory or working
memory or long-term memory or focus or
concentration or creativity or analysis
or synthesis or you know some of those
things and hopefully more of them and
beyond baseline means not just taking
someone who has brain fog and getting
them back to normal capacity which say
someone has a deficiency of some key
nutrient the brain needs supplementing
those brain nutrients could get someone
back up to baseline but it's not going
to get them beyond baseline because
that's part of the evolutionary
environment that evolved to baseline
these are going to be things that
modulating modifying some aspect of
normal physiology typically when you
modify a normal physiology there's some
trade-off effect that occurs where you
get some negative somewhere else so the
idea that you can enhance something
beyond baseline and not have a
meaningful negative is this kind of like
magical unicorn idea but it actually
seems to be demonstrating itself is true
in a number there is where and this is
in Contra distinction to both let's say
brain nutrients that would just bring
you back up to baseline if you were
deficient or other forms of medicine
that would bring you up back up to
baseline if there's some pathophysiology
or say you're dealing with
anti-inflammation of brain inflammation
or whatever or some smart drugs that can
increase some aspect of function beyond
baseline but have meaningful
consequences methamphetamine at all etc
right and depending upon someone's
physiology these have the ability to
modify dopamine acetylcholine whatever
it is depending upon the kind of drug it
is but typically those single drugs
synthetic mechanisms they work through
some process that overrides the way the
body naturally produced that chemical
that transmitter which means if you use
them long term you can get down
regulation and dependence ie addiction
and often times are modifying one
chemical in a way where that chemicals
getting kind of fixed based on an
external stimulus so you're less
adaptive and that chemical that was in a
dynamic set of ratio for the bunch of
other chemicals the other chemicals
aren't also being effective so in other
words you'll get a narrow set of
positive effects it's only going to
affect some aspects of the function you
get side effects and down regulation so
no topics are the exploration into how
to up regulate things
ideally lastingly at minimum without
lasting orders do we have data on the
long-term effects of trying to tropics
like over the lifespan some we have
Grasset am starting that field was
started you know was studied in the
early 60s and so we now have people who
had multi year and multi decade use and
we have different kinds of performative
tests as well as you know brain scans
blood chemistry many other rasa tabs
many other amp Akane's different
categories nootropics have longer-term
data but we haven't been able to study
this field as well as we would study
normal things in medicine because our
kind of western modern model for
medicine as if this is based model where
if there is a disease we're looking at
treating the disease
we get a lot of funding because we'll be
able to get FDA approval and then you
know sell a drug so for enhancement
where you're not treating a disease
you're not going to be able to get FDA
approval you're not gonna be able to
sell it as a drug and there's a whole
set of like our whole process of studies
factors what we call risk benefit ratio
where you're willing to have some risk
and study because there is a disease
that if you don't treat there's risk of
getting it and so how do we do risk
benefit ratio for enhancement it's a
totally new topic but it's a topic
that's being explored everywhere in
transhumanism right now brain chip
interplant
implants you know gene therapy etc and
nootropics are one of those fields so
there's a lot of quantified self data
and have like the early people in
steroids who made a lot of mistakes but
then actually learned a lot about
endocrinology that the endocrinologist
couldn't learn that had advanced the
field of endocrinology and now made you
know we have Psalms today that have the
same positive effect with a tiny
fraction of the negative effects of the
early anabolic steroids that came about
through that kind of citizen science
testing of course at the cost of some of
the people the tropics has had a similar
curve and so we have data but the data
is not as deep long-term and robust as
we would like it to be and it will be
yeah I've been reading a lot of blogs
from people who have been treating
themselves human guinea pigs and trying
lots of things I have to say I have to
thank you for introducing me to the
whole idea of nootropics it's a
fascinating world and it really has
inspired me I would say to to really
understand what you know there clearly
are some nootropics that are more well
studied than others that's for sure and
I don't think they're all in an equal
footing I don't think you would say they
are at all now you created something
called qualia right this was very well
researched so you put together 40
ingredients is that right that are
synergistic with each other
yeah the current version of auliah has
42 ingredients but we have many many
many different iterations and versions
so what's the difference between
nootropics and what are called smart
drugs the difference we nootropics and
SSRIs for instance where are the
difference between those so just to be
explicit about something that's probably
obvious so
medical disclaimer part nothing that
we're sharing here is medical advice I'm
not a medical doctor thank you for
saying that your podcast and me and
neural hacker aren't giving medical
advice etc so this is just general
information and anything that one wants
to explore regarding medicine they
should go check with a alright
profession on that front I accessorize
are actually a they approved medicine
for treating certain diagnosed illnesses
primarily psychiatric and some other
illnesses and they're one category of
psychiatric madness other meds that
modify serotonin and nearly opposite
ways SSRIs and tricyclics two different
things
dopamine modifying GABA modifying etc
kind of things in the in the field of
Psychiatry psycho chemical smart drugs
is a term that generally means a
pharmaceutical that is being used for an
off-label purpose meaning a doctor
didn't give somebody drug for this
purpose but an off-label purpose for
enhancing some aspect of cognitive
function and these will usually either
be narcolepsy drugs that are going to
promote wakefulness the utero X and a
female arm and F and all that those
kinds of things they will be sometimes
anti Alzheimer's and Parkinson's kinds
of things
l-dopa and tune episode things like that
or say psychiatric meds wellbutrin that
are all Debra Nell and some of these can
actually be balancing for certain
people's physiology depending upon
what's out of balance but most of the
time these will serve some kind of
psycho stimulatory role in a way that
will lead to long-term instability and
the risk-benefit is deemed worthwhile in
the current field of medicine because
it's addressing some real dysfunction
for somebody but in general I don't
recommend much in the way of smart drugs
and it doesn't mean that there's no
positive application of them but I
recommend people be highly educated
before exploring and then explore
conservatively I appreciate that
what I'm trying to understand is how is
the difference but to like your qualia
nootropics in general they do affect and
they do target neurotransmitters they do
target like dopamine production
serotonin production that's exactly what
that says
with target serotonin production how is
that different so let's take a look at
dopamine princess sono favorite it's my
favorite molecule yeah it is a favorite
for everybody the dopamine opioid axis
right the kind of pain pleasure reward
circuit axis is one of the deepest
evolutionary biology axes in nervous
systems for knowing what to avoid and
what to go towards and so major aspects
of how pain pleasure dynamics work etc
are their most OCB addiction is a
dysregulation of that system it's a
profoundly deep system even if someone
also has serotonin or bottle or other
things to address so dopamine is the
first of the catecholamines so it
converts to northen Efrain and then to
epinephrine and those are all kind of
stimulatory neurotransmitters dopamine
has a lot to do with focused attention
concentration also pattern analysis and
pattern recognition pattern isset ii
it's why if it's excessive you can get
full pattern recognition single to
schizophrenia oh yeah yeah and if it's
deficient you'll have lack of Drive lack
of motivation as well as inability to
recognize patterns adequately so under
performance it's not more or less that
we're interested in it is the
adaptiveness right it's how the dopamine
process can self-regulate well because
when you're trying to relax and fall
asleep you don't want to have dopamine
peaking you want it to be able to chill
and you're trying to concentrate you
want your body to be able to up regulate
so one thing is rather than give someone
a dopamine agonist that is going to
elevate dopamine kind of no matter what
we would like to be able to give
precursors and then the conversion
factors on those precursors and other
things that support your body's
dopaminergic processes so that it can do
its own basically you think about it has
the body as an internal and endogenous
regulatory system how do we support that
regulatory system to self-regulate
better so what dopamine dopamine is you
have a essential amino acid
phenylalanine it gets converted to
tyrosine it gets converted to acetyl
tyrosine it gets converted to l-dopa it
gets converted to dopamine
it has to travel a process and apps
where it's broken down by chemicals like
mao-b
and then it has to get up taken and the
postsynaptic dopamine receptors and
there's differential up taking the d1 d2
d3 receptors that affect how it
processes and it can also be broken down
by hydroxylase into norepinephrine etc
so if someone doesn't have enough phenyl
alanine enough tyrosine if they don't
have enough of the phosphorylated
version of b6 that helps convert or
vitamin C or copper that helps convert
the amino acids into l-dopa
and then into dopamine if they're mao-b
levels are excessively high or they
hydroxide these are all gonna lead to
imbalances in their own regulatory
systems so we were looking at common
regulatory difficulties and how to be
able to support the systems have
increased regulatory robustness and so
therefore you're less likely to see grow
side effects yeah right so think about
you know when I when I was talking about
the amino acids the vitamins and
minerals were necessary as cofactors
plus the synaptic transmission plus the
receptor site modulation we're looking
at multiple steps across a whole pathway
and we're seeing where the rate limiting
effects and how can we support those and
but then that's just opening right and
so increased concentration without
increased working memory ends up being
pretty lame and so increased working
memory is mostly not dopamine lot
supported right it's mostly mediated by
acetylcholine and other transmitters
and the compte yeah well so that now
we're looking at enzymes again right
yeah and so if we're wanting to increase
short-term and long-term and working
memory and intensity of focusing on
concentration but also the capacity for
task switching well it was we kind of
modeled from a cognitive science
perspective what are all the things
we're wanting to affect or what people
call the synergy of those things are
cognitively available creative
productive flow states of that what are
the underlying physiological pathways
that mediate those and then how do we
support those pathways then let's look
at synergies between them
sounds like a fair approach well I do
wonder though okay so in listening to
this could be like well like how
you why are you why do you have so much
confidence you were not formally trained
you're not you could imagine a doctor
listening to this and and just
immediately dismissing this whole thing
is saying well look I'm not even gonna
listen to this because he didn't even go
through med school what do you say that
you know so I was like like why are you
so confident in what you're saying well
having a lot of respect for what we
consider better methods of
interdisciplinary education and
traditional specialist education usually
does we also have a lot of respect for
people that the cutting edge of their
specialties that formally trained in it
so you know this wasn't developed in
isolation this development was working
with many doctors were working and
integrated facilities running pre and
post blood labs and we actually started
with you know having some medical
directors I want to play with us and
particularly with patients they're
having a hard time with him he said we
show again risk-benefit made sense to
them because they were having a hard
time they said we think we've got an
approach that could help and so we were
customizing chemistry based on looking
at their genome their clinical chemistry
their clinical intake etc and then
getting to see really profound shift not
just in subjective reporting but in
those same biometrics being tested again
and so then that that's actually where
we started in the formulation process
and then started to say well what things
are pretty common across most people who
have similar desires or symptom ology
that we could before getting into
personalized medicine be able to
meaningfully affect at scale so the
doctors were contributing to the insight
of you know how we did formulation and
then we've had a number of PhD
neuroscientists of different disciplines
neural chemists on petition we're all
scientists etc look at what we're doing
give us feedback on at a number of
different kinds of doctors psychiatrists
and integrative MDS and etc look at it
and give us feedback on it many doctors
just find what we were doing start using
it in their clinics and contact us and
saying you know here are the effects
were seeing in patients they were very
positive so we're actually just starting
to put together a program to kind of
like harvest this that or better how we
can be distributed science and of course
once we came to a place that we felt
good
our own internal testing on formulation
which had many rounds we did a formal
safety data sheet we had you know which
looked at all of the research meta
analysis structured review on all the
ingredients and etc and we had
pharmacists look at it doctors look at
it HD neuro chemists look and I I went
through you know I don't take anything
at face value right so I mean I looked
every researched every single one of the
ingredients and I like spent like a day
on each one I was like because that
one's very potent it's very potent so
racetam starting with piracetam in them
there's many other racetam zener asset
an impressive them do different things
but their primary effect is up
regulating acetylcholine uptake in the
nmda complex so they're learning helps
with learning and memory learning memory
working memory but also sensory motor
nerve capacity and so they are
allosteric modulator zat the nmda
complex and then which racetam will have
differential effects on gaba receptors
or dopamine receptors etc so rasa tems
are really the first kind of major area
of Metroplex that people get into it
anyone gets into no tropic and then
because they're they're affecting the
postsynaptic neurons uptake of
acetylcholine then they'll usually start
stacking them with some choline donors
may be some acetyl group donors and then
maybe some things to help the
acetylcholine get across the synapse
like acetylcholinesterase inhibitors and
so you know that's how you can kind of
start to stack the pathway for
acetylcholine the next major category
that people really kind of come to get
into with no topics that are very
meaningful are amp Athene's
which are glutamate uptake on the
postsynaptic neuron so much leaders of
the AMPA complex and up regulating the
glutamate up taking increases the speed
of synaptic transmission but also
decreases excitotoxin from excessive
levels of glutamate and that staying in
the synapse so new pet new pet has am
packing like and racetam like properties
at the same time meaning that it up
regulates both due to main and
acetylcholine uptake in the postsynaptic
neuron which is quite unique aniracetam
also does both of those but
does it more potently and so there's
research showing it as being
neuroprotective because it is
specifically protecting neurons from
excitotoxin city damage while typically
you could decrease excitotoxicity from
glutamate by just scavenging glutamate
and you can use things like oxaloacetate
to do that but then you're decreasing
the speed of glutamatergic transmission
so new pep does this unique thing where
it decreases excited Lexus city while
increasing glutamatergic transit
transmission released support minute
so new pip is a very interesting
molecule from the standpoint of being
both neuroprotective and increasing a
number of interesting dimensions of
learning attention and and one of the
big kind of holy grails the space is
working memory yeah I see a big in terms
of Holy Grail it turns the future of
this is it's it's obviously it
personalizing dosage because there's
individual differences in genetics that
that help regulate neurotransmitter
production and how in some interactions
so I'm sure you're working on that area
right so we are and you know being able
to have integrative doctors
psychiatrists neurologists general
practitioners get support and better and
better methodologies for assessing brain
chemistry and not just brain chemistry
but endocrinology physiologic chemistry
etc and then putting all that together
and then being able to work to balance
and optimize it that's hugely important
and it's an area that you know we are
working in and working with some small
number of doctors to kind of prototype
methodologies but also working on
structures that could be brought more
widely but there's also things that we
that could happen that are not dr.
atheras mediated so imagine a portal
where someone can take cognitive
assessments online using best in class
online cognitive assessment that has
been correlated to best in class and
personal assessment and shows high
accuracy and also online psychometric
assessments and so that people can see
how their pattern recognition their work
memory but also structured subjective
insights into their you know psychologic
state predisposition etc and they could
track that in time then imagine
they could load up into that same portal
and somatic portal and they control
their information so it's not being used
by anybody company for reasons they
don't want that they could upload their
motion tracker data their content by
itself there's loop tracker data and
then maybe even if they go get medical
blood data
qyg data and then the system doesn't
just look at each one of the
psychrometric s-- and biometrics on
their own in relationship to a reference
range but starts looking at what is that
whole complex of data with all the other
pieces tell us that is synergistically
more than the separate pieces right you
could imagine like a Fitbit for this
literally tracks this stuff throughout
the day absolutely so we are looking at
the intersection of quantified self data
harvesting sounder adoptable biometric
Diagnostics and better psychometric
Diagnostics and then the synthesis of
all that knowledge to then be able to
customize protocols both at the level of
medical protocols where doctors can use
it and at the level of just
direct-to-consumer wellness protocols
now for that imagine a version of qualia
that is fully customized where we get to
take all this data from someone and then
customized which chemicals and which
amounts are in there that requires a
robotic we automated compounding
pharmacy that can make a custom
formulation from a bunch of powders
based on an AI generation of their
specific formulation based on the
biometric data that's complex to do it's
a dream of ours we want to we want to
get there and be able to do it and we're
definitely worked on how to do that but
it's not right around the corner yet but
maybe in our lifetime oh and do much
sooner than that
are you familiar with note six
experience machine full of philosophical
experiment no you know he has this
thought experiment you know imagine if
we could hook you up to a machine and it
gives you whatever it is desirable or
pleasurable anytime you want it turns
out most people would not want that
because they want to the will is
something about the human will about
suffering and overcoming suffering that
makes us human that makes us want to
gives us a sense of meaning in life
ultimately the kind of vision you have
for this world at which I share and I
and I think is really quite admirable
we'll have to go beyond nootropics right
I mean it's only part
the whole system of cultural changes of
personal changes as well that is willed
right yet
so let's just roughly break down four
categories that we can look at this in
terms of that are not reducible to each
other but are all under effect sounds
good let's think about human physiology
which includes our you know EEG pattern
computational neuroscience stuff our
neural chemistry or endocrinology the
our microbiome genetic expression just
all of the things that affect what you
can think of as the human Hardware so
there are human Hardware predispositions
for I mean if you just think about
consciousness running on that Hardware
then then empathy runs on certain neural
networks utilize utilizing certain
neural chemistry etc that can be up or
down legged it can be down regulated by
head trauma by microbiome imbalances by
toxicity can also be operated by a
number of things so let's think about
the human Hardware predispositions and
capacities let's think about human
software being our value systems or
world view or understanding themselves
or understanding of other right now
they're they're not hardware software as
totally distinct categories like they
are in computers because of course they
are dynamically intersecting each other
continuously in real time that's means
that the neural plasticity where your
thoughts are affecting physiology and
your physiologist predisposing thoughts
it is a it is a completely intimate link
between them but we can so roughly think
of those categories so on the software
side we have education we have media we
have psychology with personal
development psychotherapy etc on the
hardware side we have not just medicine
but the future of well-being
optimization and those are both at the
level of the individual then at the
level of beyond the intuitive level of
the collective kind of the hardware of
the collective is infrastructure how we
meet our physical needs in relation to
the planet water energy agriculture
transportation in factoring waste
management and then the software the
collective is the agreement fields that
run over that is social structures
economics governance
language ultimately the hardware and
software of the individual and the
collective all have to be upgraded and
for this kind of phase shift that
humanity is entering into and upgraded
towards Omni positivity meaning that
each of those four have things that
affect human experience in human
behavior the environment right the
lower-right infrastructure that the
build world and natural world
environment affect you can experience
and affect your behavior so do the
social agreement fields culture
economics etcetera economics what we
incentivize very directly affection
behavior what we have status of
allocated to etc our definition of
success in the individual and human
software and our physiology so we would
say no topics are just the first part
we're getting into of human physiology
which is just one of these areas and all
of them are necessary but only all of
them together makes efficient yeah I
appreciate you outlining those for that
topology there are heart there are
things we can do software wise that can
show the same effects on phy ology and
physiology as the nootropics
in some case like meditation can get you
in a state of mind it's so there's
different routes perhaps to this upgrade
there's not just a single route and
there are multiple routes that can get
you the same place perhaps some time
same place and sometimes different but
related but highly synergistic places
when they come oh sure yeah for sure and
that's the beauty of self-organizing
systems and I mean that's the whole
point of systems right is that you want
to get to a point where they're all
integrated and that the entropy is
minimized we were just talking about
whole systems and self-organization yeah
and by understanding how whole systems
works leads to a perspective that
emphasizes synthesis of all of the
meaningful modalities one of the
concepts that we have to get over that
is kind of reductionism in the negative
sense rather than positive as the word
is kind of looking for single bullet
silver bullet solutions you know a
single molecule that's going to fix this
whole thing well it wasn't a single
molecule that was off there was a whole
cascade of systemic effects that were
off and so is it human hardware or is it
human software or is it the environment
or well it's usually all items some kind
of complex so the question becomes if
someone's physiology is off how to
balance it can lead to their psychology
being out of balance which can lead to
their physical
make more at once and you get a vicious
cycle you can also get virtuous cycles
of creating lift and meb areas making it
easier for better behavior and function
in those areas creating more lift so our
interest is how do we stop negative
feedback cycles and how do we promote
virtuous cycles positive feedback cycles
between by the mind relationship
environment right between all of those
intersecting complexes and how do we
meaningfully synthesize and support all
of the modalities are actually effective
no that sounds like a great goal I mean
you have our thoughts you know like
cognitive behavioral therapy effects do
the way we frame things don't way we
make meaning out of our experiences
effects our cortisol production it
affects you know our negative reactions
so we it in all these different they're
bi-directional you know yes all these
different ways Daniel thank you so much
for your generosity in China with me
today and I do wish you all the best in
your endeavors likewise it was a blast
thank you thanks for listening to the
psychology podcast with dr. Scott Barry
Kaufman I hope you found this episode
just as thought-provoking and
interesting as I did if you'd like to
read the show notes for this episode or
hear past episodes you can visit the
psychology podcast calm
[Music]