okay we're now recording Jordan just
talking about the notion of a certain
relationship between universal basic
income yeah
the meaning crisis and and then dot dot
dot so right and I think this is also
germane to our discussions about the
religion that's not a religion because
what we've tried to say about central
that if the religion was try to make
these the non-negotiables that the
religion that's not a religion has to
address or we failed in the design yeah
but I was talking to now by the way I
would never bridge I would actually say
something like so if we take you VI as a
pointer to a category universal basic
income that category the scenic when on
its design characteristics include the
religion that's not a religious yes yes
oh yes I like that
yes of a combo combination I think
that's good so and I think this fits in
even better now that you've made that
bridge and that you've made it a
reciprocal reconstruction and
integration so soggy the ocean and he I
was trying to point out that because he
was actually asking but okay how do we
take this stuff about the meaning crisis
and how do we Ratchet it up to the
structural social structural level right
right of sort of our our socio cultural
political economic you know
organizations and the first thing I said
was you know well I don't I don't have
expertise at that so I want to be very
cautious but one of the things we talked
about was we talked about how our
culture has tended to conflate the
pursuit of subjective well-being with
the pursuit of meaning in life that
those are actually not the same thing um
and they should be distinguished and our
culture has also thought that the
pursued that the correlation between
resolving socio economic distress and
subjective well-being is a perfectly
linear one in women and of course it's
not right the relationship like so
socio-economic distress when you're in
poverty in huge impact on subjective
well-being but once you get out of
poverty as you as you know from the
research the graph you know really
starts to flatten
comes irrational to pursue these things
because you have to put it you need a
huge increase in wealth for example of
you'll allow me that word to make very
small differences if people's subjective
well-being because you get into very
quickly you get into powerful
diminishing returns so that so the
relationship is not a linear correlation
and then also subjective well-being and
meaning in life are very different
things right and the classic example I
use you might have heard me use this
before is having a child when you have a
child many of the measures that the
Enlightenment talked about go down like
your your finances get really hot yet
you're not sleeping right you're getting
sick your health is generating your work
is impaired your longevity is actually
jeopardized so your subjective
well-being crashes when you have a child
you know what I'm talking about cuz
you've had one fairly recently but you
do why do people do it then if there's
all this diminishment reliable dis
management of subjective well-being Bo
because meaning in life goes up because
why well what's happening is you if
let's talk about people who are trying
to become good parents right and they
want to be parents I'm talking about
parenting in this sense much beyond
biological offspring alright um so right
well what happens is you I mean it's one
of the most profound things to take you
out of your ego centrism right because
you you know you the child is now the
center and this is that this is one of
the factors that so contributory of
meaning in life is called mattering I
want to matter I want to be highly
relevant to something that is outside my
egocentric set of preferences and
desires and goals right and that
mattering that transformation from
egocentrism to other centrism or even
Anto centrism is one of the things that
is constitutive of you know in enhance
meaning let you be as Susan will said
you're connected to something bigger
than yourself something that has a value
independent of you just liking it or or
preferring it because we think persons
have inherent value to them right and
you're engaged in the a gapek project of
making the person and so I think I look
part of it he was asking me to respond
to people like Steven Pinker and like
well you know look at my drafts look at
my crops
and I was saying well again I think the
Enlightenment made a couple of
confusions and that it got locked into
our socio-economic political grammar or
code to use your language in that we
we've we've made a mistake we've
conflated and confused meaning in life
with subjective well-being that's a big
mistake and then we thought the
relationship between socio-economic
improvement and subjective well-being
was a linear one and it's not it's
curvilinear right in an important way
and that's that's why you can see you
know areas of huge affluence like
Silicon Valley also being places places
in which the meaning crisis is being
experienced in a very intense manner and
now I think I think that's important to
sort of bring in here and and I I think
therefore that what you just did a
minute ago is completely apropos of that
that what's going on is yeah we just I
think I like this matter where you're
just dumping money on people isn't going
to be enough precisely because that
dumping right it is still caught up with
in this grammar that that I say that I'm
saying is deeply mistaken in these two
kind of profound ways and that's why the
right the the universal basic income and
the religion that's not a religion have
to be powerfully integrated if we really
want to try and have a good shot at
improving people's lives yeah yeah that
was that was a bit of a speech but I I
thought there was an important argument
to get on the table for the two of us
yeah I think all the pieces fit together
quite nicely and your writing was the
size of the piece that was that all the
pieces had to be there to actually have
the whole thing right I was actually
wondering by the way I'm wondering if
there's a connection that loops back
between socio economics and meaning Oh
being well being decision ominous I
think there's a triangle or something
yeah yeah and I was talking to Sean
about that too and I mentioned our work
your work and I to him a lot on this
issue
and I was saying well what what I can
talk about is you know the how that
those confusions we were just talking
about are bound up with a confusion that
comes from sort of from the
socio-economic down if you'll allow
that that language that you're asking
about and as the way that's why I point
to you know Fromm's idea of the way
capitalism tends to promote modal
confusion in powerful ways because what
you get right is you get a certain
socio-economic organization in which the
being needs are always pursued in a Mis
deeply confused a mistaken faction in
the having mode now that actually makes
capitalism sort of work in the in the
abstract sense of there's more buying
and selling going on now but it makes it
deeply dysfunctional in the sense that
people are experiencing this with
Strom's point in the modal confusion
they're experiencing a kind of profound
existential frustration and futility
because they're consuming more and more
and yet not alleviating their hunger
it's kind of like you know like junk
food kind of consumption and so I think
that's I'm not claiming this takes
exhaustive or exclusive by any means but
I think that's one way in which the
socio-economic then feeds back down into
the meaning system beautiful yeah yeah
the constructor actually works quite
nicely one of the things that we've run
into people like Daniel enforced is that
there's a I think we can talk about this
mission of the triadic modalities right
the transcendent the imminent miss you
there's something about their
relationship that there's three so they
can kind of go one way or the other way
you're either go from transcendent to
image omniscient transcendent and kind
of flows clockwise in my visual field
right or you can go the other way it's
gonna go try some mission imminent
transcendent flow counterclockwise and
it seems like many many many times that
if you actually notice something that
seems to be wrong broken it's because
there's flow in the wrong direction so
well there happens is is that you way of
saying what you just said in in this
language be to say this or the
meaningfulness would map you the
transcend and that the the simulacrum of
meaningfulness is this modal confusion
precisely a modal yell fusion in writing
that instead of actually experiencing
the transcendent instead of experiencing
and being in relationship with mystery
instead of being feeling a deep profound
sense of meaningfulness we
simulate that at the level of
socio-economic right right right and
then what happens in since then we the
sprayer exist the other directions we
actually bring from the minutes and the
trend incentive to the emission and then
down into the imminent which is that we
now collapse the just so more and more
therefore if meaningfulness is is a
commodity that we can produce this is
you economic then subjective well-being
must in fact be always best satisfied by
an increase in the socio-economic domain
and by the way we now actually occlude
we lose track of the fact that the
subjective well-being and meaningfulness
are aren't the same thing
we actually difficult with this weird
construction if you what we're talking
about is reversing that flow right oh
that was brilliant what you just did I
thought that was really good that sounds
to me like at sort of the collective
level something deeply analogous to what
Mark Lewis talks about on the individual
level of addiction
well reciprocal narrowing and you're
getting a reciprocal narrowing it sounds
to me like if you're going one way that
that whole triad that you just pointed
to can do risk reciprocal opening or it
can do reciprocal narrowing and you can
get in locked into something that's very
analogous to addiction and ocean was
talking about this about how people are
cut there's no alternative to what we
have there is no option of B we're at
the end of history because there's
nothing this is the only way we can be
and this is the only kind of world we
can have you hear lots of arguments of
that effect and that's exactly the state
that the addict is in I can't be other
than Who I am and this is the only world
that is available to me there's no other
options in the world there's no other
options for my agency and that's exactly
the Attic that's what the Audi is
reciprocally narrowed down to that
stuckness and frozenness and it's not to
me you're describing something analogous
to that but at the macro level rather
than that at the individual level is
that is that fair yeah very very very
for Mom and you can actually show it way
what I notice is you're saying it's a
okay if you flip it like this notion the
place of a proper place or imagination
the proper place for
innovation the parking place for truly
entering exiting trance transcending
rate transgressor right a thing that
you're stuck in is that that transcended
mode but the mode in which
meaningfulness is anchored in the way
that I'm talking about it right now and
so precisely if you're going in this
direction which in my visual that is the
wrong direction
yeah anti-clockwise to use that think
the more poetic British construction
yeah that would make sense you would
actually have a reciprocal narrowing and
increasing in capacity to transcend and
because you've actually become you're
actually losing access to that mode
altogether where it was actually bike
going back and saying ah this is the
mode like geez if I feel stuck actually
to figure how to settle back into and
release myself from that that cycle that
trap and figure how to go to reciprocal
opening which is gonna say okay getting
there so this sounds to me like again
another design feature for the religion
that's not a religion right in addition
that in addition to that it has to be
coupled to ameliorating right the the
meta-crisis it should be one that's
doing this macro reciprocal opening yeah
we should be able to articulate and say
no no this is did here's a clear
narrative to because people are oriented
toward here's a clear narrative of how
we're cycling through this as a
reciprocal opening rather than cycling
through this in reciprocal narrowing
would you say that's also an important
design feature then yeah yeah it's just
to make that's that is it app for short
I can't say anchor nail it now how that
really shows up in reality I think it's
a really interesting yeah feels to me
like actually drop into that level of
concretion like doing a concrete example
of that I think it's good let's do
though let's do it yeah and I like the
idea it may be trying to explore it
using the metaphor of the Attic yes yes
because we've seen this like the 12-step
program did that that's what it does
they've got the 12-step program toaster
program is a program that slows down the
cycle right and actually enforces you it
requires that you open back up to the
transcendent as when you get to the
bottom of the cycle you have to open
back up to transcendence and you have to
you've connected something that is
greater to yourself and you're actually
surrendered like I can't solve this
problem so I surrender completely which
is in some sense like you've got this
cycle that sort of wound like this and
you're slowing it down slowing it down
slowing it down theory you has this
notion at the bottom to you it's a
little bit like that like it's a way of
getting back down to the bottom that you
would do is sort of a hard reboot and
then you begin again from the bottom of
the U but now not but now cycling in the
right direction and right trying to find
a way to stay in that right genetic
directionality and building up slowly
from that place so I'm leaking the
notion that you just mentioned of
surrender to an ocean of faith that
doesn't see faith in terms of belief but
like the auth that you've got a sense
that you are like immersed in that
there's a course that's unfolding as
things are opening up right because we
know I mean nobody's no no nobody's
sorry worries about the epistemic status
of knowing when there's falling downward
and getting stuff so that I mean I
brought this up with market if we have
that sense we also have the other sense
we have the Platonic and a gothic sense
at least late nerves we know what it's
like to become unstuck and to be opening
up right and right my god my faith is
that sense you know reliably not
perfectly good yes yeah that's right
it's great like you can even have yes
faith faith is very well grounded in
that sense that sense yeah
am i spiraling down or am i at least in
the process of beginning to spiral pop
yes exactly exactly and that that really
that really picks up again on the older
and I think better meaning of Metanoia
which is the term that's often
translated as conversion like you know
converting into a religion but Metanoia
actually meant you know a fundamental
change neue to notice noesis like it's
your salience landscape in Metta it's a
fundamental turning and transformation
of of like of your sort of enacted sense
making and that's what the Daath is
picking up on rather than the
acquisition of conviction of particular
propositional beliefs
absolutely yeah yeah again that's that
that's that done Moodle reversal yes
exactly because I call faith conviction
and certain proposition beliefs you're
going the wrong direction dude I think
so I think that's I think that's exactly
right and you could see why if you if
you're if you have the off right this is
why you have the taste metaphors in the
Bible or in other another sacred
literature because if when I'm spiraling
downward I'm getting the reciprocal
narrowing in the modal confusion and I'm
hungry in a way that I can't even
articulate but when I when I'm spiraling
up I'm starting to be less hungry and
less frustrated and I'm starting to also
be able to articulate why I'm no longer
hungry and how I and precisely how and
why I was hungry before and you get but
you can only do that while you're in the
stream
you can't like this is not something
that can be no one without
transformation that's that's the
important part yeah I mean the lyrics to
Amazing Grace yes yes lost but now I'm
found and yes my cup overfloweth that's
that characteristic of the yes eating it
the capacity to express but again as you
say if you have not experienced grace if
you've not experienced faith
particularly if you're locked in a modal
obligate propositional epistemology but
you're having propositions rather than
being faithful right yes that's right ya
know what I like about this is there's
something about if you can get down to
the right characteristics it gets very
simple I think I know that easy but
simple no no I understand that
distinction and I think it's important I
this goes towards the scalability issue
you know Paul basically talks about its
got it it's got to appeal to the
homeless person and to the philosopher
mmm-hmm if there's a sense in which it's
very simple in one it again not easy but
it's simple in the sense that it can be
enacted in embodied by human beings
right at the depths of them bottoming
out as you just said but that's
presumably what he means by the homeless
person but it can also reach off into
the upper echelon of the philosopher
trying to come up with a you know a
culturally transformative way of talking
and thinking at a highly abstract level
what I think what we're talking about
here is exactly
and I think that's the test that's
another test the test for the
scalability hmm okay yeah Yale ability
something like process or dynamics uh
okay there we go great
I love it would you do that by the way
oh really no no I mean I really enjoy it
just as an experience to belong to and
be part of so like thank you for that I
really like it a lot so there's this
thing scalability where we have there's
kind of like I've got so many different
metaphors but if there's there's there's
a way of thinking about scalability that
is coming from a place that is like like
copy you can copy it a lot you can copy
it a lot with with decreasing loss like
amuses prayer if I get the other part in
Atlanta and better and then there's
something where this the scalability is
actually generative where it actually
the more people who are participating in
it the more capacity that it has to be
for everyone who's participating so it's
my distinct she was rivalries in the
answer rival is everything that the
continuum of the rivalries we have on
the left-hand term scarcity like
privation right but on the right-hand
term we have something that we call like
plenitude I'm just gonna so yeah if you
use like like food rice on the left hand
term in the domain and the continuum of
rivalry I've got a bowl with a single
grain of rice almost nothing on the
right hand in term I've got a warehouse
piled with rice that I'm sitting on top
of which is great hey just a bunch of
 who cares at a certain point as you
start moving around that continuum if
you stay in the continuum of fundamental
rival ristmas you start moving from
having enough to having a superfluity of
enough this is very similar to our
socio-technical right diminishing
returns affinity yeah
flip it if you're on those other
continuum there's other continuously
anti rival risk as an travelers it's not
non-rival risk I mean other king the
anti rabbits what happens is is that
when you're on the on the far left side
secure you're in the part of the anti
reverse that shows up as being in light
light privation what you have is
something like like non scalability
difficultness scalability like what's
happening right now what I'm doing right
now is on that left hand side like it's
hard for me to express I'm not
expressing it well we haven't yet
developed a capacity to share well hard
to share poor poor me share I see as you
get to the to the middle term you start
getting is something that is shareable
easily share shareable like you couldn't
mp3s that I can copy music I could share
maybe Bob is sort of you can replicate
it really easily you replicate it and
the energetic cost per unit replication
is small and diminishing it's a zero
marginal cost society Rifkin sings very
middle term you get that far right term
and that's where things get very
interesting this is the sweet spot with
it I think it's the inside lies at the
far right side of the anti rivals is
where and this is like network effect
for every sharing the active sharing the
act of adding somebody increasingly into
the thing actually generates more thing
increases more capacity if you think
about that in the context of what Paul
was saying needs to be the homeless guy
if I'm thinking about the ante rival is
kind of in that middle zone cuz he's
calling for that middle zone say hey it
needs to be shareable here's we really
well shared anything we can share to the
homeless guy I started going keep going
say no no no we'd actually fit peg it
all the way to the right where to have
shared it at all with anyone
intrinsically increases the capacity to
share it with everyone
ah so it recursively it sort of evolves
its its capacity for sharing he thought
just doesn't just it doesn't just
replicate it evolves in that sense right
right right right that's the that's the
key right that's the inside that no yeah
that it's not scalable in the sense that
you can share it broadly it's scalable
in the sense that once it gets past a
certain critical point it becomes
inevitable because there's capacity to
bring more people in is so high and
every person that brings in increases
its
so it goes for being just except
actually it goes from being
self-perpetuating to self promoting in
in the fashion it's sort of like open to
article F right that's what I was going
to lead to exactly exactly exactly
oh that's Jordan that that's brilliant
that's it that's fantastic I think
that's an important point I think that's
another major point to bring in here
that what we need right is an ecology of
practice that has exactly that kind that
sense of scalability there should be a
second term for this is there like if if
what Paul is talking about is standardly
called scalability
what's this kind of evolving scalability
what's called the only language that
I've heard of this network effects and
it's not that's not a very strong term
no it's not intuitively you know
elucidating that term it doesn't really
it doesn't really I'm Jen exit
[Laughter]
I've even older than use but I think
that I think the phenomenon you're
pointing to I think that's right I think
that's a I think that's a respectful but
also very like thoughtful and insightful
response to Paul it's like you know
actually we don't want that that's
that's an old sort of you know
hierarchical way of thinking of this we
need something that's much more like a
dynamical system where we're we're
stability isn't understood in terms of
you know mechanical solidarity stability
is an understood understood in terms of
dynamical self correction right there's
a there's a way in which what you're
saying here it's ultimately correcting
itself because it's actually
qualitatively improving its
functionality as it's being shared and
think about you just used word evolving
and that's exactly the point
right in this that mission of the
reopening of the triadic modalities
exactly the opening a truly innovate to
truly literally go from 0 to 1 in
response to actually changing conditions
must be part of it but if you can't do
that then it's dude immediately it will
die for sure
yeah it's just a matter of time and then
that's the problem like everything we've
done in the context that I've called
game a how does that characteristic is
that it it any it's funny I look really
like this when you're talking about the
the cycle this dynamic cycle where we
have the axial age director look at the
Bronze Age collapse goes crazy and
everybody's kind of forced to go back to
well we got to figure out some new
just really not working and let me
figure out some new and then we
build with it like crazy for a long time
 that's just kind of building this
this build area and we and we invert the
cycle we start losing track oh that's
good relationship it's funny seems like
it actually happens I think about this I
become say having a background in mind
was phrased like there's a reason why
Buddha Socrates and Jesus didn't write
 down
yeah this is very interesting
characteristic I remember watching this
documentary of Buddhism and there's a
Cameron is just kind of right on the
tree there the Buddha's there Bodhi tree
right and it's perfect cuz you see the
tree he's against women my mind's eye is
like oh the trees in a forest
alright and then it started zooming out
and it gets to a certain point you begin
you see this with riot of color and a
cacophony of like stalls and you know
basically it's Disney World
Buddhist new world on the Mall of
America we were crazy in a very oh
that's what happens right what happens
is there's a moment of generativity
where the modes are in the right
orientation going in the right direction
but for some reason it's so and that
super salient if the movements of
superfluous aliens is such an easy
transition that we get this flip and the
what the flip does is the flip just kind
of it converts to propositional if
inverse right right right right
I'm I scale in the in the middle term
not scale on the right hand term yeah
there's probably activation energy yeah
I thought about this as well that I get
the feeling that we probably couldn't
have pulled this off until sometime in
the late seventies but there's something
about just the underlying socio
Nicolle capacity and the underlying
rights literal like well-being and level
of education or literacy and the ocean
that audio ideological development that
and what the wideness like the
globalization of it the general
spreading out that had to already be in
place the pushing that was too hard for
these autocatalytic autopoietic systems
yeah so they eventually kind of ran at a
steam the default mechanism was the
practical well it just goes super
salient lock it in there top-down
hierarchy is able to get done and a
do stuff which did I in churches
developed in the old sort of religion
that is a religion modality yeah and and
and and things moved but the the
proposition the hypothesis the hope is
that the context is now super saturated
fluid is super saturated and so the
possibility of one of something that is
coming in the right modality actually
generating getting through the face
transition and leaping over the
transition to being truly out of poetic
he's available like it's a real
possibility right oh my generation no no
my generation talked about I don't know
these people still use this somebody you
know from physics the critical mass idea
that you you like it sounded like only
only in the 70s do we have sort of
enough that it could start becoming you
know autocatalytic and and
self-organizing in a powerful way
yeah and probably as I say it probably
like in the 70s it began to have enough
like we were beginning to get the
components like you know that homeless
guy so this is why the way I'd the the
idea came up for me is that on the one
hand yes there needs to be some sort of
field effect there's some sort of
characteristic of the way of being in
relationship with religion it's not a
religion that actually looked at the
individual level it was a way for them
to sense in their body a up gradient
movement away from downward spiral and
towards upward spiral
yeah the notion of faith to be felt yeah
exactly exactly exactly
there's the conversion for them and
exactly and also though think about what
happens when they're beginning to notice
this in the context of some community
you can actually noticing the kind of
other people and the homeless person is
which eligible but zoom back to 800 AD
800 ad village and actually I'm not even
a village in like remote hinterlands at
the northwest China it's an in Tuscany
so I'm clear like in a place that has
some people at the end of the day the
likelihood that I'm going to encounter
another person who's really heard the
word and is feeling this thing richly
and deeply is actually kind of low yeah
not that many people around who don't
you know travel is very limited
communication with people I'm not lucky
enough I might get up and kind of head
to Assisi because I've heard there's
some going down yeah
hundred years later but that's kind of
it right there's like here critical mass
that the neutron density is preventing
the fission from actually popping over
the top but now it's there right now I
could just kind of pop in to a location
if the possibility of actually having
not so many caddying rods like sucking
the energy out of the system that's
wonderful all the time but they're just
having enough sort of you've got the
feeling for what this this faith feels
like right you can actually come in this
other direction and you're beginning to
notice with other people who have that
feel like and speak like then you can
find them like we can have this you and
I can have this conversation and we can
share this conversation and for a lot of
people this is either gonna be confusing
or annoying or whatever it happens to be
but for some people it will land in a
useful way they're sinners right yeah
you know that generativity will increase
for them the capacity to have their
version of the geography
exactly exact are exactly right if
continue like we'll continue doing that
kind of thing something like that no I
think that's excellent so yes I don't
want to lose one thread that's sort of
what I liked you also pointed to this
there's a threat also so that you for
the last few minutes you'd be talking
about sort of the positive affordance
but earlier you pointed to a threat
which is people go from sensing the
upward spiral
the an agogic spiral in terms of how
that connects them to the generativity
to more being int like you said when
they stopped
to innovate and instead they let's just
keep building more I think is that
building more on the basis of well
you know the grammar that we've already
worked out so it shifts from being it's
just from an evolving sense to a
hoarding sense of if you'll allow me
that way I was holding it to invoke
something in the de minimis sacredness
gentleman Clayton Christensen died
recently hmm and he wrote the book the
image
laris is perfect sorry join you're
breaking through person you broke up for
a second oh my back
yeah your back yeah I didn't get the
author or the books Clayton Christensen
right and the book is called the
innovators dilemma oh I see so we're
talking about someone who by the way was
a Mormon who went a mission right was a
successful entrepreneur quit to become a
academic at Harvard Business School this
is a very different domain beautiful
sacred text because he's not even trying
to be a sacred text he's trying to be a
way to instruct business leaders on why
this hoarding thing happens because it
happens all no everywhere so you can
really look at it into this milk micro
case
oh now important legislators dilemma
right we have a real thing like we can
study this very closely and in mostly
like tech companies it's easy to see so
you'll have a situation where something
like let's say let's go to Google
there's a period of Axial Age
generativity right really where the
context of the people their
relationships their openness their
willingness to experiment their
willingness to fail the things that the
the stake they have like if at the
beginning it's you know a bunch of grad
students more left right and some people
who have put money in who are saying you
know what it's okay if it fails like we
thought we understand that's how this
thing works and invent it innovates
innovates and in debates and innovation
it's a lot of generativity to it but
there's an s-curve
and there's a point at which the
organizational dynamic have this
characteristic of optimization they have
some some desire to begin to to no
longer continue to innovate but actually
to optimize for the potential that was
stored in the innovations that already
happen right we're good and it's always
this sort of weird unconscious
frustration because there's a belief
that you can have your cake and eat it
too
there's a belief that as an organization
if for God's sakes we've got 50,000
people in this organization surely we
can have a skunkworks
surely we can have like these in new
what they call intrapreneurship if we
could have these empowered mechanisms
20% time Google trying to do or you can
enable the innovative capacity continue
to stay vital and rich and seekin while
also you know milk in the cash colic who
isn't that right I've got billions of
dollars and I don't milk the cash cow I
can't I can't find my awesome project
that's the right thing to click
Christian points out that it turns out
no there's some characteristic of what
happens is that when the there's a
percolation if there comes like a
critical mass in the inverse direction
very the organizational culture just
enough pieces of the fundamental
organizational culture begins to include
a certain kind of psychology or typology
of person and and then a structure like
literally the organizational structure
has a wait process and protocol
is biased towards optimization right and
the thing about optimization is the
salient I can I can make your ear that I
could put a bunch of metrics together I
have a big sort of board that says you
know what's my cost for customer
acquisition involve me whatever happens
to be in my curve go in the right
direction so it's well defined problem
it's a well-defined problem if the well
we find problem innovation is a very
ill-defined problem so many people the
organization in general diaphanous new
ineffable character the culture in
general loses its capacity to make space
for innovation even when it intends to
do so are keeping on consciously
wait sit down number one forever
it still dies and that's like that's a
place we could take a really good
examination of that kind of thing and
then of course we see this sort of thing
also happened in like art communes mmm
places where artists get together and
that goes a different direction that
goes in this direction of almost like
evaporation like a fire that runs out of
fuel right right right
so
let's do this then this is good there's
a tax aamani there so the first taxonomy
is the you know the innovation dilemma I
think that's important the the second
one is that doing BR the artistic
evaporation right it runs out of fuel
right there there's something going
wrong there
then there's is there's potentially a
third one because people talk about this
in general system collapse right the
idea that the system is complexify and
then what happened
it complexify is to deal with the
complexities of the environment and then
the system itself becomes so complex
that it becomes as problematic as
anything it's trying to address in the
environment and then it event it
eventually it can't solve any problems
because it's got so consumed with itself
you see that's at the end of the at the
Western Roman Empire
like no matter what we do is just making
things worse and the Empire becomes the
problem as opposed to being the thing
that you're trying to use to solve a
whole bunch of problems right and so
that strikes me as another way in which
like so the system could be complexify
but they could come to a point where you
you might be hitting something like
general system collapse
oh okay oh yes the collapse of complex
societies right right it's precise I
have this book but haven't read it but
we talked about a couple times yeah
that's it that's the that's the at least
I would I would point that insight to
him I think there's other domains like
different people from different
exploring different domains have noticed
the same thing happens in lots of
different places
yeah he does it he does a very big job
describing exactly that so so part part
part of what's sounding like I was gonna
say oh go ahead me someone when I kind
of just so what happens on that curve
right and I'm not sure if canter writes
about this I've been kind of up in the
eyeballs in this stuff for such a long
time that I have a hard time not
distinguishing exactly who so if I'm on
the Tainter curve right so the system is
becoming more complex right and if
there's like a couple of inflection
points and it has to do with a funny you
can you actually take look at the shade
of that shape of the curve so I've got
something like
maybe jerk acceleration and velocity so
there's the jerk right so the jerk is
the rate of change of acceleration
acceleration is rate of change of
velocity and velocity of change of
position so if I'm looking at the curve
the first inflection point happens when
I actually go into zero jerk and less so
what happens is is that for a period of
time means the innovative capacity of
the of the thing that is being developed
actually is accelerating the rate the
acceleration is accelerating and is that
curve that looks acceleration itself and
as the point at which that stops
happening right and if I look at this if
I can zoom at and look at the
mathematical domain you actually start
to begin seeing that this this is the
point at which the accelerating returns
begins to turn into not diminishing
returns but not as rapidly accelerating
returns I didn't see the space is
beginning to be filled is that what
people shift to optimization to then
well that's that's what you actually
generally speaking have a choice as far
as I know everybody always fails which
is you can choose at that point to step
away from optimization or you can choose
to step towards optimization because
what happens is is that you're at that
point you're beginning to the
low-hanging fruit have been picked right
all right so it's not as easy to get the
easy stuff now here's the thing here's
the problem this is the medicine that
that is so very difficult to hold on to
you can double down you can get better
at the thing let's do this go to oil
like oil yep I remember you talking to
me about this yeah you know I I it's the
first iteration some very simple basic
technology and not too many geographic
regions and I'm getting like just your
cursors like little I can take it out of
there
yeah and then something happens to the
low-hanging would have been picked well
either I can say I need to keep my
fluidity open and not become too
addicted to this particular oil on plug
system to oil and the petroleum refining
and construction all that whole
or you can say how could I'm actually
pretty good innovation I'm and double
down on optimizing my oil construction
like a little rig like I'll actually
figure how to drill deeper or whatever
happens to be oh oh so you get much more
local in where you're innovating rather
than global innovation you're living -
right right you bind innovation into a
domain right that works right really
well right now you're know what I'm
looking for it's gone from mystery to
puzzle that's yeah familial - fine -
well-defined problem yeah yeah yeah now
I'm now I get it
Oh boom like now I have a boom gets
really really good for a while I have a
golden age and that's the really weird
trick because you feel like Welsh it's
really good so obviously I must be must
be winning you're exactly the same time
it's because you're making the
wrong thing salient right it's
you're making the wrong thing isn't it
you're bullshitting yourself and it's so
hard so then the next thing of course is
then when you start going into zero
acceleration right where my my
accelerating returns has now shifted to
diminishing returns so the velocity
continues but now the cost per unit
velocity is going up which by the way is
happening all over the place yeah right
now in the context of where we are
I've got a real trouble now I'm a noun
that now I'm actually an adit now I kind
of can feel it not can sense it like
this is the seventies yeah all right the
shocks get all over the place and the
response at that point is really really
better kick dude you this is a beggar
you've just got your first real moment
of clarity now is the time to get off
the juice but what do people do all
right
it's hard like that now you know that
build an entire addiction I think about
back to oil up that bill harsh man
absolutely get around if I don't have
cars of that built the interstate
highway system soon it's only 20 years
old it still is functional
yeah built in suburbs of that if I don't
have cars suburbs will work like I live
this massive infrastructure commitment
to a lifestyle premise on this
particular capacity this complex or
complicated structure so
in some sense I have to blind I have to
do actually to commit to I
think I'm actually delusional
so the eighties in America is there a
way at which sorry to interrupt but I
just want to explore this lot with you
quickly like is there a way in which our
culture is in that sense and I sorry I
do this very cautiously and I don't want
to be dismissive or insulting
okay so let's really I'm now Singh that
is their way which our culture is
addicted to Christianity because it has
been so into woven with our moral and
legal I think of it not economically
although it is but it's it's so deeply
interwoven into our moral and legal and
spiritual and existential and
therapeutic you know infrastructure that
we don't we're sort of addicted to it so
even though a lot of people sort of
reject their propositional e there's
still something analogous to what was
happening with oil and the
infrastructure right yeah yeah like the
things that I like about it babies say
that were I what I noticed is something
like everybody who consumed really truly
feels from the participatory level up
what I might call the essence not the
proposition or the uh the dogma
Christianity should be agreeing with you
yeah right right right you recognize
that is the good news yes because it's a
simulation at the end of the day it's a
formalism it's a performance where we're
addicted to a performance of the rites
and rituals
there's of Christianity and we're
constrained by them that's the
prediction means all the way down to the
propositional level so we were game
where we're simulating we're living
through it and yeah that feels right to
me as you're saying is like trying to
like heal the growing up as a not as a
not as a Christian in in the West so I
were really deep like okay what are
these things like watching them from the
outside and interacting as Christians
don't okay so there's something about
that I think is I think that you're
pointing to something it's right but it
takes it I get it I get what you have to
actually be great
careful there yeah well because I like I
don't want to I'm not trying to dismiss
the argument made by like Jordan
Peterson
Tom Holland and others about how many
how many things in our culture that even
the atheists or the secular people
espouse and how it's ultimately you know
derived and presupposes Christianity in
important ways right and and and so I
want to acknowledge you know the light
side of the force I don't want to say
that that's false but what I'm trying to
expand the awareness of is that there's
the dark side of the force
to that with it's like the way we become
addicted to oil we've built it because
because it has been so successfully
woven into right the infrastructure of
our cultural you know cognitive grammar
there's a sense in which we're also
reciprocally narrowed and addicted to it
and we don't know it's sort of
unthinkable for us even when we claim
propositional e2b atheists about how to
break out of it and I think this was
Michy's when this is part of Nietzsche's
concern as I mean people really don't
get what they're talking about when
they're trying to say God is dead or
there is no God and stuff like that I
just wanted I just wanted to sort of I
just wanted to counterbalance these
arguments made by you know well you know
all these good things that you like
they're dependent on Christianity well
you know all these good things that I
like are dependent on oil right but you
know that dependency can go from being
you know a positive thing that I
celebrate to being exactly what you say
you can come a point where oh no oh no I
know I'm so reciprocally narrowed
because of the dependency that I have
like an addictive dependency like you
know substance dependence Oh editor's
note to the extent that this to get
shared more broadly yes I think they're
very important to bracket the last five
minutes of conversation that this is one
must be very careful to listen very
closely to where it is it's going to say
yes thank you for that thank you for
that Jordan it is this is a reuleaux
make a space for me right this is a very
very subtle thing that you're actually
pointing at yes and if somebody is
reacting to it what I would suggest and
hope is to step away and recognize that
Johnny B is operating a good faith
yes I am let us try to work with that to
find out what is being pulled out here
because real it's rich there's something
really good and meaningful that all
right editor's note and bracket no thank
you for saying that and that's why I
tried to caveat it by saying look and
explicitly acknowledging that there is a
you know like I said the light side of
the force I was using that metaphor
right you know that there's all of this
I'm not denying any of that but I'm
trying to say like if we like what you
and I are engaging but there has to be
we have to broaden the framing or we're
not going to get out of how we're stuck
and that's all I was trying to do but
thank you for your editors note because
it's much appreciated because I was
hesitant as you know I was hesitant to
say this and I was trying to be very
careful and so you acknowledging that
explicitly was also there's some shared
context or search terms that I can't
make things but again back to kind of
being a little simpler which is the
meaning of this notion theory is as
least as far as I understand it as the
religion that's not a religion right is
in some sense endeavoring to find a way
to put things in the back in their
proper place it's to get them going the
right way did he go in the right way and
so for example if you are living truly
living Christian moment a moment from
the inside out in in relationships life
real life like actual life like the
tragedies of your existence and you're
making meaning you're truly making
meaning out of that then you're fine
totally and I again I I say this
repeatedly I know because I've met
people and I'm in discussion with them
that there are many people who can
individually turn to Christianity and
spiral up to use our language I see that
I see that in other religions too I
don't think that's an exclusive property
of Christianity okay I see that I I know
I also acknowledge that my feet the
things we are that the argument we're
making here is not a float foreclosure
argument it's not saying it's impossible
here's a deductive proof that
Christianity can't structurally figure
out how to do this we just find it
improbable that's right that that's not
the same thing actually I would actually
throw something out that I've run into
recently and we just talked about
just say hey here's the here's the
proposition ha ha yeah I think we can
finally at long last get away from
selling out our religions right right
that's the thing we're putting out there
I think I would like to suggest oh I
like this in that anyone who truly truly
limbs their religion wherever it happens
to be knows what is being said here is
the case ya Thursday selling out you're
a practical conversion of the true in
exchange for the salient an exchange
would be shareable in exchange for
something that works something sometimes
works but that exchange comes with a
modal confusion of confusion and the
proposition is we can at long last no
longer make that compromise that's right
long enough
truly teach the good news and it will in
fact be shared yes without a little
compromise that's that's the proposition
that's the that's the thing we're trying
to to bring into the light like the
sense thing that I have yes this is
possible this could totally you've got
this totally right and that's that's
exactly that's exactly right that's
exactly right I'm completely concurrent
with the way you've just articulated
that I really haven't any idea how to do
it I've got all kinds of concepts and
notions and I've tried all kinds of
sorts of things but this conversation
really helps a lot
I mean I don't know how to engineer the
whole thing I'm having lots of
conversations I'm having conversations
with people who like rave kelly and
others who are building communities you
know Daniel Thorson people like that and
doing all of that I'm try I'm trying to
you know in a really comprehensive
manner reverse-engineer a meta cycle
technology for exactly the reasons that
you articulated so long ago and that's
the find it you know do that the project
of dialectic or you know dialectic 2.0
or something that is gonna view that
role for us other than that I don't know
what to do like you but I keep wanting
to have these conversations I keep
wanting to try and reverse engineer as
much as I can because you know we both
agree that we're in an urgent situation
we don't have we don't have the luxury
of a lot of time so
I mean what I do
Jordan is I have DAF I have the sense
that you know what's happening is
there's the it there's there's it's
starting to become self-organizing it
feels like it has the potential to be
autopoietic and it definitely feels like
it's reciprocal opening spiraling up and
so that's where I've gone from being
bleak to being hopeful not cheerful
because the world is still a you know a
dark place in a lot of ways for a lot of
people but being hopeful is definitely
ours now something you know st. Paul
talked about and you know faith is the
you know the evidence of things unseen
or the hope and if you make that
propositional it's just a loopy thing to
prescribe but if it's like this what
we're talking about about now the sense
of the off you're right and the sense
that you owe a tie there's there it's
it's gelling it's right there it's
becoming a B it it's it's it's it it
priests ages that it could be
autopoietic in a way that I can taste
right and that gives me that gives me a
directed hope then I sort of can give a
new meaning to his phrase and his
understanding and so and that's why I
like to emphasize the adjective rather
than the now not faith but faithfulness
that sense of you know because when
you're faithful to your wife it's not
like just well I believe these things
about her and I will always believe them
that's not what it means
it means that your God that you are you
know you you sense an autopoietic thing
growing between you and her that is
valuable to both of you in an evolving
spiraling upward way that is so like so
real that's the reality that is so
important
yes yeah that's actually such a powerful
thing with grasp you wonder if that
lands for people so just to say it back
to you sure let's go with model one
right and mother one in this case is
gonna be propositional so for model of
one is something like I've said some
words in front of her in front of a
group of people let's say a preacher and
I've been trained that I need to keep my
word right and so I keep my word just
say I've got a whole bunch of
commitments that I have made and I'm
going to keep those commitments come
hell or high water this is also very
similar notion of responsibility right
right right right right
and model one has this really bizarre
characteristic the the the pairings the
relationships that are bound by that
kind of a a binding may or may not sort
of last until the two partners have died
very great but really are deeply joyful
that's right over attack sir that's
right
by contrast and by the way there's a
value that's in between these two on the
other side model B or model to write is
that it's alive it's a living thing the
relationship is well watered and has Sun
and nutrition but it's healthy it's a
vital that being in this thing is
actually good for me it's good for her
and there's an us that is also growing
there's an autopoietic living being
that's wasteful this is my willingness
and capacity to continue to commit to
the caring and feeding and nurturing of
that thing and then it's supporting me
in that I guess when I get weak or I get
strong or ice number or I fall there's
something that helps me who supports me
understands me as me brings me back in
and it's real like it's a lot it's like
a tornado that is actually turning this
is like the difference between and crack
EMS officer and it's like the difference
between you know making yourself do
something and being sword like so you're
sort of pushing for yourself as opposed
to be drawn right your softer side
you're tempted by the good right and
you're faithful to your partner because
it's like well not being faithful
strikes you is unthinkable
not because I'm going to hold myself in
it's like no no I'm constantly being
drawn into this and drawn beyond myself
and what why would I want anything other
than that right and this is just a loop
back in terms of that that thing that
contract of universal basic income right
the transition between those two yes oh
that's beautiful
oh yes yes yes yes yeah Oh excellent
excellent
I should go soon my friend but we that
was actually a nice closure we circled
all the way back around what do you
think about um uploading this
conversation are you still feeling you
don't have to be this is pretty good
okay I may be wrong but I guess my mic
like I've had that experience of that I
think Zack Stein was telling me it's how
you actually grow wisdom which is he
calls it the blackening I can write like
a deepening depression in relationship
with Rama yeah but then I've been
metabolizing that and I think my
capacity to be in relationship with me
in the infinite darkness that is the
nature of this part of reality by the
incident lying in the infinite darkness
has increased so your ex correct there
would be a decent amount of that
comes out of anybody who watches this
but I also expect this it's worth
putting it out there so I would hope
that people would be charitable into the
good faith spirit that we brought to
this discussion I mean we stepped back a
couple times and said look like this is
what this is what we're clearly trying
to do right and we're not trying to do X
Y Zed I you know yeah like what one can
hope that at least the fact that we've
tried to make that clear what our
attitude and what a project is that that
would help call from some reciprocal
responses from people that they they
that they would respond in good faith as
much as possible okay thank you my
friend hopefully will speak in a couple
of weeks that's right good luck okay
take care bye bye