[Music]
you
[Music]
welcome back to awakening for the
meaning crisis so last time we were
taking a look at a proposal that we
could under now understand the the
sacred that that which causes the
experience of sacredness in terms of a
transgenic saw stability a kind of deep
and agog a between the no thickness of
your ever evolving relevance realization
and it's mysterious depths and the no
thickness of a reality that is
ultimately combinatorial explosive and
dynamically changing itself and that we
can acknowledge the important role of
the symbolic the way it helps us to
engage and activate the primordial
aspects of religio and go through
processes of re excitation housing new
emergent abilities so that we're opening
as we're opening up the world we are
also opening up ourselves in response to
that but I cautioned against confusing
indispensability your own or our
collective at times indispensability
with any kind of claims of metaphysical
necessity or an absolute essence and
that was part of the larger critique
that relevance can't have an absolute
essence but and therefore we shouldn't
think of the sacred ultimately as a
supernaturally endowed absolutely at
essential form of relevance so I then
proposed to you that part of what we saw
the at least the experience of
sacredness doing was helping to
facilitate the higher order relevance
realization the meta realization between
homing us against Dom aside the meta
assimilation but also causing us to
confront the numinous
than that accommodation and those so the
sacred is doing that but I also propose
that we needed to look at this more
deeply we needed to look at how the
sacred helps us address perennial
problems so that took us into opening up
and becoming a little bit more analytic
about the meaning crisis there's two
components to the meaning crisis there
are the historical factors which we
traced in detail at the beginning of the
first half of the series and now an
issue that is now one we need to focus
on the perennial problems because in
some sense the experience of sacredness
the attempt to activate accentuate
accelerate articulate and appreciate
religio should address our perennial
problems the perennial problems are of
course perennial because the very
machinery of religio that makes us
adaptive also makes us perpetually
vulnerable to self deceptive
self-destructive behavior most cultures
cultivate an ecology of cyclic
technologies typically in the form of a
religion for addressing the perennial
problems but that set of psycho
technologies has to be fitted into a
legitimizing and sustaining worldview in
some sense the psycho technologies have
to be integrated with sacredness what's
of course happening for us is and we'll
come back to this in more detail here
the historical factors have undermined
that possibility for us undermined the
experience of sacredness the all of the
ways in which we can cultivate an
ecology of psycho technologies for
enhancing religion because we do not
have a worldview in which within which
that project of meaning making its self
transcendence the cultivation of wizz
the affordance of higher states of
consciousness the realization of gnosis
we do not have a world view that
legitimates or encourages that and so
people are forced as I said to cobble
together in a dangerously autodidactic
fashion their own personal responses to
perennial problems without traditions
guidance communities well worked out
sets like I say a practices well vetted
well developed and so that means they're
often bereft when they face the
perennial problems so responding to the
mean crisis has two components to it and
that's why I call it awakening from the
meaning crisis because it has not only
the response of trying to rearticulate a
new world view in which the projects of
enhancing religio again gets validation
is properly situated encouraged
facilitated legitimated etc but we also
need to understand what the set of
practices the ecology of psycho
technology would look like that would
allow us to address the perennial
problems and I'm proposing that the
scientific account of relevance
realization and religio and I've already
tried to give you some illusions to that
we're going to come back to it
full-force
will give us a way of articulating a
worldview in which we can resituated
meaning-making and of course the the
linchpin of that argument is the idea
that at the core of the meaning-making
is relevance realization and relevance
realization B can be given a
naturalistic explanation one that
hopefully still does full justice to the
experience or sacredness
but I want to concentrate as we began
last time on the perennial problems
because ultimately that's the final
thing if I come up with a historical
response and it does not actually afford
the addressing of the perennial problems
helps people to ameliorate and perhaps
alleviate the perennial problems then
this project has failed so we need to
start discussing the perennial problems
and developing this thesis more
extensively that the very machinery that
makes us adaptive makes us susceptible
to self-deceptive
self-destructive patterns of behavior so
we talked about looking at some of the
core features of religio right so we've
got functional features
all right and here we have of course
self-organization and I tried to develop
that very explicitly it's not just vague
self-organization its opponent
processing opponent processing that's
making use of self-organizing
criticality relationship between
compression particular ization and
others such trade-off relationships etc
we've got all right self identification
that process by which you're creating an
identity and you've got self reflection
your ability to step back and reflect on
your own cognition which of course was
made so powerfully present in the actual
revolution with the advent of
second-order thinking we took a look at
the structural this has to do with the
components of the agent arena
relationship the ways in which self is
connected to the world self is connected
to self and self is connected to others
right and then we looked at the
developmental and I sort of laid left
out as a placeholder because I just
wanted to give a quick overview last
time but I wanted to go in and draw this
together because what we've been talking
about throughout the last few lectures
is the idea that your cognition is
inherently developmental it functions by
developing it develops by functioning
it's a right so because it's inherently
self-organizing it develops right by
functioning it functions
by developing and this is qualitative
development right what I mean is you get
the capacity for self transcendence
there's not only an increase in what you
know but an increase in the kinds of
things you can know the kinds of things
you can do right and this is ultimately
some kind of process of optimization so
there's a developmental trajectory and
then what you can see right is some of
the problems we've already talked about
the parasitic processing in the notes
for this lecture I will put references
to the previous lectures in which I have
talked about these in detail so if you
in order to avoid useless repetition you
can go back and look at the presentation
all right but this is if you remember
you there's a bad event and it spirals
off and it gets as very complex
self-organizing system that takes on a
life of its own becomes very compelling
very adaptively resistant to our
attempts at intervention etc okay so
this is modal confusion this is the
right Fromm but very much you can also
see it being addressed by the Stoics you
can see it being addressed by Buddhism
as Batchelor argues this is to get into
confusion between the having and the
being modes the kind of AI that you are
the are you in an ayat' i thou etc
self-reflection last time we talked
about this this is the reflectiveness
gap this comes from the fact that what
we can do is we can step back and look
at our own processing and this affords
us this gap affords us regaining our
agency from the chaos of being the
impulsive wantin but when we open up the
reflectiveness gap too much
we got also a loss of a agency we get
the tragedy of Hamlet and of course some
middling position is not the answer
there because at times you have to be
highly reflective at times you have to
be highly immersed how do we answer that
the problem here right with the self
world relationship is absurdity as I
said this is the agent arena
relationship and we talked about
absurdity here and made clear that all
of the arguments for absurdity like what
happens a million years from now it
doesn't matter I'm is so small I will
die none of these things actually are
arguments that can legitimately lead to
a conclusion of absurdity because there
are in many ways and this was Nagle's
point there they're just bad arguments
they're fallacious arguments now
dismissing the arguments is not to
dismiss the person who makes the
argument I'd hope I made that clear last
time if not I'm trying to do that now
because people are trying to articulate
with these pseudo arguments something
real that is happening to them something
that is very important so the arguments
are after the fact expressions rather
than the generators and the the main
thing here and this of course goes into
right you can see how all of this is our
prospective all participatory ways of
being ways of knowing okay but what's
here is a clash of perspectives all
right it's a class of perspectives when
we did the example of Tom who's calling
Susan and how in humor that clash of
perspectives can be resolved usually by
playing like equivocating between terms
or meanings or getting some people to
make a connection they hadn't made
before but an absurdity and I think
there's like I think there's a overlap
like this right where you have humor as
a resolvable clash of prospective
perspectives and then you have absurdity
here right and then there's an overlap
zone and like I said there's a lot of
humor
my prototypical example tells my age
when I was growing up is the humor of
Monty Python in which right you get a
lot of absurdity but then it you get
what becomes irresolvable
it's undermining religio in some way
undermining your your agency in some way
and that's sort of pure absurdity myself
with self this goes back to what we
talked about with Tillich right and
anxiety inner conflict and what we need
here right is to again think about the
ways in which this is connected to write
a self-deception because the inner
conflict remember Plato often skews your
salience landscape and makes you
susceptible to pull bullshitting I'll
talk about bullshitting in connection to
this over all right of course this is
alienation this is our inability to
connect to other people something that
is often exacerbated through social
media by the way these other perennial
problems and self deceptive behavior can
be magnified in social media so we can
be modally confused and think by having
a lot of connections we're overcoming
our alienation and loneliness but of
course that's not the case we can
exacerbate the social media by falling
into a sort of pretend pretended
narrative and things like that okay here
we talked about like existential inertia
this is when you need to move between
worldviews make make a worldview viable
that you're not currently in we're going
to talk a lot more about the work of
agnes Callard
and with aspiration but the point here
and going back again to the seminal work
of la paul but this is basically a need
for an agog a how do i and agog a my way
out of this worldview into another
worldview and then of course there's
existential ignorance a point made
salient by la paul and also picked up by
agnes coloured in her book on aspiration
that right we can't sort of reason our
way through this we can't infer our way
from a weaker logic to a stronger logic
we can't infer we can't propositional e
come up with the prospective all
knowledge that were lacking with them
with the participatory knowing that we
do not currently possess and the
identity that we are not currently
cultivating so right all of that of
course can come together and this was
mythologize and I mean that in a
complementary sense right remember how
I'm using mythos but this is myth
mythologized by the Gnostics of
existential entrapment
feeling trapped now a couple of things
before we move towards starting to
address this this is analytic this is
for Theoretical purposes that these
things are being distinguished and laid
out right it is often the case as I've
already tried to indicate that these
things are interacting and exacerbating
each other right that right you can be
experiencing absurdity and it can be
really contributing to your existential
inertia right you could be overthinking
things and getting sort of stuck and
that a right might be also contributing
to your existential ignorance or it
might be contributing to your modal
confusion because you can't remember the
being mode because you're caught up in
having a lot of thoughts and trying to
have a lot of beliefs I'm not going to
try and map this out because the the
permutations of the ways in which these
interact and afford and write exacerbate
each other is very complex which of
course is why the perennial problems are
so pressing on people now what I want to
try and do is to show you what I I'm I
want to try and show you how we can
salvage from the legacy so many psycho
technologies for
addressing the meeting crisis the reason
why I'm hesitating is because again I'm
this this is genuine I am there's a
hubristic element here and and I'm not
just trying to say oh you know taking it
from you and leaving that behind but
again I'm trying to get a balance
between respecting where we really are
and what our situation really is and
respecting all of the tremendous
heritage and legacy that has been given
to us and trying to get that balance is
always in my mind it's very difficult
but okay I'm gonna go through these each
one first I'm just gonna sort of name so
you can get an overall schematic and
then I'll erase the board and I'll talk
about each one in greater detail okay so
be patient please I'm asking for your
patience I'm just going to give some
indications about how we address each
one of these schematically so you can
see on the board and then I'll step back
and go through each one in more detail
and then how they're integrated together
and what's also missing from this in an
important sense so what I'm going to
propose here is the way you deal with
parasitic processing is and this is why
this is number one in some sense
schematically it's overarching you've
heard me talk about it before with the
idea of an ecology of practices and
ecology of psycho technology right what
you want to do is you want to cultivate
a counter active dynamical system see
parasitic processing is a very complex
dynamical system and if you try and do
one-shot interventions it just
reconfigures itself what you need is to
cultivate a camp that you've
internalized can't just be something you
think about it can't just be some right
ideological structure it has to actually
be an active dynamical system in you and
so what you're gonna do and again I'll
come back to this in more detail you're
gonna try and cultivate a counteractive
dynamical system because that is how you
will be able to respond to the dynamical
systems of parasitic processing and
propose to you that a prototypical by no
means exclusive so that's how I'm using
it but a prototypical example of this is
the cultivation of the Eightfold Path
and Buddhism which is very very
perspicacious Li represented by an
eighth spoked wheel the integration it
revolves it involves etc so what we're
looking for here is a counter active
dynamical system ok modal confusion we
we've already talked about this and this
is sati practices that are designed to
invoke a deep remembrance of the being
mode ok the reflectiveness gap you need
the combination the integration the
dynamic integration not just a settled
median point you need a dynamic
integration of immersion and creative
flexibility we know a state that does
that we're going to come back to this
but that's the flow statement you need
to be cultivating the flow state in in
important ways ok the clash of
perspectives this is going to take again
so this what I put on the board right
now initially it's gonna seem like what
so again give me some time I'm just
gonna put it on here this is what
Spinoza in the West called C&C Intuit
Eva or what in Buddhism in the East
refers to is Praja this is a state right
in which you get the deep
interpenetration of the perspectives
right so I'm just gonna put it up here
and you like wow what does that mean how
you do that scans here and to ateva
proj nut but if you remember just to
foreshadow it right we talked about I
can scale down I can scale up and then I
can get the state of non-duality that is
simultaneously scaling up and scaling
down and that actually alleviates the
clash of perspectives so we'll come back
to this ok
so anxiety
is inner dialogue so this is to pick up
right
the idea of internalizing the sage right
as the child is to the adult the idle
distance stage I want to like the way
it's so an exemplary example of this is
that you know the Christians it's not I
who live but Christ who lives in me or
the Buddhists you have to realize your
Buddha nature or the Stoics I have to
internalize Socrates and again if you
turn these into ideas to believed rather
than you know practices that are have
actually been internalized and our art
are integrated into your the development
of your identity then you're not hearing
what I'm saying
okay so alienation I haven't talked as
much about this but I'm going to come
back to this more this is to cultivate
what Turner and other people call
communitas this is the sense of
connectedness to other and part of that
is to try and recover what we had in
platonic dialogue and what's happening
right now is a whole movement called
authentic discourse I'm going to talk a
lot more about that the authentic
discourse movement right authentic
discourse movement but we just need
authentic discourse here something like
what we had in platonic dialogue
something like therapy sort of both
beyond I'll come back to that because
this is a primary way of doing this I
gave you an extended argument for how
you respond to existential entrapment
and of course this is gnosis and that
this gnosis is going to have a
connection to higher states of
consciousness there's something that's
missing right and what's missing is we
need of course a an overall framing of
these things that they the way we're
pursuing all of these and the way we're
trying to integrate them together right
I'll put I'll put it here because I ran
out of board on that side all of this
has to be within a wisdom framing
we're gonna talk more explicitly
we're gonna devote quite a bit of time
to try and get at what can we now think
about wisdom given all the current work
within psychology and cognitive science
and even neuroscience on wisdom right
because if throughout all of this we
have to have a we have to have a
cognitive style in which the
amelioration of self-deception and the
affordance of self optimization are
paramount okay so I want to go through
each one of these in more detail this is
the overarching structure and then
trying to bring it together what is it
I'm proposing to you and seeing then
here's where my concern about hubris is
here although I think there's a little
bit of point I'm making I'm trying to
argue for a way in which we can
reverse-engineer enlightenment instead
of keeping enlightenment as an obscure
state surrounded by mystique and
nostalgia we need an account that
recognizes what that mystique pointed to
but exaggerated which is the difficulty
of enlightenment but ultimately if we
have a kind of being a ecology of psycho
technology that reliably and
systematically individually and
collectively allows us to address the
perennial problems I'm gonna propose to
you that that's what we should call
enlightenment if enlightenment is
something above and beyond that then I
don't know what what its value is
and if enlightenment is not directed
towards this I would say it is
not something of value so I'm going to
propose to you that insofar as we can
give using the theoretical tools we've
cultivated together relevance
realization etc insofar as we can need
the work we've done on mindfulness the
work we've done on flow right all of it
in so far as we can give an account of
this in terms that are all ultimately
naturalistic they can be subject to
scientific investigation we will have
and and this is is this the final sort
of challenge to the division given to us
on the Enlightenment we will have a
scientific theory of enlightenment and
what it can mean for us all right
so let's talk about some of these I'll
talk about it more at length because
they're more novel others I'll talk
about more briefly because there's an
extended discussion of them so again
let's start with this notion of dealing
with parasitic processing which is an
overarching thing and the idea here is
as I said to cultivate a set of
practices and that's what you have with
something like the Eightfold Path where
you're trying to remember all of these
you know right aspiration right
mindfulness right concentration etc
remember that the right is not moral
righteousness the right is right
handedness it's dexterity and now to use
language that we've developed it's right
fitness it's an optimal fitness it's
enhanced relevance realization within
each one of these and what you have
right is a set of practices that are
interdependent with each other mutually
supporting and self rolling becoming a
self rolling wheel and if I have a set
of practices that can take on a life of
its own
and you have the metaphors right in
Buddhism of you like where you enter the
stream it takes on a life of its own and
initially what I'm doing right is I'm
cultivating this practice and this
practice in this practice and I've got
sort of set but then they start to write
it implicitly interact reinforce the
develop and it starts to become a
counter active dynamical system in me
the the Buddha told a famous parable
about how to understand this he talks
about the goldsmith and the gold is
something inherently valuable and you
should think of your mind as something
inherently valuable right and he says
okay so take a look at the goldsmith the
goldsmith just looks at the gold no
change is wrought so if you're just sort
of doing meditation and reflecting
nothing happens right the goldsmith has
to heat up the gold right there's to be
this right effort the energy put in
maybe something like flow right but if
the goldsmith just heats up the gold the
gold just melts and goes away
a right and then also there has to be
they're shaping right there there has to
be the reconfiguration there has to be
the cultivation of new skills new
abilities new virtues if you just hammer
the gold deal you'll smash it and wreck
it if you just heat it it will melt if
you just look at it you won't notice its
imperfections
sorry you-you-you will do nothing but
notice its imperfections but nothing
will change so I need to look in order
to notice but I need to balance that
integrate that dynamically with heating
and with with with hammering and and
notice what I'm doing I'm creating this
higher-order skill of being a Smith by
getting a set of practices that have a
complementary relationship to them each
one has strengths and weaknesses and the
strengths and weaknesses are fitted
together so you get something overall
that can produce something that the
individual skills can't do so by getting
this fluid ecology of looking of heating
and of shaping then the gold becomes
well shaped and it becomes as he says we
ugly you can wield it very well you can
it fits your hand and extends your
capacity so well so what you're getting
there
right is a strong recommendation for
looking at this as you know cultivating
an ecology of practices getting sets of
practices sets of psycho technologies
that have complimentary relationships to
each other organizing them together
right and we do this all the time we we
we we Const we Kate constellations of
lower order skills and techniques to
build higher order skills and techniques
but we build it as a dynamical system a
counteractive dynamical system that can
operate in many ways on many levels of
our cognition and our consciousness and
our being so the way to deal with
parasitic processing is to cultivate a
counter active dynamical system
and this is why this is an overarching
thing so modal confusion we've already
talked about this we've already talked
about the way in which mindfulness
practices and other practices like they
can be drawn from stoicism like the view
from the Bob or objective seeing can
help us to remember sati the being mode
again not as an idea not as a belief but
as an existential mode that we can
reliably reactivate and re-enter into in
a viable and enriching manner
okay the reflectiveness gap and flow so
if I were to just speak this lecture
impulsively wantonly just gah it'll
become chaotic right it'll tend to right
probably fall into self-contradiction
they will be confused and therefore
confusing but if I'm constantly stepping
back and reflecting on what I'm saying
and engaging in self-criticism and then
thinking I also I'll choke right so what
do I do well I try to get into the flow
state because the flow state is a state
in which I am both and velman by the way
argues for something very similar he
proposes Taoism and Taoism as a solution
to the reflectiveness gap and of course
as I've argued Taoism is basically the
religion of flow in many ways the yin
and yang the out in the end right there
making frame and breaking frame etc so
what you're trying to do is set up the
practices that will afford flow set up
the conditions that will afford flow and
remember we talked about the right kinds
of conditions and also and this is where
we're going to have to go back to wisdom
wisely cultivate your flow where and
where
and in what domains are you learning to
flow so I'm trying to get into the flow
state here that will keep me sort of
immersed and engaged with the material
but also make me hopefully very sort of
flexible and capable when needed I don't
mean to be self congratulatory but you
know where it's needed
hopefully insightful that there is that
this is not just mechanical that there's
an element of sort of well a flow to it
almost like jazz jazz with concepts and
jazz with argumentation okay so let's
come back to absurdity and come back to
Praja talk about this again we did talk
about this before but I want to remind
you of it and that you are very capable
of this because your cognition is
capable because of the way attention
works because attention we put it up
multiple times right the cat and
everything your attention is
simultaneously bottom up from the
features and top down from the gestalt
all right and your attention write it
right the way you are related to the
world is one in which the world and you
can be co-creating this is actually
something that Spinoza talks quite a bit
about in the ethics the how your
experience is co-created by the by by
the body and by the world so if you
remember Spinoza talks about this idea
right when you're reading an argument
and his whole book the ethics is an
attempt to bring back blessedness and a
sense of I would argue sacredness within
a cartesian scientific worldview that's
what's called the ethics
it means ethics in the older sense of
becoming the best person leading the
best kind of life not just doing the
morally correct thing
but Spinoza talks about this kind of
knowing and and but I realized when I
was reading the ethic while studying the
ethic so you have to almost do lectio
Divina with the ethics you have to read
it you have to really let it soak in do
you have to try and get that worldview a
tuner here just what's it like to see
the world as Spinoza did so you have to
sort of study and practice the ethics
viously it's an extended period and then
he talks about this and then I realized
that the ethics was actually designed to
do this you have this tremendously tight
logical structure but the logical
structure is trying to afford what he
called ciencia into ateva
this sort of deeply intuitive knowing
and what he means by that is that you've
got this tremendous argument that
reaches up to the sort of the largest
scale of reality right but there's
individual premises along the way and
the idea here is here's the analogy so
the premise is like the letter the
premises are like the letters right and
the oh the whole the argument of
arguments all the arguments constellated
together so I'm gonna call this the
Metta argument the arguments of learning
right so these go up into arguments
right and then the arguments right go up
into Metta the Metta argument and this
of course is like you know the through
words into sentences kind of thing I
remember we talked about how your
attention is multiplied layered in this
way and what can happen is if you
practice the ethics you get to a place
where you see the whole of the argument
in each the Metta argument in each
premise and you see how each premise and
each argument fit into and contribute to
the whole just like you're seeing the
words in terms of the sentence and the
letters in terms of the words right and
it simultaneously bottom-up and top-down
in a completely interpenetrating fashion
and what you get is you get a cosmic
perspective that is right
interpenetrating with the perspective of
your individual moment of thought
that's Kantian to ateva there's a right
there there is a complete interleaving
of the prospective all-knowing the
Buddhists talk about something similar
to this Praja a kind of self liberating
state of wisdom and it's a state in
which you know as DT Suzuki says you're
sort of simultaneously looking as deeply
in as you can and simultaneously looking
out as deeply as you can and he quotes
Eckhart a Christian neoplatonist as a
way of explaining this you know the this
the I by which I see God is the same
ayah by which God sees me so the the the
perspective that reaches out and upwards
- what's ultimate is the same as the
perspective that is coming deeply into
into me and what you get right is you
practice you practice sort of scaling
down as deeply as you possibly can
towards something like the pure
consciousness event and scaling down and
you practice scaling up to this sense of
sort of profound resonant at one mint
with everything and then what happens is
you get I mean when in practice you're
off you if you're you you are
alternating between them but then as I
mentioned what eventually happens is you
get non-duality you're simultaneously as
deeply in and is deeply down sorry for
these metaphors as you can be but as I
said they're often indispensable you're
simultaneously is deeply down and is
deeply in and it's simultaneously as out
and as up as you can be the you're sort
of that maximal breaking frame maximal
to make sort of maximal breaking frame
and maximal making frame and they are
optimally dynamically integrated like in
the like they are in them in right sort
of the most optimal profound insight you
can have so that state
is a place that addresses absurdity and
you say but it doesn't answer any of the
arguments for absurdity but that's the
point
there is no argumentative response to
absurdity because the arguments that are
supposed to be generating absurdity
don't generate absurdity there after the
fact expressions of absurdity what
drives absurdity is prospective clash
and if you can reliably realize a state
in which you overcome the perspective of
clash and remember you can overcome
lower-order perspective a clash in humor
and humor it's has at the core of it a
kind of insight and a kind of joy in
that insight you can have something like
that if there's a continuum you can have
the overcoming of the prospective of
clash with this prajak state of
non-duality that carries with it a kind
of joy a kind of insight a kind of ski
an SIA into atiba a deep intuitive
knowing and so that is very doable for
us
so
anxiety so what anxiety is about right
is there's a nebulous sense that right
something is wrong and it's connected to
inner conflict you know we see both we
see this in Christianity the inner
conflict Paul we see it in Plato in the
inner conflict there's different centers
working according to different goals and
they're at war with each other and and
we suffer and it's a it's a it's a
dramatic sense of threat but it has no
specific target of course as fear does
because of course anxiety the threat is
endemic to you so no matter where you go
that you're sensing the threat but
there's nothing that the threat can
particularly attached to because the
threat has to do with your inner the
state of being at war within yourself so
we see a cross or traditions the idea of
internalizing the sage to create an
inner dialogue that helps to coordinate
the various centers gets them to talk to
each other and I think this is something
where cognitive science can actually do
give us tremendous help there is we've
had a lot of increase in our knowledge
of the various different areas of
cognition even different kinds of
centers processing in the brain and how
they work and how they're all operating
and what we need is right an
internalized representation
a model a role model and a role as a way
of taking on a new identity right we
need a role model for how we can engage
in dialogue and the proposal here which
is of course the Platonic proposal we
already saw that if I can internalize my
capacity and and and and develop by the
store it's my capacity to interact with
the sage eventually I get that ability
that I have only with the sage I can
have it with myself within myself and it
means therefore that it becomes part of
my metacognitive machinery the way I
dialogue with myself and get the various
aspects of myself to various centers to
dialogue with each other and you can see
various versions of this you can see
Jung's use of active imagination as a
way of trying to create an inner
dialogue between different centers of
the psyche right you can see practices
like lectio Divina where I am reading
the text and I am trying to get the text
to speak to me is also allowing aspects
of the different aspects of the psyche
to talk to each other through the text
so there is a lot we can do so as I
mentioned to you the process of
identification where you're identifying
with something like the the sage right
obviously it makes use of our capacity
for internalizing the perspective of
others but it also requires our what
Pelini called the capacity for
indwelling right so remember indwelling
is when I'm I'm proceeding through the
pen I'm indwelling it so you not only
have to internalize the sage but you
have to indwell is that you have to
practice right and that's fits within
with others to practice trying to in
what does it look like right what is it
like to see things the way the sage does
you have to seriously play
this age without pretense or arrogance
or inflation that's why wisdom is going
to matter to all of this right
so I practice indwelling the sage right
and you yet you know and people think
what would Socrates do what would
Aristotle do what would Jesus do right
and you have to regularly practice so
you practice indwelling and then you
practice internalizing and you practice
indwelling and then you practice
internalizing right and that is how you
basically start to afford the
internalization of the sage and the
creation of your ability as antis and he
said what he learned from Socrates so
long ago to converse with yourself to
get to enter into something like
platonic dialogue with yourself
all right what about alienation so
alienation takes us towards something
talked about by Emile Durkheim and
Viktor Turner and others communitas
communitas is what you feel when you're
watching with other people what has
happened recently the Raptors and
everybody was gathered together and we
have shared attention and we are getting
in sync together and we have that sense
of community and communicating with each
other and there is a shared spirit
amongst us all
that's communitas that's communitas
communitas right is basically a way of
getting collective flow going but it's
also something else it's a collective
flow in which we feel like there is real
communication between people and
something deeper there's real communion
there's a sense of participating in a
shared identity of some kind
so this has to be with looked this has
to do with sorry taking a careful look
at our careful look at the way in which
our practices of communication and
communing have been so undermined by
bullshitting and modal confusion and an
adversarial political culture etc and so
what's been happening and as I said part
of the gift of the video series is I've
gotten to meet more and more people who
are trying to do this there they're
trying to they're putting real time and
talent into cultivating individual and
communal responses to the meeting crisis
so I've got to interact with for example
Peter Lindbergh who's been introducing
me to authentic discourse authentic
relating practices I will talk a little
bit about this in a minute and then for
example I've got to meet and have some
interesting dialogue the in one
interview not one interview sort of one
dialogue with him is out and there's
another one coming because what Jordan
Hall is trying to do is he's trying to
do two things in an integrated fashion I
see him trying to do he's trying to free
communication from the the cultural
grammar that has got us where we are and
that since he's trying to respond deeply
to the history not in theory but in the
actual practice and and that is bound up
with as my argument has tried to show it
that is bound up with the project of
trying to re-access in a powerful and
perspicacious manner these other kinds
of knowing and that making our
communication on
communion not just a matter of
propositional exchange or conflict but
trying to tap into right the underlying
procedural knowing and how that
procedural knowing is dependent on the
underlying perspectival situational
awareness the perspective of knowing and
how that is ultimately dependent on the
participatory process of our ongoing
evolving attunement from which the agent
and the arena co emerge and so I see him
trying to do that I see him trying to
create a way in which we can get what he
calls coherence a kind of community I
would say that is directed towards
engaging the collective intelligence of
distributed cognition and remember that
most of our real-world problem-solving
contrary to the we tell
ourselves about how we're self-made
individuals most of our problem-solving
is done in concert serious play concert
music is done in concert with other
people and so what he is trying to do is
create us stands towards right a state
called coherence in which we are
creating a kind of community cast that
is marshalling distributed cognition and
it's collective intelligence for
simultaneously freeing us from the ways
in which we are boxed in like the nine
dog problem by our historical cultural
cognitive grammar access the other kinds
of knowing and bring that to bear on the
problems that we are facing so I want to
talk a little bit I'll just introduce
the idea there's a book I'm Co hearing
the integral we space enabling
collective emergence wisdom and healing
in groups I've gone to a circling
practice already I'm not an expert in it
I'm I want to become one I want I want
to take it's here I take it seriously
so I'm only gesturing towards it but it
is a communal practice in which this is
my best way of trying to explain it to
you're engaging in something like share
you're engaging in a mindfulness
practice something like platonic
dialogue and you're creating something
like a collective flow state so that
what emerges right is a dynamical system
and as I basically have been proposing
throughout this the last few lectures
that the word spirit is basically
pointing towards dynamical systems that
right are evolving we create a dynamical
system that gives people the resources
to address their capacity for being in
touch with themselves in each other it's
not therapy although it overlaps with
some of the the gnosis in therapy as
well you know this you know that you eat
when things are right and you get in
sync with another person or another
group of people there's a and we talked
about this with platonic dialogue
something emerges there's a collective
right that emerges there that takes your
cognition and everybody else's in places
that you can't go individually you
participate in that but you don't make
it you're not just a passive recipient
of it you know just a patient of it
right you're participating in it and so
I want to know I want to learn more
about this but dairy is a growing and
this is this the the circling practice
overlaps with other practices that Peter
and I are learning about where you're
Peter talks about you know a process he
calls the anti debate where we turn
adversarial debating we have techniques
for turning it into authentic relating
where we're trying to get insight rather
than victory in our our debating
processes there's there's lots of books
coming out on this like you know verbal
Aikido and verbal judo so there is the
beginning of a whole set of practices
for bringing about authentic discourse
that can really address
the issues of alienation okay now of
course as I said the response to
existential entrapment is gnosis and we
had an extended discussion about that
and it's interconnection with higher
states of consciousness so I'm not gonna
talk about that that a great length
please go back and look at that that
gnosis but what I would say is that
gnosis seems to need and you see this
with cheap form you see this in therapy
it needs that open-ended mythos that the
Gnostics talked about I'm not talking
I'm not advocating their particular
mythos I'm not saying their metaphysics
is correct but that did that
transgressive the open-ended ongoing
right symbol the ongoing mythos these
seem to be needed for the cultivation of
gnosis and so I would recommend that to
you so what I want to do next time is
come back and put this all together what
it looks like and then start talking
about the overall framing of this the
way we frame how we cultivate the
individual psycho technologies the
individual practices and how we also
collect how we constellated G of those
in a state of enlightenment within a
wisdom framing thank you very much for
your time and attention
you
[Music]
you
you