[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
people are awfully forgiving or that
they just don't understand what's been
done to them we are at an epochal shift
we're at the point where the West could
tip into complacent and quite well-off
for redundancy or we could pay a
decisive role in the future what the
bank's did was reprehensible that was
why it was the outrage of agree the
bankers when you gave them money that
was supposed to help them lend to others
but they decided to use that money to
pay themselves bonuses for what for
record losses we are governed by
corporations today often by corporations
that don't have very much interest in
the United States of America I don't
know what happened that what happened to
the United States it was so far in the
ditch you know what at what moment did
it all go back with a discount was it
was it Donna Summer
is that what killed America
we are entering the age of consequence a
rapacious financial system escalating
organized violence abject poverty for
billions and the looming environmental
fallout are all converging at a time
when governance religion and mainstream
economists have stalled
[Music]
war conquest famine and death
the four horsemen are coming
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
this is not a film that sees
conspiracies it's not a film that
mongers fear it's not a film that blames
bankers or politicians it's a film that
questions the system's we've created and
suggests ways to reform them over
centuries systems have been subtly
modified manipulated and even corrupted
often to serve the interests of the fuel
we have continually accepted these
changes and because man can adjust to
living under virtually any conditions
the trait that's enabled us to survive
it's the very trait that has suppressed
us no societies have an elite and elite
drivers and power and the ways they stay
in power is not really by controlling
the means of production to be Marxist
are you controlling the money but by
controlling the cognitive map the way we
think and what really matters in that
respect not so much what is actually
said in public but is what is left under
baited unsaid the centuries gatekeepers
have manipulated our cognitive map but
in 1989 a computer scientist by the name
of Tim berners-lee implemented the first
successful communication between an HTTP
client and server the world wide web was
born
it has since unleashed a tsunami of
instantly accessible freely available
information just as Gutenberg's printing
press wrestled control of the cognitive
map away from an ecclesiastical and
royal elite today the internet is
beginning to change governments finance
in the media we are at the cusp of
change
but to announce it we must first
understand the things that have been
left unsaid for so long to do that we
need context from people who speak the
truth in the face of collective delusion
because to understand something is to be
liberated from it
[Music]
[Music]
the end of World War two
we had 50% of the world's gross domestic
product we were making fifty four
thousand airplanes a year seven thousand
ships etc etc and we were the new Rome
and we recognized it and devised the
power management scheme in the 1947
National Security Act - we thought
manage it and it worked fairly well
during the Cold War we haven't done
anything since and I think that's
another sign of our inability to grasp
the new world if you will
empires do not begin or end on a certain
date but they do end and the West has
not yet come to terms with its fading
supremacy at the end of every Empire
under the guise of renewal tribes armies
and organizations appear and devour the
heritage of the former superpower often
from within in his essay the fate of
Empires the soldier diplomat and
traveler leftenant General Sir John Club
analyzed the life cycle of Empires he
found remarkable similarities between
them all an empire lasts about 250 years
or ten generations from the early
pioneers to the final conspicuous
consumers who become a burden on the
state six ages defined the lifespan of
an empire the age of pioneers the age of
conquests the age of Commerce the age of
affluence the age of intellect ending
with bread and circuses in the age of
decadence
there are common features to every age
of David's an undisciplined overextended
military the conspicuous display of
wealth a massive disparity between rich
and poor a desire to live off a bloated
State and an obsession with sex but
perhaps the most notorious trait of all
is the debasement of the currency the
United States and Great Britain both
began on a gold or silver standard long
since abandoned Rome was no different so
it started on a principle that was very
sound and it was on a silver standard
but as it corrupted further and further
and further the Roman daenerys got to
the point where it was basically a
copper coin and they learned how to
plate and it was washed in silver and in
circulation the plating came off and at
the end all the Senators that really did
at one time represent the people only
were interested in representing how much
wealth they could steal at the top great
Empire wealth always dazzles
but beneath the surface the unbridled
desire for money power and material
possessions means the duty and public
service are replaced by leaders and
citizens who scramble for the spoils
historically all the signs of the demise
of the Empire are beginning to develop
some or more trenchant than others this
current financial and economic crisis
that sort of thing always accompanies
the demise of n/bar the people of Rome
were constantly being distracted by the
gladiatorial events and the politicians
knew that they did this whenever there
was unrest among the people there huge
events going on they created a new event
with lots and lots of gladiators every
day we're doing that that is that is a
common trait of declining empires and so
today in the United States for example
you find a tremendous emphasis on all
kinds of television programs that
distract people from what's really going
on Sports is a big part of that as it
was confetti at a time in essence we've
been low into a lethargy and we've
accepted it just as our sport stars
today and vast sums so did roman
charioteers in the second century one by
the name of Gaius akula's Diocles
amassed a fortune of 35 million
sesterces in prize money equivalent to
several billion dollars today strangely
perhaps there's another profession that
is disproportionately hallowed as an
empire declines the Romans the Ottomans
and the Spanish all made celebrities of
their chefs and this again is typifying
the end of an empire where things were
so great we have this last hope of
momentum that we used to be great and we
felt great we don't feel it anymore so
everyone is out searching for it well
maybe it's in the best food or the best
clothes or the best music or the best
movies or a reality TV show or another
magazine but you can never get enough of
what you don't need what you need is a
strong moral conviction that is
pervasive throughout the society and
integrity reigns there's a vast apathy
there's a vast a moralism even a
political nature to it that is to say
there are vast numbers of people who
don't give a damn and so there's this
this natural I suppose entropy any
living organism which an empire is of
course over time dies question is how
does it die does it die devout cascade
of events or does it die over a long
period of time
the baby boomer generation were born
into this age of decadence perhaps
unwittingly they've broken the unspoken
intergenerational contract through
unfettered consumerism spiraling house
prices and a desire for eternal youth
the baby boomers have squandered future
generations inheritance my generation
the generation right after my generation
I think we forgot that little phrase in
the preamble to our Constitution which
says and our posterity all of a sudden
it became us period a baby boom
generation which I'm a part of has gone
and done the biggest miss allocation of
capital in the history of mankind we
have had cheap oil or cheap energy is a
better way to phrase it we've had an
abundance of ideas and we have chosen a
system and perpetuated it that is
probably one of the worst ways to use
the blessings or bestowed upon us and we
are going to pay a price for that human
beings are inconsistent and paradoxical
we hope for peace and immortality but
continually invent new ways to destroy
each other we're capable of the kindest
most noble acts and the most horrific
atrocities
you know things are complex scriptures
I mean for example we're capable right
now at this minute of acting in such a
way as to make it likely if not certain
that our grandchildren are going to face
terrible disasters and we are
consciously acting to accelerate that
likelihood even though we all love our
grandchildren how can you be more
contradictory than that in spite of all
the economic activities of last 50 60 70
years since the world Second World War
and all the industrialization we have
not yet managed to solve the problem of
poverty deprivation hunger malnutrition
millions of people every night go to bed
without food and millions of people are
throwing away their food waste on the
one hand and poverty and deprivation and
hunger on the other hand a malnutrition
on the one hand and obesity on the other
hand what kind of system had we created
why with such brilliant knowledge on the
planet are we still struggling to
distribute well fairly how has the human
race developed a flawed system of
government and economics that serves the
few at the expense of the many and with
such poverty in an age of Plenty why
have we not had the will to change such
a vicious social structure
Pete is a fundamental kind of
ingredients for the immoral economy
become the problem is not that there is
not enough in the world people say that
their poverty we have to create more
wealth - there is enough in the world
for everybody's meat as Mahatma Gandhi
said but not for anybody's breed but is
it just greed or does it go deeper than
that
it's the problem systemic
[Music]
[Music]
as a civilization we've obviously we've
obviously had a great run who come very
well we had the Industrial Revolution we
survived that we've built a lot of
modern military technology we've
survived that so far we've built a
banking system and we're still
struggling with that part of it but you
know we've been good run it's kind of
like when I was working to Wall Street
for seven years you had the experience
some people would have what they working
at a meat processing plant they become
vegetarian you work on Wall Street you
see how the bank's involvement gave you
more give me the other bank to make
money when you see money you can't make
it sick well I think if the people knew
what the banking system is up to as
Henry Ford said there would be a
revolution tomorrow morning the fact is
most people think that what a bank does
is lend you money that someone else has
put in the bank previously but what a
bank actually does what a commercial
bank does is to create money for nothing
and then lend it to your interest if I
do that if I manufacture money in my own
home it's called counterfeiting if an
accountant creates money out of nothing
in the company accounts it's called
cooking the books but if a bank does it
is perfectly legal and so long as you
allow fraud to be legalized then all
kinds of problems are going to pop up in
the economic systems you can't do
anything about private banks create
money out of nothing and limited
interest now that sounds absurd when I
teach sophomores you know about money
and banking and how banks they never
believe it and so you have to go through
it again and again
yes banks really do create money
here's how it happens and it's absurd
and they're right to doubt that that
could possibly be what's really going on
but it is now if the banking Lobby is
very strong they're going to say well we
don't want to change the system in
making so much money out of it
what we have to do is a try and convince
the people that is their fault that
their wage claims are too high and
that's why we're having lots of
inflation where people are speculating
on housing and that's why house prices
are going up what they're not going to
say is that this is happening because
banks are creating money out of nothing
and pumping it into the system and
that's why prices are going up but how
is it that we've ended up with a system
in which banks have to power to create
money since 1971 when President Nixon
took the United States of what was left
of the gold standard the world has
operated under a system of money known
as Fiat the dollar the pound the euro
are all government fiat currencies Fiat
is a Latin word meaning let it be so it
is the law that this government currency
big money indeed without that legal
enforcement and the fact that we must
pay taxes with this money that dollar
bill or that computer digit that
represents a dollar would be pretty much
meaningless only the government has the
power to issue fiat money but banks can
create it through lending over the last
40 years since this system of fiat money
became the global norm the supply of
money has grown exponentially in fact
we've seen the greatest growth in the
supply of money in history but who
benefits
of course those that have the power to
issue money governments and banks then
those companies and individuals that get
this money early they can spend it
before the prices of the things they
want to buy I've risen to reflect the
new money in circulation in other words
they get services products or assets
cheap but prices soon rise so holders of
asset such as houses or shares will then
see gains without their necessarily
being any improvements to the company or
house in question often this can lead to
speculative bubbles but what about those
at the bottom of the pyramid those on
fixed wages or incomes those who live in
remote areas or those with savings by
the time this newly created money has
filtered down to then the prices of the
things they want to buy have increased
their savings buy them less however and
their wages remain largely unchanged in
some cases they have to take on debt
just to be able to afford the things
they were previously able to buy which
means they have to go back to the banks
in reality this process of creating
money only redistributes wealth from the
bottom to the top of the pyramid and
that's that ever-increasing gulf between
rich and poor gets bigger and bigger and
bigger well when you get off the gold
standard and you go into if you have
money currency combined with a
fractional reserve banking system you
end up compounding debt faster than you
can ever possibly produce to support
that debt so eventually you're going to
find yourself back into debt slavery and
that's what's happened in the US for
every dollar of GDP for example in the
US and now it's also create something
like five dollars and 50 cents worth of
debt because it this is this is what
happens in our economy flips over and
basically capsizes and of course the
government solution now to to address
all the problems is basically to create
more debt you can never get enough of a
currency that doesn't work you can print
it to kingdom comes but you can't print
wealth and you can't get yourself out of
debt like making more debt if you could
print wealth Sambhav way would be the
largest most prosperous
country on the planet we all know it
doesn't work of the money in the world
today 97% of it is dead the French
philosopher Voltaire once said all paper
money eventually returns to its
intrinsic value zero
for three generations the world watched
the fight between capitalism and
communism but in the 1980s the Russian
economy started to collapse the Soviet
Union capitulated and so called
capitalism reign supreme before 1989 we
had a battle between communism in the
market and in that battle
there was a sense of let's not expose
the flaws in the market economy this is
too important of a battle that you don't
criticize our team while we're fighting
their team and their team so jameth
authoritarianism with a failure to
deliver well-being to their society it
was very clear that if you had to choose
between these two which was better
communism failed first for various
reasons I think it was inefficient human
rights lack of respect over so
capitalist West has been continuing in a
triumphalist mode thinking ah you know
our adversary has failed that means
we're doing everything right both
systems are trying to do something which
is fundamentally impossible grow forever
and they're both going to fail one
failed first capitalism is going to fail
and you know later oryx failing now
America right now is in a very
interesting position because in the past
two three hundred years of its history
it's a culture and country was almost
always existed on the assumption that
resources could be expanded if there was
a problem you always try to do it by
expanding the time go west young man and
make the pie bigger so that everyone's
got a bigger piece now it's creating a
world where possibly resources are
beginning to be more constrained and
where it's going to have to divide up
that pie and inflict pain on people and
that's something which is just not well
prepared for
how has the country moved so far from
the intentions of its founding fathers
how has the American dream become so
distorted over the last 30 or 40 years
capitalism has taken this extreme form
and a lot of it goes back to the
economist Milton Friedman from the
Chicago School and Ronald Reagan and
Margaret Thatcher and others buying into
these policies that really encourage
people to take on huge amounts of debt
encourage privatization smaller
government supposedly
although bigger military so actually the
government Finnegan is out deregulation
getting rid of rules that govern the
people who run our institutions
especially our corporations it's as
though we suddenly are supposed to
believe that the human beings who sit at
the top of corporations I don't need to
be regulated there's some sort of God's
Milton Friedman his protege is the
Chicago boys and the neoclassical
ideology beat the classical approach to
economics and became the framework for
what we today call capitalism there are
two main competing economic approaches
which determine how we humans manage the
world and distribute wealth these are
the classical and neoclassical schools
the classical school favors less
government interference more personal
autonomy and recognizes that humans
cannot function without natural
resources the neoclassical school which
has a more dismissive view of natural
resources thinks government should rule
the economy solve social problems and
leave the free market to look after the
distribution of wealth the neoclassical
school emerged around 100 years ago due
to vested interests desire to protect
their assets
this meant that neoclassical
mathematical models and assumptions were
divorced from reality they're based on
what ought to be instead of the
classical models which are based on what
actually is it's these neoclassical
models which favor large corporations
that have been used to legitimize the
financialization of the global
economy championed by Ronald Reagan and
Margaret Thatcher neoclassical economics
still dominates policymaking today the
Reagan Revolution is recording those
days obviously the Reagan Thatcher
revolution think about it more globally
it was a big change in power structure
and a big transfer of opportunity and
wealth now it wasn't it's not if not
that the poor gave it to the rich it was
a transfer within the well-to-do so that
the financial sector in particular in
the United States for example but also
in the UK in some other places
it came vastly more profitable and set
wages in that sector went up a lot and
we we focus on bonuses but it's also
based salaries went up our overall
compensation so there's a transfer from
the non-financial part of the economy to
the financial part of the economy that
actually is unprecedented as far as we
can see in any of the available data to
us until about all over recorded human
history in 1932 in the aftermath of
America's great stock market crash a
piece of legislation was passed to
protect society the glass-steagall Act
was introduced to separate ordinary high
street banking from Investment Banking
67 years later in 1999 under the
influence of Treasury Secretary Larry
Summers and his predecessor Robert Rubin
President Bill Clinton repealed the
glass-steagall Act once again banks
could take ordinary depositors money and
speculate with it on virtually anything
they liked Wall Street is has become a
very particular type of casino and it's
unfortunately not the kind of casino
they have in Las Vegas which is know
perfectly legitimate form of
entertainment
it is a casino that has massive negative
repercussions on the rest of society so
it's not just losing your money
on a few wild nights it's about the way
in which those organizations lose their
money impacting the whole of society
leading to a massive loss of jobs
this unfettered gambling pushed the
entire global financial system to near
collapse with balances and debt
obligations larger than the GDP of
entire countries the banks had become
too big to fail the West was unprepared
and bankers met they're reeling and
disorientated governments you have to
bail us out we need money if you don't
give us the money the whole thing goes
down and what are you going to do with
millions and tens of millions of people
who have lost everything in their bank
account you you will have a revolution
on your head so fork over the money
borrow borrow the money create it out of
nothing and give it back to and give it
to us and and and so that we can face
our our problems and not go under and or
otherwise and this is what the mr. Hank
Paulson did in the US Congress he's went
there one day and he told them over
we need 700 billion and we need it now
or else this this system we call
capitalism really capitalism in a
capitalist system government is supposed
to be small but today the state is more
bloated and invasive than it's ever
being individuals and companies are
supposed to operate in a free-market
good Enterprise is rewarded with profit
and flawed enterprise with failure but
during the 2008 banking crisis the
people saw the Western economic system
divided in a way they were told could
never happen socialism for the rich
capitalism for the poor and in America
for example the banks are got in trouble
that bailed out by the government that's
socialism and they people are arguing
against socialism in America and yet
it's probably not socialist country the
world right now now we have a system
which is enabling of koper capitalist
system which people make mistakes I did
only punish the poor people make
mistakes are they punished or you
words that they didn't make any mistake
and they are forced to pay for the
mistakes of the rich when the taxpayer
is footing the bill for the misplaced
speculation of bankers then suddenly
instead of the economy serving the human
being the human being is now in
perpetual service to a moral financial
organisations it was the head of the
Federal Reserve Bank Alan Greenspan who
after 9/11 slashed interest rates to
encourage lending bankers needed new
participants to keep cash flowing into a
system that had become a global pyramid
scheme all this newly created money
entered the housing market and created
unprecedented inflation house prices
rose and rose new mothers were forced
back into the workplace to service huge
home loans and the Anglo American dream
became all about land speculation the
housing market in the West isn't about
ownership housing markets in the West
because it's the only way ordinary
people can get ahead and the ordinary
people can't get ahead but by wages what
we created a mass bubble economics
around housing does that suck seeing a
huge amount of capital takes capital for
genuine innovations in the economy and
puts it into a speculative use that has
no genuine productive outcome it's
interesting if you talk to people in
Germany for example they don't see a
connection between owning a piece of
property and they're being inclined
towards being democratic there's lots of
people who rent their housing there and
they're perfectly comfortable with that
arrangement but it is true that in some
more different contexts both mr. Reagan
or mrs. Thatcher pushed for more people
to own housing and actually this is part
of the problem because if you push
people to buy housing before their
readiness oh if you if you push very
dubious loans on them and they don't
understand what they're getting selves
into you can have huge adverse
repercussions exactly what led to in
part the subprime housing crisis in the
United States that's not ten things to
do is moxie that's just a bad economic
idea the breakthrough that occurred
around the year 2000 in the United
States
well some bankers found out that the
poor are honest and they realized that
if you're poor if you're not rich you
have a different set of values and you
think that a debt is a debt and it's
something that has to be paid and the
people will try to pay the debt that
they're stuck with even if the debts are
not valid even if the depths are much
more than I expected even if they really
can't pay the debt the London and
banking institutions when they drew up
contracts with interest rates with
flexible interest rates I think they
knew in the beginning that these
problems were going to come back later
on where folks weren't going to be able
to afford the mortgages as the interest
rates increased they put a lot of people
in situations where they were taking
food out of refrigerators taking kids
out of higher education they're not able
to afford college anymore and it is
making a really really bad situation
worse the banks engaged in what was a
criminal conspiracy to charge more for
the blacks and Hispanics the banks got
together backed the Bush administration
to block the state prosecutions of
racial lending in order to exploit and
charge more to the minorities these are
loans which were made by one of the
major lenders in the city and in this
country Wells Fargo in which Wells Fargo
targeted minority communities in the
city put borrowers into loans that they
could not afford put borrowers into
loans that that were the subprime
variety therefore more expensive and
less advantageous to the borrowers
hiding predatory lending practices in
the small print of complex financial
products was only ever going to enrich
one set of interests many of the
communities in which African Americans
live in the city were establishing
momentum there was development activity
that was occurring we were seeing signs
of vitality in many of these communities
and
the results of the Wells Fargo
foreclosures and the subprime lending
practices of that lender and others has
significantly impaired that progress and
brought it to a halt and not worrying
about they don't down come in the heart
of it like you in the heart of it so you
see don't really see the trouble is they
don't coming the heart of it they send
outside of it that's like looking at a
cover of a book and saying that outside
of the outside of a book but if you
won't go inside the book you'll never
know what the books about
so they not worry about nobody else but
they sell and I think it's wrong because
if they come in to harder and they say
they'd be willing to help what happened
in Baltimore is just one example of what
is happening all around the world one
way to frame this injustice is by
branding it a race issue but when we
look really closely we can see that
there is something at play here that
transcends race profit not an accident
for instance that we had the
deregulation in our financial industry
that was such a disaster the lobbyists
of the finance industry amount to five
per Congress person you know where they
pay five people for every congressman to
explain to them persuade them that they
should pass legislation that is
favorable to financial industry the poor
people who are devastated don't have the
money they couldn't hire five /
congressman
so the way our our democracy works it's
an unlevel playing field the financial
sectors are quite enormous power
probably through political contributions
so buying favors but mostly through
ideological control convincing people
that finance is good more finance is
better and unregulated finance without
limit is best and that is really the
cornerstone of this what we call the
United States of Wall Street Washington
corridor I mean if people need any proof
as to who's controlling Washington when
the bailout came after Lehman Brothers
collapsed 80% of the population was
against the bail
notwithstanding that they Congress
passed the bailout just showing in my
view anyway that it's really under the
control of banking interests it's not a
reflection of good democracy when a
company that group of companies and
industry says our interests are more
important than the national interest how
can that happen very easy
next the role of campaign contributions
lobbying an America's political
structure we have a flawed democracy
this is an advanced oligarchy in the
sense that its main mechanism of control
if you like is through convincing people
that you really need for example the six
biggest banks in the United States in
that particular in the particular form
they exist today with the very light
level of regulation and if you don't
have them if you try to change that all
kinds of awful things will happen and
this is not really blackmail I mean
sounds like right now but they convince
you it's not like a let's just test the
way the world is there's nothing you can
do about it oh my goodness you just have
to cooperate with them it's very clever
the Fed is essentially the lobbyists for
the commercial banking system when you
say you want to turn regulation over to
the Fed you're saying the financial
sector and Wall Street should be self
regulated and the Wall Street has veto
power over whoever is going to be the
head of the Federal Reserve as long as
you give veto power over the regulators
to Wall Street as long as you pick the
bank regulators from the banking
industry itself you can forget any
thought of selling it regulation it's
deregulation and to call it regulation
instead of deregulation is using
Orwellian doublethink democracy is
government by the people
plutocracy is government by the rich in
a typical plutocratic state economic
inequality is high social mobility low
and because of continuous exploitation
of the masses workers find it nearly
impossible to climb out of poverty the
equal voting rights movement in the
early 20th century abolished a system
where rich people had more votes than
poor people but today lobbying has put
pay to that and reduced the American
political system to a mere Clearing
House for the concerns of the rich the
Goldman Sachs machine is one of using
profits to buy influence in Washington
to change laws to make it easier to make
money on Wall Street to be used to buy
influence in Washington so it's a
self-reinforcing malfeasance machine
that is continuing to grow as a parasite
in the economy and continuing to kill
the host famous for claiming it did
God's work goldman sachs is one of the
most influential investment banks in the
world
it's alumni often occupy positions of
great influence in governments and
central banks in September 2008 barely a
month before the stock market crash
Goldman supposedly a pillar of the free
market changed its banking status from
investment to commercial this meant it
was now eligible for state protection
socialism for the rich right there
goldman sachs are extremely efficient or
what they do their task is to make money
they make bank robbers like Willy Sutton
look like modest amateurs they're huge
bank robbers but it's legal the system
is set up so that they can do it in the
recent years they have been selling
securities but together from mortgages
that they knew were worthless so they're
selling these things to unwitting
consumers making it time Aion meanwhile
they're betting that they're going to
fail because they know that what they're
peddling is rotten so they placed bets
with a credit default swaps other things
with a huge insurance company AIG and
that was insuring Goldman Sachs against
the failure of the stuff they're
peddling during America's subprime
collapse Goldman traders Michael Swenson
and Josh Birnbaum made a four billion
dollar profit by short selling junk
mortgages backed by Dan sparks
internally Goldman Sachs called their
position the big short and bet against
their own clients Senator Carl Levin
called Goldman Sachs chief executive
Lloyd Blankfein to a Senate subcommittee
to testify under oath much has been said
about the supposedly massive short
goldman sachs had on the US housing
market the fact is we were not
consistently or significantly net short
the market in residential mortgage
related products in 2007 and 2008 we
didn't have a massive short against the
housing market and we certainly did not
bet against our clients riding the big
short in 2007 made billions of dollars
for Goldman
and so far they've got away scot-free
with this massive heist so they're not
back bigger than before richer than
before biggest profits they've had in
history huge bonuses they don't great a
lot of what a lot of what they're doing
has effect really maybe all of it has
suppose nothing to do with you benefit
of the economy can there be any
objection to genuinely talented people
earning big money if they bring
something new and tangible to the world
if they take great personal risks with
their own money and actually bring
greater prosperity for all in a free
market if I have a brilliant idea that I
can run an automobile on grass clippings
as an example and I produce that car my
motivation might be to make money but if
the market says my goodness this is the
greatest automobile ever invented by
mankind and I make a billion dollars
I've not only served myself but I have
served everyone else that needs a
transportation and that is the
brilliance of a free market is that
paradox that you could serve yourself
and simultaneously serve others and
that's what it's all about but how many
of the general public have achieved
greater prosperity through a banker's
bonus it was against the holy backdrop
of some Paul's Cathedral in London at
Goldman Sachs vice-chairman and
mouthpiece Lord Griffiths gave insight
into how certain bankers really think
the devoted Christian defended
extortionate versus I'm not a person of
despair I'm a person of hope and I think
that we have to tolerate the inequality
as a way to achieving greater prosperity
and opportunity for all the fundamental
Christian view and I would say of Islam
as well and certainly of Judaism that
wealth is to be shared money has to be
shared you can't take it with you and
from that develops a whole lot of stuff
about justice and the economy and so on
and we've lost that and instead we've
got people accumulating more and more
and I just think it's I just think it's
disgusting that people have lost their
homes lost their jobs to compare their
mortgages from bankers who made a big
mistake and then paid enormous bonuses
I'm sorry that is simply wrong and I
can't understand why we are not more
vociferous about that when rich people
tell you that they specifically healthy
rich through these egregious ripoff
mechanisms that's just self-serving
propaganda and it should be disregarded
it is true that if you when you organize
human society some people get ahead and
some people struggle that's a natural
mechanism but saying oh we got to have
any quality bet for Goldman Sachs must
be organized along the following lines
that's a complete non sequitur at what
juncture what point does morality enter
into economic the economic calculus in a
way many people think that Adam Smith
gave us a free pass way not to think
about morality because what Adam Smith
said was that individuals in the pursuit
of their self-interest are glad is it by
an invisible hand to the general
well-being of society let me make it
clear
annasmith didn't really say
that is a Adam Smith was very much aware
that businesses when they got together
conspired against the public interest
raise prices he was aware of monopolies
he was aware of the importance of
education that the private sector
couldn't provide so he himself was aware
of all the limitations but his latter
gay descendants have forgotten all those
caveats Adam Smith was the Godfather of
classical economics but since its
publication his work has been used as a
political football finances twisting his
words to suit them Lord Griffiths
advocates ruthless individualism to push
this idea that if bankers get rich then
we get rich too through a process known
as trickle-down economics all for since
parentage
if you feed the horse in our votes some
will pass through to the road for the
sparrows the idea is that extreme wealth
concentrated on a small minority will
eventually trickle down to everyone else
but it doesn't work because by the time
the money reaches the people at the
bottom of our money pyramid it's lost
its purchasing power but the public are
now confused as to why our political
leaders have allowed this to happen
now ask why because our political
processes of badly flawed their
battle-ax flawed because of the
dependence of lobbyists on campaign
contributions so that's why my view and
a view I think about a lot of people is
that we have to restructure our
political processes to give more voice
to the ordinary citizen and less voice
to the interest group moneyed groups to
those who who have taken such a large
role in shaping our tax code regulatory
regulations and so forth
[Music]
I stood on the front step of : Powell's
house now look at him and say what what
next boss and he says what you mean
that's it what next where are you going
next from writing a book I said I know
you're going to write your book I can't
do that for the rest your life where you
going next he said maybe a cabinet
position but first but first money I
said money he says yeah Millions
that's the only way you can be a cabinet
officer in the American government oh
wow
the Democrats and the Republicans are
beholden to corporate interests and
until they become unbuilding to those
corporate interests we will never have a
well governed Republic
[Music]
[Music]
the inherent iniquity in our system of
money banking and politics has not just
had consequences domestically but also
on a massive scale globally
[Music]
[Laughter]
Western leaders have presented their
military campaign in Iraq Afghanistan
and Pakistan as a moral obligation but
are there other reasons for it the first
financial beneficiary of America's
foreign policy is the military in
particular those who supply it with arms
and equipment the military has won Wars
but how successful has it been in its
bigger aim to eradicate terrorism the
drone attacks not only failed but
they've created extra extremism they've
helped in radicalization of youth in the
Northwest Frontier and also in certain
parts of Punjab and Pakistan and because
time after time and sometimes you know
there's a feeling that America does this
deliberately to destabilize Pakistan I'm
not so sure about that but I certainly
think those people who actually support
this policy every time you kill 10 the
so called terrorists you create 500 more
because they see the drone attacks as a
an attack on a sovereign state of
Pakistan if they really wanted to flush
them out there was no need for a huge
military operation in Swat causing the
entire district to become internal it is
displaced persons the population of
source is 1.8 million there are 2.3
million refugees in the country the
whole district has been emptied this
wouldn't be necessary if they had
carried out a surgical commando
operation to get the military base but
they allowed them to escape all of them
after the military the next financial
beneficiary are those who win the
contracts to conduct the rebuilding
process in the West people might even
feel optimistic when they hear that the
u.s. is pumping tens of billions of
newly created dollars into developing
nations to build infrastructure but
often this too doesn't seem to achieve
the publicized goals is there another
reason we give these countries aid we
cannot equipment have created the
world's first truly global empire and
we've done it primarily without the
military we work many different ways but
perhaps the most common is that we'll
take a third-world country that has
resources our corporations covet like
oil and then arrange a huge loan to that
country from the World Bank or one of
its sister organizations however the
money never actually goes to the country
instead it goes to our own corporations
to build infrastructure projects in that
country power plants highways industrial
parks things that benefit a few wealthy
families in that country as well as our
corporations but don't help the majority
of people at all they're too poor to buy
electricity or drive cars on the
highways and don't have the skills to
get jobs in industrial parks but they're
left holding a huge debt infrastructure
which is used heavy loans from the World
Bank and IMF and made from grants from
Western countries they've all gone into
benefiting the elite and the feudal
classes and they have not benefited the
people a lot of money goes to these
consultants and companies from the West
who charge huge amounts of money and
actually the real money on projects and
on ordinary people is very limited the
masses have very little already so those
landlords who have the infrastructure
and who are going to make money because
of the infrastructure that is built
through their roads they will prosper
but
the ones who don't have any resources
they've not had jobs there isn't any
economic activity for them in terms of
manufacturing goods so they can sell and
they can also prosper when you don't
have that what do they do they resort to
joining the Taliban because they see the
enemy coming in and taking away what
little bit they have President Obama I
understand wants to invest seven and a
half billion dollars in Pakistan's
infrastructure to alleviate poverty and
you know take away all the divisions and
all being anti-american sentiment over
here or whatever his reasons are we can
do without it
in fact it's the worst possible thing he
can do this kind of help is actually
going to be a hindrance with just go to
make matters worse it will bring this
contrived war and terror into a rural
areas how much of US foreign policy is
genuinely altruistic and how much is it
influenced by the banks and corporations
with profits so tremendously from it
America's evangelism of democracy is
riddled with contradictions not least of
which this idea of promoting democracy
at the point of a gun or opposing
regimes which are democratic but not in
the way that America wants so to this
idea that America been promoting free
market capitalism have also been riddled
with confliction because the reality is
that American firms tend to make most
money when countries are at the cusp of
change certainly American financial
firms and in a sense they want markets
of changing structurally but not too
free and too transparent because they
make money when markets are a bit opaque
is it any wonder developed nations of
fighting in underdeveloped countries
when so many are making so much money
out of it without ever really having to
face up to or even witness the
consequences of their actions so what if
five million kids died in Africa because
of debt last year
you know I got a bonus of a million
pounds and if I have that conversation
I've had it with some bankers who've
been in the business a long time and
they listen politely very polite a
charming and at the end they say well
client is lovely meeting you again and
they go back to the office and do
another loan deals attends an ear or
something I've known a lot of terrorists
called unquote
I've met them I've interviewed them for
books their loans and those and economic
hitmen I've never met one who wanted to
be a terrorist they all want to be with
their families back on the farm the
driven to terrorism because they've lost
the farm it's been inundated with water
from a hydroelectric project or with oil
from oil derricks their farm has been
destroyed they can't make a living for
their kids
or in the case of the Somali pirates
they're fishing waters have been
destroyed and that's why they turn to
this isn't because they want to be the
pirates or terrorists now the maybe of
cue crazy people there are a few crazy
people people with not they're not loose
they'll always be serial killers they'll
always be crazy people
maybe Osama bin Laden was one of them
but they do not get a following unless
there's a terrible miss going on and
people are starving and deprived and
then they will follow these crazy people
because they seem to offer an
alternative if we want to do away with
terrorism if we want to have what we
United had called homeland security
we've got to recognize that the whole
planet is our homeland what does the
word terrorist actually need
many terrorists would sooner describe
themselves as freedom fighters could it
be that the charge of terrorism could
just as easily be made against Western
corporations speculators and policy
makers when we talk about terrorism
means what they do to us not what we do
to them and what they do to us can be
pretty ugly although it's excited a
fraction of what we do to them and it
takes a 9/11 it was pretty serious act
of terrorism maybe the worst single act
of terrorism in history but it could
have been worse I suppose for example
that al Qaeda had bombed Washington
bombed the White House it killed the
president installed a harsh military
dictatorship that brought in a bunch of
economists who drove the economy into
its worst disaster in history that would
have been worse than 9/11 and I'm not
making it up it happened what's called
the first 9/11 in South America namely
Chile on the 11th of September 1973 the
democratically elected Chilean President
Salvador Allende was overthrown in a
coup a dictatorship under Augusto
Pinochet was established that ruled
Chile until 1990 there was the
systematic suppression of all political
dissidents thousands were imprisoned and
murdered who was involved in that first
9/11 not hard to find them right in
Washington and London and so on but
that's off the agenda doesn't count
there's a principle of ideology that we
must never look at our own crimes we
should on the other hand exult in the
crimes of others and in our own nobility
in opposing them
the root causes of so-called terrorism
will not be solved by increasing
economic inequality if governments
really are serious about combating
terrorism then they must start with real
structural reform back home as long as
banking empires chase infrastructure and
debt deals in pursuit of profit the West
will continue to export injustice
through finance millions more will be
displaced terrorism will thrive and
neocolonialism will continue to end more
and more lives
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
what's happened is that we have moved
from a relatively empty world to a
relatively full world that is empty of
us and all of our stuff to now full of
us and all of our stuff in my lifetime
the world population has tripled and the
populations of other things of cars
houses boats all these other things that
put a load on the environment too just
like human bodies those are vastly more
than triple so the world is very very
full of what we might call man-made
capital and it's becoming more and more
empty of what used to be there what we
might call natural capital we are the
first generation we in the rich
developed world or the first generation
to have got to the end of the real
benefits of economic growth for hundreds
of years the best way of raising the
real quality of human life has been to
raise material living standards and
that's what's driven the huge rises in
life expectancy and increases in
happiness and other measures of
well-being but all those have now come
detached from economic growth and
although life expectancy continues to
rise in the rich world it's no longer
related to the amount of economic growth
a country has at all and the same is
true of measures of happiness and the
measures of well-being the paradox is
the more we grow the more poverty we
create our self-interested economic
system seems to be continually missing a
trick so as we keep plundering the
earth's natural capital is it time to
rethink our Western definition of
progress when I look at the world I look
at much the way royal dutch/shell looks
at it they have one of the best
strategic entities in the world private
or public and royal dutch/shell has
posited two scenarios one is called
blueprint and is obviously a planned
corporate structure where world leaders
get together and they think about things
like energy transformation planetary
warming and dwindling fossil fuels and
so forth the other is called
ramble and scramble is pretty much what
it sounds like - it's a mess
interestingly enough in 2075 the ending
year for these scenarios as I recall we
get to about the same place it's just
that blueprint leaves a lot less blood
on the floor
scramble leaves a lot of blood on the
floor is people fight for these
resources and so forth the reason oil
companies are drilling miles under the
sea is that the world's easily
accessible oil has already been found
and largely consumed not only a royal
supplies dwindling major new metals
discoveries are becoming increasingly
rare 40% of the world's agricultural
land is seriously degraded and ever more
volatile yields continue to be unevenly
distributed it may be that the looming
environmental threat is not global
warming but the exhaustion of the
world's resources we're going to have
struggles for finding land sufficient to
grow the agricultural products for a
what the United Nation says is going to
be a nine billion bird population we're
going to struggle over non-renewable
fossil fuels as they run out I think
shell posits about 2075 they'll be gone
and we're going to struggle over things
like water and other precious resources
that are necessary to our life into our
economy and this could be a shell says a
blueprint affair with world leaders
working together to share and share
alike or it could be a real mess and
she'll incidentally that's on the mess
just like the baby boomers failure to
look to the next generation our outdated
competitive mentality for a world of
depleted resources could have
devastating consequences
our economic setup encourages
one-upmanship competition in comparison
whereas the progress humans have made
over millennia has been largely based on
cooperation in any species in almost any
animal there is always the potential for
huge
because within any species all members
of that species have the same need so
they might fight each other for food and
shelter and nest sites and territory and
sexual partners all that kind of thing
but human beings have always had the
other possibility we have the
possibility to be the best source of
support and love and assistance and
cooperation much more so than any other
enemy and so other people can be the
best or the worst you can be my worst
rival or my best source of support in a
progressive society to meet our common
economic social and cultural needs we
must move from globalization to
localization the benefits of a communal
sense of fellowship responsibility and
purpose in a life driven by production
or consumption would lead to happiness
and satisfaction indeed we must ask have
our modern consumerist lifestyles made
us happy I think if one been living in
the 19th century and somebody told you
that 100 years later people are going to
be living in this extraordinary wealth
and comforts you know central heating
and being able to throw away such a high
proportion of our food as we do we'd
imagine that we'd be living in a state
of extraordinary social harmony and
everything would be rosy and it's really
quite remarkable the contrast between if
you like the material success of our
societies and the social failure the
growth economy demands that we make
consumption a way of life he who dies
with the most toys became the ambition
and we tail replaced spiritual
satisfaction unsurprisingly sales of
antidepressants skyrocketed the fact is
that the world economy over the last few
years a good share of my lifetime has
been built either on the military or on
producing items that most people don't
need and really don't even want you can
right down to it but we are going to
have them consumerism is driven by
our extraordinary social nature that we
want to have the stuff so we look good
in other people's eyes it's because I
experience myself through other people's
eyes with feelings of shame and
embarrassment or pride and maybe feeling
envied all those things so you know it
the goods are just a way of if you like
mediating relationship between yourself
and others in this extraordinarily
alienated hierarchy what's really
suffered is human relationships family
life the things that really matter to us
and in the end the only thing that makes
human beings happy isn't money it's very
clear that past a certain level you only
get marginal gains for and wealth what
really makes us happy is other people
it's our relationship with other people
that's really been damaged by the last
30 years we trust them less we have less
interaction with them we bomb less than
ever before we marry less and marriages
and the more threat than ever before and
all the association's that represent
sort of permanent uncondition human
affection or being eroded or damaged and
that's the real legacy of the last 30
years and in some times we've got to
recover and realized our lives otherwise
lyonie will be be nasty brutish and
short
but they'll be lonely the West is coming
to the realization that it's human
project is failing the West was so
convinced that if you push people to
achieve as individuals the accumulated
achievement of individuals would make
for a successful society and what the
West is now beginning to realize is that
the individual achievement without
incorporating the vulnerable community
is a myth the idea was make your own
life be individually aspiring and then
you'll be individually achieving and
then you're being visually prosperous
and then you'll be individually happy
you end up doing that in a glass jar and
the glass jar has a limited height and
it's encapsulating and in the end you
die of lack of oxygen
human beings are alive because they seek
attachment and because they're propelled
by affection so the isolated achieving
individual in the end implodes in order
to find a purpose in life it has to be
outside yourself it matters not how you
constructed outside yourself as long as
it's a positive value added to society
pursuit but it has to be outside
yourself it can't be yourself if you're
pursuing yourself you're pursuing you're
pursuing the abyss as Nietzsche said
you're you were going to wind up in the
abyss
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
one of the most powerful cultural
frameworks that shapes where we think
today in the West is the Hollywood film
construction and it follows a particular
cultural passion in that there is a
beginning of the middle and an end there
is drama tension of revolution there's
usually a goodly in a body and as
usually a story told the medium of human
being this Hollywood ization are the way
that people communicate and the way they
tell stories about themselves and view
varies in history has very much impacted
how we look at the financial crisis in
that people look at the beginning the
middle and the end they look at the
drama around Lehman Brothers and they
wanted to say a revolution and they
wanted baddies they wanted sacrificial
victims as well the people have focused
on a few individuals and the idea that
somehow it wasn't just one or two
individuals who were the root of the
problem it was a systemic problem but
actually almost everyone who
participated was in some way guilty
either of outright negligence or simply
failing to ask like questions or simply
failing to ask her why money was so
cheap for so many years the idea that it
was a systemic flaw if something which
is very hard people to grasp and even
harder to depict as a good story
perhaps there is this feeling of
helplessness because we don't understand
what the real problem actually is
cleansing a few bad apples will not
rectify the flaws at the heart of the
Western economic system a system that
should be protecting people is in fact
the very thing that's enabling our four
horsemen to ride with such vengeance the
modern day Four Horseman a rapacious
financial system escalating organized
violence abject poverty for billions and
the exhaustion of the earth's resources
a riding roughshod over those who can
least afford it they gallop unchallenged
because the cognitive map that's been
put in place by our schools universities
and our media does not encourage us to
question accepted norms
instead there is apathy in a sense I
think we're rather depressed societies
we've got used to the idea that there's
nothing that can be done there is no
alternative that you know we're never
going to deal with these environmental
problems and we live in a dog-eat-dog
society and that's it I think what we
have to take away from this is a
recognition that most of these problems
can be very substantially improved by
making our societies more equal reducing
the income differences and that also
helps us to solve the environmental
problems we can reach a society that is
qualitatively better for all of us
well the apathy is sort of engineered
because you don't have any discussion of
this in the public media hardly by
surprise the public media are owned by
the real estate and the financial
interest and they're not going to
explain the people the integration
between the financial insurance and real
estate sectors the fire sector there's
this disinformation going on passing the
buck denying what the real driving
factors are all of these are common
strategies in fact even in education you
can see that banks have helped to set up
universities they've funded them they
fund think tanks they have educational
foundations they own newspapers all of
this stuff is going on as a kind of
propaganda exercise so the people don't
actually work out what the problem is
you should not assume because you know
you don't have a background in economics
or law this is usually these issues are
somehow too complex you that they're not
complex at all it's very simple it's
about power and it's about democracy and
you understand that just as well as I
did one source of this disinformation is
the neoclassical school of economics
these economists and academics have been
successful in convincing the world that
their models were gospel but just as
Gutenberg's printing press was
revolutionary in the 16th century
today were at the dawn of Internet
enlightenment which will remove the
cloud of ignorance upheld by academic
and media gatekeepers
education can be a form of mass mind
control and it's astonishing that today
neoclassical economics continues to be
taught in all Ivy League universities I
do get letters from students in
economics departments at other
universities there and they are in those
some graduate program or something and
they say oh you know I've just read such
and such as you wrote and this is the
kind of thing that interests me I'm
stuck in this program here in which you
know I can't even talk about any of that
you know what's your advice what should
I do
what they're teaching you is what you're
going to have to oppose a lot of it when
some of its useful but so some of its
useful go ahead and learn it and the
other reason for learning the rest of it
is know your enemy an individual might
not be able to change the system but
they can change themselves if we're not
offered proper education we must begin
our own and a good place to start is to
become reacquainted with the classical
economists and with something that so
few question but that affects us all our
system of money if the monetary system
of the world is not reformed then we are
headed towards the end of industrial
civilization I won't say that we're at
going to the end of humanity but it's
just going to be absolute a collapse and
of our world as we have known it because
it cannot function on fiat money and
none of those were who are responsible
for this want to admit it but that is
the fact the Fiat system of money is a
man-made law and it's been abused it's
they're a form of money whose law is not
set by man
when you look at natural law and gold I
sort of describe gold as being a natural
form of money although the gold that's
been mine throughout history still
exists in its above-ground stock it's
about the size of two and a half Olympic
swimming pools if you put all that gold
together in one place
the key is is that this above-ground
stack of gold grows by about 1 and 3/4
percent per annum which is approximately
equal to new world population growth and
it's approximately equal to new wealth
creation so as the net result of this is
that you have this very good consistency
in Gold's purchasing power over long
periods of time because the supply
demand equation is very much in balance
to achieve human liberty you really need
to have sound money and gold is the only
way to do that because only gold is
outside of the control of politicians
with modern man-made monetary processes
a chronic excessive debt is built up at
every level of society debt is now
regarded as normal it isn't it's a form
of slavery but how much do we question
our debt and what should we now do about
it the classic example most recently of
a debt cancellation was the German
economic miracle in 1947 the Allies
cancelled all domestic and international
German debts except for the debts that
employers owed their employees for the
previous few weeks and except for a
basic working balance that everybody was
able to keep in the bank in order to buy
food for the next few weeks or so
essentially you would follow the five or
six pages that the currency reform of
1947 did in Germany you would start with
a clean slate
that means that everybody would own
their property free and clear and the
problem here is that you'd wipe off the
savings that are the counterparts of
that that actually would not be such a
bad thing if you look at the fact that
the wealthiest 1% of Americans have
concentrated an enormous amount of
wealth in their own hands more than at
any earlier time since statistics have
been kept
our system of Taxation also needs
addressing currently we're taxed on what
we produce perhaps it would be more
progressive to tax what we consume how
many American people realized that the
founding fathers never intended
Americans to be taxed on a labor in
other words they weren't meant to pay
income tax the tax system that was
exported from Britain a relic of
colonialism has duped the world the most
important element of a tax system is to
do what everybody expected to be done in
the nineteenth century and that is to
base the tax system on land taxation on
the free lunch of land values and on
what John Stuart Mill called the
unearned increment the income that
landlords made in their sleep as he put
it
who made oil in the ground you know coal
or iron ore these are things which are
not the product of human effort of
course extracting them is but their
existence is not and so the rents from
natural resources are a wonderful source
of taxation nobody made them so and when
you do tax them we caused all of us to
use them more efficiently so this seems
like really the excellent thing to tax
rather than labor and capital if the
government used this land site value
that's supplied by nature not by human
labor not by a personal Enterprise then
the government would not have to tax
wages in the form of income tax it
wouldn't have to imply sales tax that
add to the price of doing business and
it wouldn't have to add the
proliferation of business taxes this tax
system advocated by all the classical
economists would begin to address global
poverty as it would allow citizens in
developing countries to keep their
resource wealth in developed countries
it would begin to address our housing
and debt crisis and unleash the kind of
entrepreneurship
needed to refloat our economies perhaps
we should also resurrect another time
this principle for workers it was
promoted during the Industrial
Revolution
well the idea that people who work in a
plant auto owned is just deeply built
into working-class culture so right
around here at the early Industrial
Revolution in the late 19th century the
working people simply took for granted
that yes of course the workers should
own the mills in which they work
anything else is an attack on our
fundamental rights as free citizens they
also took for granted that wage labor is
hardly different from slavery it's
different only because it's temporary
now you can be free one of the ways you
can be free is by owning your own plants
that was not an exotic view that was
Abraham Lincoln's view in fact it was it
was a principle of the Republican Party
in the in the late 19th century it's
taken a lot of effort to drive those
ideas out of people's heads but they're
still there and they're very relevant it
was the Greek philosopher Plato who said
the ratio of earnings between highest
and lowest paid employee in any
organization should be no more than six
to one in 1923
anchor JP Morgan declared no more than
twenty to one was optimum yet today's
salary difference between top and bottom
earners in global corporations can be
higher than 500 or a thousand to one
when you're up in the range of five
hundred one inequality the rich and the
poor become almost different species no
longer members of the same community a
commonality of interest is lost and so
it's difficult to form community and to
have good friendly relationships across
class differences that are that large
when the public do vent their outrage at
inappropriate earnings the common
defense is to move the debate to the
psychological realm and quote mercurial
British economist Herbert Spencer he
coined the phrase
survival of the fittest and his words
are now used to justify excess
competition in business is a good thing
but the playing field must be level
monopolists have too much because the
system a game is rigged
under the current economic setup the
fitness of the vast majority of the
world's population is irrelevant those
that are made to pay for this crisis are
not those that caused it but those who
caused it for survival will no doubt try
to marginalize this film as socialist or
even Marxist I'm a capitalist I'm a
businessperson I believe in the basic
principles that's why I'm completely
appalled by seeing these principles
destroyed by monarchs monopolists who I
have totally destroyed the system will
prompt with in on Wall Street and and
this is completely unacceptable
unacceptable I think capitalism can do
it it's not a question of getting rid of
capitalism it's a question of getting
rid of this terrible form of capitalism
capitalism more broadly understood
market economy not only has a future I
can't see how the future of the world
without it but the question is what kind
of capitalism will kind of bargain
economy a system of reformed capitalism
built on independent money attack system
based on consumption not income and
employee owned businesses would begin to
build an economy that's not dependent on
constant growth to service its debt
we've endured the so-called free market
for centuries but far from being free
it's led us to destroy nature and each
other in a vain attempt to progress
it's absolutely ludicrous to suggest
that somehow there is that
scientifically defined boundary of the
market that we should never change and
then of course that is that what the
free market economies want you to
believe because once that they convince
you of that and claim that on top of
that they claim that they have the truth
because they are PhDs in economics then
they can't tell you whatever they want
and then you have to accept it but
that's how we're we have to that that
take these guys on politics is about
throwing the boundary of the market I
mean when you think about it a lot of
things have been taken out of the market
over the last two three centuries two
three centuries of all you could buy as
a human being
child labor a lot of things that values
and imagine you could buy and sell today
so I mean over time we have partly drawn
this boundary and there is nothing wrong
with that we during the boundary again
things that were considered absolutely
reasonable in the 1850s like selling any
chemical on street corner and telling
you that it's a pharmaceutical drug
they'll make the good for you things
like that that we're absolutely
confident are now serious criminal
offenses well the same thing will be
true of active money management in 100
years the breakdown we saw in the Great
Depression and witnessed again at the
beginning of the 21st century occurred
because in the name of growth much was
taken out of the system by those who
contribute very little multinational
corporates and banks will always want to
grow without having to compensate those
people who actually do the work to
produce the surplus in the past every
time too much was taken by those who
contributed little people rose up to
halt the violent practices enacted by a
tangible enemy today the question is
with such a formless enemy pervading
every element of our economic and
democratic process can it be done again
so of course can be done again look it's
a cycle I mean if we're not we're not
debt peons but maybe rats running around
a little a little wheel in some
somebody's big cage somewhere the
finance rises finance Rises finance
becomes organized you make a lot of
money in bank
it's easy to go out and buy politicians
but the essence of democracy the essence
of American democracy is this is a
repeated confrontation a repeated
showdown and in 1830s Andrew Jackson
beat the second bank in the United
States in the early 1900's Teddy
Roosevelt beat JP Morgan and John Jay
Rockefeller in the 1930s Franklin Delano
Roosevelt FDR beat everyone from Wall
Street
and now we have to do it again the one
single thing that makes me optimistic
rosy and cynical pessimistic is my
student first I do not see the desire to
go to Wall Street amongst them
I see the opposite second I see a
disdain amongst them for people who are
motivated not just they don't want money
I see a disdain amongst them for people
who do just want money because we face
today are created by humans and what is
created by humans can be changed by
humans so we are all capable of
transforming our world revolutions are
philosophical getting organized and
preventing the culprits camouflaging the
real problem means it's possible to
embark on a bloodless revolution against
the violent organizations and barbaric
leaders who've trashed the economy
central banking rigged capitalism land
speculation income tax and neoclassical
economics of corporatized democracy
stunted progress perverted the course of
human destiny and compromise the future
of this planet if these issues aren't
addressed then the next implosion will
be on a scale unimaginative
whatever the propaganda at the beginning
of the 21st century central bank's
unregulated cheap money pumped up land
values which created an unsustainable
asset bubble in a world that once again
operates a rigged tax system that
enriches entrenched privilege
neoclassical economics have ruined life
for the bottom billions tempted everyone
into intergenerational conflict and
created massive suffering that has no
limits human beings go mad in crowds and
come to their senses slowly and
individually history is littered with
examples of people who threw themselves
off the yoke of oppression to adopt
radical change only to end up with
popular new rules that maintain the
status quo to really understand
something is to be liberated from it
dedicating oneself to a great cause
taking responsibility and gaining
self-knowledge is the essence of being
human a predatory capitalists truest
enemy and humanity's greatest ally
is the self-educated individual who has
read understood delays their
gratification and walks around with
their eyes wide open
[Music]
you
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
you
you