I am super stoked to introduce John
Verve a key so for those of you in in
the know of the modern stoic movement or
our stoic super users you might not be
familiar with John's work but he's
creating a lot of buzz right now and
something that's called the sense making
community and web he released a series
recently called awakening from the
meaning crisis and this series is
absolutely amazing I highly recommend
you check it out and it's all
surrounding something called that he
coined called the meaning crisis
I think Viktor Frankl he made have
called it an existential vacuum this
widespread sense of lack of meaning in
our lives so to formally introduce John
John is an assistant professor at the
University of Toronto where he currently
teaches courses in the psychology
department on thinking and reasoning
with an emphasis on insight
problem-solving cognitive development
with an emphasis on the dynamic nature
of development and higher cognitive
processes with an emphasis on
intelligence rationality mindfulness and
the psychology of wisdom he also teaches
courses in the cognitive science program
as well as in Buddhism psychology and
mental health program he's the director
of the consciousness and wisdom study
laboratory I didn't know that there was
a wisdom studies laboratory but that
sounds pretty awesome he is one and been
nominated for several teaching awards
and he has published articles on
relevance realization general
intelligence mindfulness flow metaphor
and wisdom he's the author of the book
zombies in Western culture a 21st
century crisis which is an awesome book
by the way and in that book he
integrates psychology and cognitive
science to address what he calls the
meaning crisis in Western society so in
this talk he's going to argue that the
spiritual exercise of the view from
above which is a stoic exercise
addresses a central problem faced by
those cultivating a stoic way of life
how to bring about the transformational
experience and aspirational development
so necessary to realizing a rational
way of life even though such
transformative transformative
experiences and aspirational changes of
identity cannot be driven in an
inferential manner the talk will explore
cognitive machinery involved in the
exercise and explain how the exercise
activates that machinery in the service
of the transformation and spectacle and
participatory knowing and thereby
deepening understanding overcoming
absurdity and provoking transcendence
so essentially buckle up and please give
a warm applause for John reveille key
that I want to talk to you about a
particular exercise I'll briefly
describe it I know that Donnell
Robertson is going to take you through
the exercise so I'll do be doing a lot
of the theory and some of the cognitive
science and then we'll do the exercise
together so you get sort of the one-two
punch what I'm particularly interested
in is how this exercise contributes to
rationality but what I'm going to have
to do is try and sort of broaden your
notion of what rationality is that's
part of what the project is so the view
from above just very quickly is the
imaginative exercise where you imagine
sort of rising above the earth and
seeing it sort of from extended
elevations and you can also extend it in
time a broader historical scope imagine
that you're you've been alive for a
thousand years as opposed to well for me
fifty-six all right and that one of the
things you can immediately think about
is that this action the spiritual
exercise of imaginatively rising above
the earth in this way and getting a view
from above is opening up that space
opening up the space between impression
and response now here's what I want to
do I want to reverse engineer the
exercise with you that's what I do as a
cognitive scientist I try to figure out
cognition by reverse engineering it what
does that mean find a problem that your
cognition needs to solve and then fry
the engineer what a solution would look
like and then figure out if your
cognition is approximating that solution
that's what it is to reverse engineer
that's how we're going about making the
terrifying artificial intelligence that
is going to make all of us
completely irrelevant joke okay so what
I want to do is set the problem with you
and as I'm setting the problem I'm going
to try to introduce these ideas to you
that we should broaden in order to
broaden the notion of rationality we
need to broaden the kinds of knowing
we're going to talk about we're very
familiar with propositional knowing but
I want to talk about procedural and
especially perspectival in participatory
knowing you don't know what that means
right now that's why I'm here that's
because what that's what I'm doing for
you okay now I want to talk about a kind
of rationality that I guess colored
calls proleptic rationality and how it's
actually right instantiated in the view
from above as a practice then I want to
talk to you about the cognitive science
of the view from above what's cognitive
science saying about this practice
because it's actually telling us a lot
about it's what it's doing to our
cognition and our consciousness and then
I want to confront a problem because the
view from the above can look an awful
lot like the view from nowhere
the Thomas Nagel famously talked about
and the thing about the view from
nowhere is it provokes cosmic absurdity
and a sense of meaninglessness and you
know it's going to take away any joy in
life from you a pervasive sense of
meaninglessness so how do we make sure
the view from above doesn't become the
view from nowhere and then I'm going to
try and propose a solution to that
making use of some ideas from Spinoza
and some current philosophy ok so that's
what we're doing
so stoicism your is trying about bring
about a radical transformation you're
trying to radically transform yourself
you're trying to get into perhaps a new
mode of being that's how erich fromm
thought about it when he talked about
the having mode and the being mode or as
you're trying to get into a new way of
life that's the way peridot famously
talked about stoicism so it's not just
about changing your beliefs this is a
much more comprehensive transformation
that is being pointed to because right
we're trying to change who we are the
lives we are living and the kind of
arena in which we are perform
our actions so this is what's known as
qualitative development this is a term
taken from psychology from the the
founder of developmental psychology
because we're talking about development
here we're talking about changing
ourselves transforming ourselves so
Piaget distinguished between two kinds
of change quantitative changes where I
just get more i acquire more knowledge i
acquire more information but there's
qualitative change qualitative change is
not changing how much you know it's
changing what you're capable of knowing
those are two different things so let me
give you an example you have a
five-year-old child right and that child
is just a sponge right I've had raised
two sons and like I know what this is
like they're just taking in so much
information that's quantitative
development because although they can
take in tons of information they will
fall prey to a bunch of errors
repeatedly they lack a certain
competence so you can do this with them
take well you can I wouldn't it must be
horrible growing up with a dad who's a
cognitive scientist right so you count
out five candies to space them like this
one two three four five and the
four-year-old can count and they know
that 6 is more than five and five is
more than four do you understand you
count out 5 candies 1 2 3 4 5 you count
out five more candies in front of them
but you space them like this 1 2 3 4 5
do you see the difference and you ask
them which row do you want you know what
they all reliably pick the bottom row
now how many of you would fall prey to
that because I've got some investments
for you ok ok so you don't fall prey for
that they all do systematically because
they are over fixated on one feature it
is super salient salience means to stand
out right they're fixated on the space
taken up they don't pay attention to
another variable which is how much of
that space is candy space which
presumably you do so they have to go
through a qualitative development they
have to acquire a new ability and
ability to manage multiple variables in
concert with each other that's a change
not in just what you
it's a change in your competence it's a
change in what you're capable of knowing
what cut problems you're you're capable
of solving so stoicism I recommend to
you is pushing for such a change in
competence now an interesting thing
about exactly that model of qualitative
change it is at the center of an
important article written in 1999 by
McGee and barber
medium barber did something very
important they took they canvassed all
the philosophical theories of wisdom and
see how much wisdom was in the previous
talk and then they canvassed all the
emerging psychological theories of
wisdom and by the way there are a lot of
these and I recently I participated in
the the Toronto wisdom taskforce it
sounds Orwellian right it was a six-hour
symposium on psychologists and cognitive
scientists trying to figure out what
wisdom is mcgee and Barbara canvassed
both of these and they made a
convergence argument what is the central
feature that all of these different
theories presuppose at the core of
wisdom here's what it is seeing through
allusion seeing through allusion now
myself and Leo Ferraro in 2013 argued
that's a little bit elliptical because
real and illusory are comparative terms
you only know something's illusory in
comparison to something that's more real
so we broadened it right seeing through
illusion and into reality now that's
really important because what they're
talking about here is a comprehensive
kind of insight what do I mean by
comprehensive so let's go back to the
child the child is not only making a
conservation area with count error for
counting candies they'll make it with
pouring liquids from do they make a
whole family of related errors that's
what it is to be in a particular stage
so you've all had an insight experience
hey well you realize oh I've miss frame
the problem and you have that AHA
experience yes but notice what the child
has to do though the child can't just
have a single aha here in this problem
the child has to figure out there's a
whole family of related problems and
have a systemic comp
hence of insight does that make sense so
that here and here so that's why you
don't fall prey to any of these
illusions anymore you've had a very
systematic comprehensive insight that's
what it is to see through illusion and
into reality to have a fundamental
change so that you gain a competence so
that a whole family of problems you can
now see through them your your your way
of seeing doesn't get distorted okay you
say well those are little kids I'm an
adult well first of all let me remind
you of one I've had those formulations
of wisdom right in fact and it was
shared by all the great schools of
antiquity including stoicism as the
child is - the adult the adult is - the
sage just like you have gone through
qualitative development so you don't
fall prey to the illusions of a child
you as an adult need to go through huge
qualitative development to become like a
sage and not fall prey to the kinds of
systemic illusions we fall prey to what
are examples of these well this is
something I study I study illusion under
the idea of self-deception
self-deception is the fact that the very
machinery that makes us adaptive for
solving problems in the world is the
same machinery that makes us
self-deceptive
so why you can't pay attention to all
the information available to you you
can't consider all the options when
you're considering a course of action
you cannot calculate all the
probabilities even though most powerful
computers can't do that so what do you
have to do you have to bias your
attention to what's salient and relevant
to you and that's how that's what makes
you intelligent in fact I've argued and
published that that's the core ability
that makes you intelligent your ability
to zero in on relevant information
treats stuff some stuff is relevant and
some stuff is irrelevant here's the
problem that a variability to zero in on
relevant information that makes you so
adaptive also biases your attention
in a maladaptive way you say what do you
mean here's an example you can't check
all the evidence so you tend to check
the evidence that's relevant to you
relevant to you tends to be serving your
interests yes so you know what you tend
to look for evidence that only confirms
your beliefs or what you want to be true
this is called the confirmation bias and
what our society has wonderfully done is
taken this confirmation bias and put it
on methamphetamine and that's called the
social media all right so you have many
of these kinds of biases so do I I'm not
free from this I'm just speaking from a
theoretical position right we're
constantly miss framing our experience
and that miss framing is self-serving in
a powerful way and I want to use this to
introduce to you something that we
therefore need to pay attention if
rationality is going to be fundamentally
about affording this transformation it's
going to require systemic abilities to
overcome self-deception but that means
we need to pay attention to how we're
framing and how things are self serving
relevant to us now this means we get
into two aspects of our knowing that we
don't typically pay very much attention
to but I which I study a lot as a
cognitive scientist and cognitive
psychologist so you're all aware of
propositional knowing propositional
knowing is to know that something is the
case and it's about asserting a
proposition a cat is a mammal that's
that's a proposition and what I get from
propositional knowing is beliefs in our
culture our culture is just addicted to
beliefs that everything is about belief
everything is about belief Billy Billy
Billy Billy believed right the thing is
that and so and we think of truth as
some correspondence between the semantic
content of the proposition and the world
but your knowing that something is the
case and we saw that in the previous
talk is dependent on knowing how to do
things knowing how to select what
relevant knowing how to pay attention
knowing how to ignore what's irrelevant
knowing how to apply this rule how not
to apply that what does it mean to be
kind it means one thing with my younger
son Spencer another thing with my
wonderful partner Saar another thing
with my students another thing with thy
stranger if I treat them all the same
that's a disaster all of your
propositions depend on your procedural
knowing your knowing how to do things
knowing it's not in beliefs but in
skills if you're going to cultivate a
skill you need to have what you have
right here right now you need to have a
situational awareness what's going on
and here now here now this is your
perspective on knowing knowing what it's
like to be here right now it's to have a
salience landscape I'm standing out for
you your left big toe was not very
salient to you until I said that and
what's salient and what's standing out
and what you're focusing on is relevant
and what you're ignoring is irrelevant
like the back of the room that's all
happening in a highly textured dynamic
fashion right now and this perspective
of knowing really matters because we're
having to study it when people are going
into virtual reality because it only
feels real when things are present to
them when that perspectival landscaping
is working properly and it really
matters for example when you're doing
work like remote scientific work on on
Mars with Rovers
so this perspectival knowing you're
doing it right now they're here now
together Ness
all of this that's not ultimately is
dependent on your participatory knowing
because all the time you can see
stoicism going right to the heart of
this you are doing this in a coordinated
fashion you're assuming an identity and
assigning identities
I am the lecturer you are the audience
that thing is a chair and you sit on it
there's an agent arena relationship that
is constantly going on in the basement
the foundations of your cognition
this process of CO identification that's
your participatory knowing Who am I who
are you what is that and their code
defining look this is graspable to me
the grasp of the fact that it's
graspable is not a property of this it's
not graspable by a snail it's not a
feature just of my hand it's how my hand
and this thing co identify and fit
together and then that makes me aware of
it in a situational awareness and then I
can cultivate skills how how to use it
and once I can use it then I can make
propositions about it this is a class we
tend to stick at the level of our
propositions and things like the view
from above are designed to drive you
down into these deeper levels of knowing
the perspectival and the participatory
knowing where the guts of your identity
and the texture of your world is being
shaped and made on a moment-to-moment
basis you're doing it right now so we're
trying to bring about fundamental
transformation at that level what's the
problem then well here's the problem
transformation doesn't make any sense at
least initially philosophically so here
I'm going to draw a convergence argument
from three really important thinkers ala
Paul in her book from 2014 she literally
wrote the book on transformative
experience it's called transformative
experience I got to I got to work meet
and work with lawyers she's great
jerry fodor founding figure of cognitive
science from 1980 a fixation of belief
in conceptual analysis and then a really
good book by Agnes Collard from 2018
called aspiration the agency of becoming
okay so let's do this I'm going to work
with with so I'll probably fall into
calling la Paul Lawrie because I know
her so le Paul's she starts with a
thought experiment to get you aware of
the issue so this
a thought experiment it's designed to be
outlandish so it will trigger your
intuitions appropriately so your friends
come to you and they give you
incontrovertible evidence that they can
reliably without fail do the following
turn you into a vampire
should you do it how would you decide
think about it here's the problem I
don't know what the perspective of a
vampire is until I become one I don't
know what it's going to be like to have
the salience landscape of a vampire I
don't know what kind of self I'm going
to be because once I become a vampire my
preferences my values everything's going
to change so I am completely ignorant
prospectively and participatory I don't
have I can't write and the only way I
can get that perspectival and
participatory knowing is if I go through
the change but it's an irreversible
change what do I do well I don't do it
here's the problem the ignorance is
symmetrical if I don't do it I don't
know what I'm missing I literally don't
know what I'm missing now I have all
kinds of propositions about vampires but
I've just shown you propositional
knowledge isn't the same thing as
perspectival and participatory I don't
know what it's going to be like to be a
vampire but I won't do it well then you
don't know what you're missing but if I
do do it I don't know what I'm going to
lose I don't know what I'm going to lose
so what do I do and you say that's
ridiculous I don't care about being a
vampire well she's a philosopher so she
gets you this and you sort of go yeah I
get that and then she goes and you face
these decisions all the time here's one
have a child
I've been threat you know your friends
can order propositions to you but all
the parents about yet get that totally
get that you don't know what you're
losing until you get there but you don't
know what you're missing if you never
have a child fall in love with this
person you're gonna be a different
person
living in a different world different
perspective all different participatory
knowing should you do it you don't know
what you're missing
you don't know what you're gonna lose
you can't and here's the key point that
Lori makes you can't infer your way
through this because you don't know the
probabilities and you don't have a
stable set of values throughout our
standard model of how we make decisions
weigh the probabilities assign the
assign the values doesn't apply because
we don't know the probabilities because
we're deeply ignorant and we know that
the values are not stable across the
transformation so you can't infer your
way through it
you can't propositional inference your
way through this now that tells us
something because the word rationality
has been invoked a lot but when we hear
rationality and you go on YouTube you
have people saying rationality is
syllogistic reasoning so they're just
along that rationality is reduced to
propositional argumentation that's a
fundamental mistake because if that's
all rationality is it doesn't touch
perspectival and participatory knowing
and it doesn't help you go through
transformation Jerry Fodor gives a
similar argument he basically says well
he thought that all of cognition is
computation just inferentially
manipulating propositions and altering
beliefs that's all it is to think and
then he famously said okay if pre oj is
you know we take piace at his word
people are going through a change in
competence what does that mean well that
means a change from a weaker logic to a
stronger logic that's what it is
if I'm changing my competence and all I
am is computational I have to be making
a stronger logic from a weaker logic but
you know what you can't do you can't
infer a stronger logic from a weaker
logic I can't do that because I have to
ah this is a pretty good DeLeon reasons
I have to step outside my axioms and my
functions and introduce new axioms and
functions so he came to this bizarre
conclusion he said therefore Piaget is
wrong there's no such thing as
development that's it's all totally
innate from the beginning everything a
child ever is capable of doing they have
their from the beginning and everybody
else went what but but you could turn it
around it's a modus tollens the way of
getting out of that ridiculousness is to
say that's because most of your
cognition contrary to what we believe is
not computational in nature because we
have machines that can do exactly what
photos said we couldn't do their neural
networks that use dynamical systems and
use self-organization to get you through
through this change so how can you be
rational how can you aspire to
rationality if rationality can't make
use of reasoning
so that takes me to a final note
developed by Agnes a Callard she talks
about in her book aspiration this
process of you where you genuinely
undertake the goal of acquiring a value
that's right I notice how the value
combines your skill what you find
salient and a change in your identity
proposition of procedural perspectival
and propositional knowing so she gives
the example of somebody who wants to
acquire they do not currently like
classical music but they want to they
want to like classical music now what
can motivate them not a love of
classical music because you know what
they don't have right now
a love of classical music so what do
they do what are they well they take a
music appreciation class and they go
through these exercises that are
designed to transform them and notice
what this word appreciation brings with
it it brings with it the notion right
almost of a sensibility transformation
transforming again your salience
landscape what you find salient what you
find relevant but also transforming your
identity who and what you are changing
your understanding appreciation also
carries with it that an understanding
unlike knowing the difference between
understanding and knowing is to know is
to be able to assert with evidence of
proposition understanding is to grasp
its significance or relevance
now why is all this important to colored
well she says notice what we have to say
here people are going through these
these processes of gaining and
appreciation and transforming themselves
and they can't infer their way through
it for all the reasons I've already
articulated so what do they do
like I said well they're doing all these
practices and they're sort of playing
with their salience landscape and
playing with their identity now if we
say because that's not an argumentative
process it's not rational we're in deep
trouble because of this one of the
things as a stoic I'm doing is aspiring
to be more rational and if the process
of aspiration is itself not a rational
process because it's not an
argumentative process you know what I
can't do I can't justify cultivating
rationality to you okay if you take note
that process of aspiration is not a
rational process because it's not
argumentation that you know what's not
rational the aspiration to become
rational I can't ever justify or
persuade you to become rational and
that's the disaster for rationality so
we have to include this aspirational
process in our model of rationality she
calls this proleptic rationality
proleptic rationality
okay now what we should ask ourselves
well I do because I'm a cognitive
scientists and psychologists yeah that's
a lot not a lot of sort of nice abstract
hand waving how do you do it how do you
go through aspiration how do you engage
in proleptic rationality well there's a
couple things you should note first of
all we need to be triggering a systemic
insight the capacity for systemic
insight is there a cognitive style that
we have experimental evidence will bring
about systemic insight not just at the
propositional level but how my salience
landscape is taking shape and how my
sense of self is being transformed yes
there is such a Cardian style that's
mindfulness practice that's why do you
research on it and you're worried here
now he's sneaking in Buddhism I can feel
it well pay attention to the science we
have a lot of good work that all of
these principles are efficacious they
are basically put in place by cognitive
behavioral therapy which is probably the
most evidence-based effective therapy
that we have right now but you know
what's happening its effectiveness is
actually declining why because we have
gotten focused on propositional
techniques and the alteration of belief
and we've lost a lot of the intuitive
skill that the original right the
originators of CBT had we've lost the
contact with the perspectival and the
participatory knowing transformation so
what's the evidence showing you know
what works better than CBT on its own
giving people CBT and training them in
mindfulness that's what the evidence is
clearly indicating
so notice what mindfulness is it's an
attention it's not an inference practice
it's an attentional practice you shut
off inference in fact and what you're
doing is using attention to alter your
salience landscape and alter your sense
of self in a profound and engaged manner
so we need that right away what else
though well let's go back to LA Paul's
example people want to have a kid what
do they do well they don't just sit
there going I don't know I don't know I
don't know some you know people just
fall into Darwinian impulse I get that
but let's say people who are doing it as
a decision not as an impulse because you
should decide right what do they do well
I sort of looked around and I noticed
people doing this sort of bizarre thing
they get a dog they get a dog and
they'll have family pictures of them and
the dog I was like whoa well I'm
thinking about getting in a romantic
relationship with this person and
there's go on a trip with them oh I
think what's going on there what's going
on is this really interesting thing and
it's actually the key to development
because this is how children primarily
go through those changes we were talking
about this is enacted play in act it's
serious play like when we use the word
play when we're talking about playing
music it's enacted play
you say well adults don't do that oh you
better not say that because one of the
thing that's growing right now for
example in Norwegian countries countries
that are really facing the bite of kind
of a very successful in many ways
secularism and I'm not dissing that but
there's there's a bit of a backlash to
that success this meaning crisis that if
you if you if you ask me a single
question about this right now I'll be
talking for seven hours so I'm not gonna
go into the meeting crisis all right
watch my series please okay anyways
what they do they have they have
live-action role-playing
you know role-playing games like
Dungeons & Dragons but in live-action
you act it out right they have a thing
called Jeep form so Jeep form is instead
of a Dungeon Master you rolling dice
you're acting right you're acting at a
scene and there's the dungeon master is
like a director and the director will
set up the scene cut the scene get you
to switch roles suddenly give you this
and say this is a gun what're you gonna
do with it stuff like that and you have
to act it out and here's what you are
after when you do this you're right so
you're at you're acting out some
situation you're after the phenomena
bleed you're trying to get so that
what's happening in the act the play
bleeds over to a real problem in your
real life where you're considering going
through a huge transformation you're
trying to play like the right you're
trying to play with a new participatory
identity you're trying to play what does
it feel like what's it like to have that
perspective what it's like to be that
person but I'm not fully committed yet
you engage in in active serious play so
now I can give you what I think the view
from above is doing we need something
that's attentional that's altering our
sense of salience our sense of self
getting into the perspectival and the
participatory knowing it's going to
manipulate perspective and our sense of
self that's what the view from the
that's what the view from above is doing
it is going to alter what we consider
significant or relevant that's what the
view from above is it doing it's a form
of serious enacted play that's what the
view from above is it doing and it's
rational even though it doesn't involve
inference proposition or argumentation
so what do we know from the cognitive
science lots so there's a whole theory
called construal level theory listen to
the word construe all construe your
perspective in your participatory
knowing as you get people to move
through different levels of control so
instead of thinking of your problem
right here right now imagine that your
problem is ten years in the future
that's a recon stroll it's imagination
what do we know about construal level
theories as we get people to move to a
higher level of control as we get them
to move to a view from above everything
I'm going to say to you has experimental
evidence for it right
it makes tap it makes challenging tasks
seem easier reliable result it generates
notice this self insight people get
insight into their sense of who and what
they are that Co identification process
becomes more apparent to them they
become aware of the identity they are
assuming and the identities they are
assigning reliably they gain self
control because as you change what is
salient to you and your sense of self
your ability to alter your behavior
significantly improves if you try to
change your behavior and you're not
doing things that give you skills and
identities for altering your salience in
your sense of self your ability this is
what the research shows your ability to
change your behavior fails
that's why 95% of people fail on diets
95% they have all the right propositions
they don't do anything to alter their
competence for salience landscaping or
their sense of self that's why they fail
you become more capable of being
authentic you're less easily pushed
around by social influences precisely
because you've lifted yourself out of
that usually unchallenged arena of
behavior makes you more creative it
generates systematic insight as I said
there's also research from what's called
the overview effect I'm doing work on
this right now the overview effect is
astronauts go up into space and they
look back at the earth and they
experience our own wonder and they say
it's the most life transforming thing
that ever happened to them and you can
now Gallagher and I'll have actually set
up set up a mixed reality sort of part
of its real part with virtual reality
and we could generate the overview
effect in people and study this
experimentally and generate on Wonder
and Yadin in 2016 there's a nice
overview when you do this with people
what does ah do are forces you to open
up Wonder and are different from
curiosity notice how you want curiosity
alleviated but you would like to
perpetuate all right because curiosity
is about quantitative development
getting more information I need little
more information but wonder is about
qualitative it's about opening up and
putting your world and yourself into
question that's what does it makes you
more humble it changes your sense of
self and your sense of perspective
literally the view from above has all of
these measurable effects another one
notice three different lines of research
and they're all converging on the
efficacy of this spiritual exercise so I
get to work with my friend and colleague
Igor Grossman and he's been doing a
bunch of work started with Krause and
Grossman in 2011 done a bunch of things
it's called the Solomon effect here's
what you do give me some horrible
problem that you're facing right now
people describe their boa or
all right then and what should you do I
don't know I don't know well then you do
yes stop I want you to read ascribe your
problem as if from a third-person
perspective a view from above what
reliably happens is people get systemic
insight into their problem and they
become more capable and this is the
language used by Igor of wise reasoning
before they start before they are doing
lots of propositional stuff while
they're in their problem and their
reasoning and reasoning and reasoning
and reasoning and learned going nowhere
and then they do the view from above and
they get oh and they restructure what
they find salient and relevant they
alter have their identity because
they're doing it from a third-person
perspective and they get a powerful
insight systemic insight and then their
reasoning becomes efficacious the
reasoning comes after the transformation
finally and this goes with the awe and
wonder there's a work of Frederickson
the broaden and build model these kinds
of what are called epistemic emotions
like on wonder they broaden your
attention they've transformed your
salience landscaping they build your
skills that's why we have these emotions
that's what they're there for
so four lines of evidence as to why the
view from above would be efficacious and
therefore how its efficacious and how it
addresses the problem of how to go
through transformation when we can't
reason our way through it
it's a spiritual exercise it different
from discourse that's why a picta
Thyssen markers are especially a pictu
test stop thinking that philosophy is
just about the discourse stop doing that
that's not stoicism
but here's the problem
Thomas Nagel in two places he did it
first in an article in 1971 called the
absurd and then later in a book called
the view from nowhere brought up this
problem because you know what I can do I
can do the view from above and I go into
sort of above the earth and then maybe
the solar system and then the galaxy and
then of you know what I could do I can
move to a perspective that is isometric
with the entire universe and that's the
view from nowhere and you know what
people experience when they get to the
view from nowhere they don't go wow this
is great
they go oh it's all meaninglessness it's
absurd this is called cosmic absurdity
now why well let's get into what
everyday absurdity is so that we can
understand cosmic absurdity so Nagel
gives this wonderful example now notice
when he wrote 71 and 80 so this is in
the dark time before Star Trek
cellphones right well like your phone
was in a place and you left it there and
you had to return to your phone at
different times right and then you put a
recording machine but you remember these
dark days okay so because here's the
example
so here's tom and tom has been working
himself up all day to call Susan so he
calls Susan and he's already he heard
the phone be picked up click he goes
Susan don't say anything I just got to
tell you I love you I love you I really
care about you I love you then here's
beep Susan is not here right now please
leave a message
he's sort of laughs but there's a bit
pathos oh you oh poor Tom I notice first
of all that there's humor there
and what's humor humor is about a clash
of perspective that gets resolved with
play so absurdity is when we have a
clash of perspectives that we can't
resolve with play because what's
happening with Tom Tom has this one
perspective this one sentence landscape
in which all and he's got this
particular agency he is Susan's future
lover and this identity is taking shape
and this salience landscape is there and
then this other perspective a third
person in personal perspective slams
into his perspective the perspective of
the Machine and those two perspectives
don't jive
there's perspectival clash when you go
to the view from nowhere and then you
compare it to your life right here right
now you experience the greatest
perspective of class you'll ever
experience that's cosmic absurdity now
notice something that Nagel points out
he points out that many of the arguments
people use for absurdity are technically
invalid arguments you don't reason your
way into absurdity I can't do all of
that I'll just give you one example of
an argument people say well what I do
won't matter ten thousand years from now
it's all meaningless into niggle points
out well be logical that's that's a
symmetrical thing if what you do doesn't
matter to ten people ten thousand years
from now you know what's also equally
true what they think ten thousand years
from now shouldn't matter to you now
it's equally symmetrical it's not a
valid argument but you know go oh well
now I feel better
the point is the arguments do not
generate the absurdity they are after
the fact expressions of it what's
generating the absurdity is a
perspective of a clash how do we deal
with the perspective of clash and
because if we know how to deal with the
perspective of clash we know what to do
right we know what to do to keep the
view from above from becoming the view
from nowhere so I'm gonna here I'm gonna
hold up a sign and you have to read it
as quickly as possible
you okay with that yes yes or no okay
here we go Liat out loud okay great I do
this all the time this is a classic
experiment by the way this is part of
the cognitive scientist dog-and-pony
show okay so first of all notice what
you did you read this as an H and this
is an okay so now I'm going to reason
this for you I'm gonna do it almost like
in a suit
anything and I you know I don't mean any
insult isn't it sooner than right in
order to read the words I must first
read the letters but in order to
destined it disambiguate the letters I
must read the words therefore reading is
impossible and what you just did was an
illusion because you don't reason your
way through this you make use of a
dynamical self-organizing system you are
simultaneously reading from the features
the letters to the word and reading from
the word down to the features and you're
doing it in parallel in a dynamically
self-organizing fashion that's actually
how your attention works notice that
your attention is simultaneously fusing
your sense of self and your sense of
object together that's what your
attention is doing right now I'm person
I'm attending to the grasp ability of
this cup my identity in the cups
identity are being fused together that's
what your attention is doing right now
your tension is a dynamically
self-organizing process so Spinoza talks
about this in the ethics and when you
read the ethics you have to do the
ethics don't just read it propositional
e argumentatively he's trying to
actually give you a spiritual exercise
that will transform and bring you into a
state he calls blessedness he talks
about a state you can arrive at called
ciencia into ateva
what is like is this and when you study
the ethic so that you can have this
experience I've had it so you keep
trying to hold the whole argument in
your mind and you keep it and you have
to practice and practice and there's
this like stretching and it's like
learning a martial art but you get to
this place where this happens you see
the whole argument at once and you see
how it goes into each premise and how
each premise fits into the whole
argument very much like how the letters
go into the words and the words feed
back down into the
at the same time and the whole argument
is from under the eye of eternity it's a
God's eye point of view and the
individual premises are individual
thoughts you have and so your individual
perspective and the cosmic perspective
become completely interpenetrating in a
self-organizing manner you see the
problem with cosmic eternity is all we
do is juxtaposed the two perspectives
against each other and then say ah but
you know what you can do you can go
through a transformative self-organizing
form of play in which they become
interpenetrating with each other it's
can see Intuit Eva and I would argue
that's exactly the goal that's sought
after non duality and Buddhism in which
the cosmic perspective in the end of
individual perspective are completely
interpenetrating because if they're
interpenetrating like this you know what
you don't suffer absurdity and then you
say but absurdities about the oh no it's
not about the arguments is it I don't
need an argumentative response to
absurdity because the arguments are
driving it this is what I need so we can
practice the view from above but we can
move towards ciancia into ateva and
thereby always preserve the efficacy of
the view from above and never fall into
the cosmic absurdity of the view from
nowhere thank you very much for your
time and attention
we also have a to punch right now
solution where Donald Robinson is
actually gonna give an example of the
view from above
so let's invite Donald up here oh good
okay
so make yourselves comfortable I'm just
gonna go straight into this exercise is
the only preamble I'm gonna give is the
if you haven't already switched off your
mobile phones this is probably a good
time to do that so we're going to do the
view from above exercise and actually
one thing I'll add is earlier you saw
the photograph of the meeting at x2
University that was the beginning of the
modern stores as an organization and
actually the thing that triggered that
was that I made an audio recording of
this exercise over a decade ago and put
it online
and it was when students access our
listen to the audio exercise that they
were kind of inspired to begin
organizing the first week so it's this
specific exercise they actually started
Stuart Khan and stoic week and
everything that fold on from that take a
moment to settle into your posture and
make yourself comfortable
[Music]
close your eyes and relax
[Music]
be aware of your breathing
notice the rhythm of the breath do
nothing for a while just be content to
contemplate your breathing more deeply
now begin by paying attention to the
whole of your body as one from the top
of your head all the way down into your
fingers and down into your tools be
aware of your body as one every nerve
muscle and fiber don't try to change
anything don't try to stop anything from
changing and some things can change just
by being observed be content to notice
whatever you notice and feel whatever
you feel be a passive detached observer
as you continue to relax turn your
attention deeper within become more
aware of your body and imagine how you
would appear right now if you could just
take a step back and look at yourself
begin to picture yourself as I've seen
from the outside and it really doesn't
matter how vividly you can see yourself
it's just the intention the idea that
matters imagine your body posture your
facial expression
the color and style of your clothing
now keep looking at the image of
yourself resting there and imagine
leaving the ground as you gaze down at
your body you begin floating serenely
upwards slowly and continuously rising
upwards all the while your gaze keeps
returning to your body which remains
there below you as you rise above it
keep looking down toward your body as
you float higher and higher and higher
the roof and ceiling can disappear
allowing you to float freely upward
looking down you see yourself relaxing
comfortably below in the building
you appear contemplative and contented
you can see all the rooms and all the
people around you as you continue to
float gently higher and higher your
perspective widens more and more until
you see the whole surrounding area you
see all the buildings nearby from above
you see the people in the buildings and
in the streets and roads you observe
people far below working or walking
along the sidewalk people cycling or
driving the cars and those travelling
and buses and streetcars and trains you
begin to contemplate the whole network
of human lives and how people everywhere
are interacting with each other
influencing each other encountering each
other in different ways
flirting higher people become as small
as ants below rising up into the clothes
you see the whole of the surrounding
region beneath you you see both towns
and countryside and eventually the
coastline begins coming into view as
your perspective becomes more and more
expansive you float gently up above the
clothes and through the upper atmosphere
of the planet air so high that you
eventually rise beyond the sphere of the
planet itself and into outer space you
look toward planet Earth and see it
suspended in space before you silently
turning resplendent and all its majesty
and beauty you see the whole planet the
blue of the great oceans and the brown
and green of the continental land masses
you see the white of the polar icecaps
north and south you see the grey wisps
of cloud that passed silently across the
surface of the earth though you can no
longer see yourself from so far above
you know and feel that you're down there
on earth the law and that your life is
important what you do with your life is
important your change in perspective may
even begin to change your view of things
your values and opinions
you contemplate all the countless living
beings upon the earth the population of
the planet is over seven billion people
you realize that your life is one among
many one person among the whole human
race you think of the rich diversity of
human life on earth the many languages
spoken by people of different races in
different countries people of all
different ages newborn infants elderly
people people in the prime of life you
think of the enormous variety of human
experiences some individuals right now
are unhappy
whereas some are happy and you realize
how richly varied the tapestry of human
life before you actually is and yet as
you gaze upon the planet Earth you're
also aware of its position within the
rest of the universe
a tiny speck of Stardust adrift in the
immeasurable vastness of cosmic space
this world of ours is merely a single
planet a tiny grain of sand by
comparison with the endless tracks of
cosmic space a tiny rock in space
revolving around our Sun the Sun itself
just one of countless billions of stars
which punctuate the velvet blackness of
our galaxy you think about the present
moment and our earth and see it within
the broader context of your life as a
whole you think of your lifespan in its
totality you think of your own life as
one moment in the enormous lifespan of
mankind hundreds of generations have
lived and died before you many more will
live and die in the future long after
you yourself are gone civilizations to
have a lifespan you think of the great
many cities which have arisen and been
destroyed throughout the ages
and your own civilization as one in a
series perhaps in the future to be
followed by new cities peoples languages
cultures and whole new ways of life you
think of the lifespan of humanity itself
just one of countless billions of
species living on the planet
mankind arose roughly 200,000 years ago
animal life itself first appeared an
hour over 4 billion years ago
contemplate time as follows realize that
if the history of life and our fold an
encyclopedia a thousand pages long the
life of the entire human race can be
represented by a single sentence
somewhere in that book just one sentence
and I think of the lifespan of the
planet itself countless billions of
years old the life of the planet Earth
too has a beginning middle and end
formed from the debris of an exploding
star unimaginably long ago one day in
the distant future its destinies to be
swallowed up and consumed by the fires
of our own Sun you think of the great
lifespan of the universe itself
the almost incomprehensible vastness of
universal time starting with a cosmic
explosion a Big Bang immeasurable ages
ago in the past
perhaps one day at the end of time this
whole universe will implode in itself
and disappear once again contemplating
the vast lifespan of the universe
remember that the present moment is but
the briefest of instance the mere blink
of an eye the ton of a screw a fleeting
second in the mighty river of cosmic
time it the here and now is important
standing at the center point of all
human experience
here and now you find yourself in the
midst of living time for your body may
be small and the grand scheme of things
your imagination the human imagination
is as big as the universe bigger than
the universe enveloping everything that
can be conceived you contemplate all
things past present and future you see
your life within the bigger picture the
total context of cosmic time and space
you see yourself as an integral part of
something much bigger something truly
vast the all itself just as the cells of
your own body work together to form a
greater unity a living being so your
body as a whole is like a single cell
and the organism of the universe along
with every atom in the universe you
necessarily contribute your role to the
unfolding of its grand design as your
consciousness expands and your mind
stretches out to reach the vastness of
eternity things change greatly in
perspective and shift Saqqara and their
relative importance trivial things seem
trivial to you
indifferent things seem indifferent the
significance of your own attitude toward
life becomes more and more apparent you
realize that life is what you make of it
you want to put things in perspective
and focus on your true values and
priorities in life one stage at a time
you develop the serenity to accept the
things you cannot change the courage to
change the things you can and the wisdom
to know the difference
you follow nature your own true nature
as a rational truth seeking thinking
human being and the one great nature of
the universe as all know in a moment
you're going to begin sinking back down
to error towards your place and they're
here
and no part of you can always remain
aware of the view from above though
whenever you like you can return to and
remember that perspective and the
feeling of serenity it brings now you
begin your descent back down to earth to
face the future with greater confidence
and equanimity you sink back down
through the sky down diving down toward
the local area towards Toronto and down
down and to this building down down down
you sink back gently into your body all
the way now as your feet slowly come to
rest upon the floor once again now think
about the room around you think about
action movement think about looking
around and getting your orientation
raising your head all at all begin to
breathe a little bit more deeply a
little bit more energetically let your
body feel more alive and ready for
action
breathe energy and vitality into your
body breathe a little deeper and deeper
again until you're ready to take a deep
breath open your eyes and emerge from
the meditation taking your mindfulness
and self-awareness forward into life so
beginning now taking a deeper breath and
opening your eyes if you haven't already
and when you're ready entering the here
and now with deep
and serenity
[Music]
so that is the cosmic perspective of
stoicism and ladies and gentlemen I
believe it's now lunchtime am I correct
that soothing Scottish voice gets me
every time