we couldn't be happier to have our next
guest here joining us as well she's a
familiar name a face for a lot of you
and for the rest she will be a nice new
acquaintances so very welcome Bonita Roy
thank you all you get a hug
that's nice we should do more hugging I
thought young people oh there we go who
told you God I'm embarrassed okay anyway
mm-hmm you believe that you need two
main parts in order to get an agile
organization working and you're about to
tell us about those two parts and how to
do it so I'll probably leave the floor
to you but you go around the world and
you work with different companies
organizations you've been to Sweden yes
as well a number of times you work with
some of the companies here yeah how do
we measure up okay so I work primarily
in Sweden in Norway and you know I think
Sweden is they have a building called
the epicenter and it's I think the
epicenter of this movement this
imagination a very imaginative people I
also work in Norway and I have to say
that the town of Truong time is in doing
an extraordinary experiment they fired
all their municipal managers and they
asked them to reapply and reapply by
stating principles of distributed
decision-making what do they envision
for their town so they're in a process
of really taking this into the the
social and augmenting democracy itself
so these are two really exciting
epicenters I think of this work and the
Nordic countries should feel proud of
that all right we will this is one right
yes so we will feel pride or proud yes
both and I'll leave the stage to you you
have the slides there you have to
connect users all right there we go very
much take it
so I always start with a framing that I
let itself compose while I spend some
few moments with the group and in the
company of the people so I start off
with a little cheat sheet because it has
just formed itself or informed itself in
participation with this environment with
some of the people that I talked with
with some of the earlier presentations
so this is a sense of self-organizing
you let your own thoughts self organize
and self organization then can bring you
into the context of what is actually
happening at any given moment right so
instead of coming up here with a slide
that just starts off I just want to
honor this whole notion of
self-organization so so what came up for
me is that I'm going to my presentation
I think is going to ask you to tap into
the edge of your own beliefs right so
this is maybe the irritating piece that
Thomas talked about and really try to
let your imagination go into what you
think is possible that's never been
possible before so we want to take a
broad look at perhaps what is this
movement where is it going where is the
momentum taking us beyond our everyday
organizational challenges so it's not
that appropriate to this group but a lot
of times I work with as I said like
intron time where people want to augment
democracy and I'll say to people how
many people really believe in democracy
so you can raise your hands okay so
raise them high we all believe in
democracy okay so how many of you people
be honest would run a organization
through the democratic process as we
know it one man one vote
okay little less sure right so then I
say well if you wouldn't run your
organization as a democracy why do the
hell you think you can run your country
as a democracy but it's so something in
our mindset and the way we think about
these terms is not really meshing we
need to take a more careful look at how
we make meaning with these words right
because we're all about reinventing
organizations and reinventing
organizational life and ultimately I
would argue where we are about
reinventing social institutions and
humans human participation right so we
just want to try to take a little closer
look at what do we mean about these
words and today we're going to take a
closer look at what do we mean about
self-organization so how many people
really be honest and I know Jurgens not
going to raise his hand how many people
really trust self-organization okay so
how many people are skeptical and don't
trust it okay the and someone other
people are in the middle so that doesn't
give me despair because I read something
about cults and in cults if you're up
here and you're trying to convince
people the two easiest people to
convince are the ones that really
believe you and the ones that are really
skeptical so I think I'm in good shape
there all right when we think about
self-organization we need to first what
is our starting point we need to be
really honest with ourselves and for the
most part the way we go about our daily
lives certainly the way we go about
participating institutions is highly
conditioned habits right they're
conditioned by our schools which are
still conventionally structured the
convention conditioned by the rhetoric
we hear on TV and stuff so right now
we're
actually at is basically we're trying to
escape highly conditioned habits so what
can we draw on we we don't want to draw
necessarily on those conditioned habits
to go forward we need to like step but
take a step back into something I call
deep code who are we as human beings as
human beings we self-organized we've
evolved to be social participants and
we've self-organized so in this work
we're going to take a step back try to
say who are we as human beings can we
can we deconstruct the social conditions
and habits down to our deep human
operating system and then build new
structures from there right so it's a
two-step so Stuart Kauffman said order
vast and generative arises naturally
right so this is something we maybe can
believe in most of the order seen in
nature is spontaneous a natural
expression of a stunning
self-organization that abounds
does anybody know you guys were all like
Star Wars and Pokemon experts does
anybody know what this is a picture of
this is a picture of molecules
self-organizing to create very
structured stations for the replication
of messenger RNA
there's no managers there's no rulebook
right so self-organization at this level
is not a trivial thing it's deep within
the evolutionary code of life itself
so these are pictures from the architect
Christopher Alexander he took these
pictures because he was ant trying to
answering answer the question what is
life and he also saw that there was the
nature of order was self-organizing and
these are ways that we self organize and
if we had time we could have a
conversation over what are the catalysts
here that create self-organization what
about the environment is rich enough to
attract self or and support
self-organization so we have different
different ways of naturally organizing
ourselves this is also patterns of
self-organization that are primarily
driven by threat or pressure or drastic
change and you see that the different
the different environments or the
different conditions create different
patterns of self-organization so these
people are not following a guidebook or
a rule book there are no signs up that
tell them how to be so all of living
animals and insects also self organize
in creative ways to build to solve
construction problems right that's a
pretty complex task to create social
bonds deep roughhouse plays turns out to
be very important aspect of building
social bonds to building family and
extended family bonds these are all ways
of self-organizing so we also see that
in nature there's multiple species self
organize to create rich complex
environments so there's a whole
literature research around
self-organization and one of the things
I wanted to point out in these slides is
that years ago
when we went in look
Ecology's like the food web we had the
pyramid right where the dominant like
the wolf was on the top and he got to
eat these animals and these animals got
to eat these animals and these animals
ate the plants so what did it look like
it looked like a dominance hierarchy
right but was that hierarchy in nature
or in the model of the researcher doing
it and this is one of those questions we
can use when we look at our own
organizations because a certain person
will go in and say oh my god it's such a
hierarchy and another person maybe who
has more lived experience and knows how
has better ways of relating will people
say no no it just looks like that to you
because you know he's really good at
giving orders and we just let him do
that and really underneath what's going
on is much more self-organizing so we
really have to be careful that we're not
looking at complex processes of human
relations we're not looking at this and
saying oh it's a hierarchical food chain
because we went from the food pyramid to
this kind of thing where this one ate
that one but then this one and all these
complex relations and now we look at
complex Ecology's in a very complex
network fashion right so this is one of
the things to remember when we look at
self-organization so the cells of your
body coordinate the behaviors are about
a hundred thousand different kinds of
molecules as matter and energy cross
their boundaries and we'll see that in
self-organization in human systems this
is what's happening we're exchanging
matter and energy we self organize to
distribute the energy load of our task
demands it's works the same in a human
cell the mind is also now thought of as
an emergent property of self organized
complexity so if the mind is not wired
into some
static habit it can continuously be
responsive and self organized in
different ways so self-organization is
not a trivial thing so why do people's
self organize this is a kind of geeky
ecological scientific explanation but
the way we can look at it is people self
organize the same reason Ecology's do to
distribute the energy load of task
demands so that could be biological when
we're born we can't even eat right so we
out there at mechanisms where we self
organized with our mother to achieve
that task demand it could be
physiological so we need to move the
couch I need to distribute that task
demand it could be psychological this
one's up often on under looks so the
need for companionship for play for
conversation we can't you know it's one
thing to sit and talk to yourself all
day but that's a task demand we actually
like to distribute with other people so
we self organize could be physical it
could be cognitive so mostly now where
are the task demands and organizations
are cognitive so we need to self
organize to distribute the energy load
of that okay so here is a self
organizing work group now it turns out
that people unlike other species are
really really good at self organizing
with other species so we've been able to
self organize with other species to
distribute these types of task demands
we're also really good at self
organizing with static material so this
is distributing the task demand of have
you know a physical task demand and this
is the task demand of psycho a lot
psychological test demand something that
is more playful and creative but the way
we work with instruments is really the
way we self organize our bodies we
coordinating our body
with actual physical things and this is
not trivial it's not trivial so when you
watch yourself as you you know go
through this conference you can see how
many ways in which we are participating
in many different levels and scales and
so this is also a way to self-organize
with computational and cognitive types
of networks okay
so the there's a great TED talk by
Sugata Mitra who showed that if you put
a computer in rural India where people
don't know how to speak English and
they'd never been to school and they
don't know how to use a computer that
just by the nature of their
participatory support and their
curiosity they can learn about
recombinant DNA over the course of a
year so they teach themselves how to use
the computer how to speak English how to
surf the web what questions to ask so
it's a so the power of trusting
self-organization is really quite
amazing so it's a great talk if you
haven't seen it Sugata Mitra
self-organizing learning environments so
the other thing we need to know about
self-organization is that that they rely
on simple protocols that simple
protocols generate the rich environments
for self-organization so this is
something for example that James and
Sochi ox III are trying to get back down
to these simple fundamental protocols
that if you seed them into environments
where people are allowed to participate
they will generate rich environments
rich complex environments that are
responsive right so when we talk about
how we to get people to self-organize we
want to look for some of these simple
protocols that seed the environment for
the expression of the complex
responsiveness in
in humans and this is again the this
slide presentation shows you that all of
this is consistent with science on this
deep ecological life force level we're
trying to tap into something that is
evolved as life evolves so this is the
you know the way I started we're pretty
much conditioned people we want to go
back and understand self-organization
from this deeper code and because we're
going to about to switch and say well
what's the challenge going forward if we
can get back and understand ourselves as
naturally evolved self-organizing
organisms and honor the fact that
they're really really good at it then
how can we take that bypass the
conditioned habits of modernity and move
that into the kinds of future that we
envision right so it's a two-step it's
not just about getting back to our roots
our primal roots but understanding the
genius in that evolved system and taking
that energy taking that genius and
moving it into a new future so this
slide is a very simple protocol of how
to do that right so I'm not going to
it's also backed by a lot of science
self-determination theory is used in
almost all leadership assessments and
management assessment but this is a
attempt to get us to understand our own
lived experience can I get back to
understanding myself as a
self-organizing being so there's three
aspects of the way we kind of hook up
with people in what Ralph Stacey calls
complex processes of human relating
first of all we have our own autonomy
right as an individual well then we're
gonna hold on to this this is not
something that we can let go lightly we
can't even let it go we are all born
very unique and that's precious to us so
we have our own
economist identity but we're also
relational beings right so we're also
relational beings and we also have
agency we want to act out in the world
we want to perform who we are we want to
solve problems and do tasks so the
collective version of these three that
comprised my live experience as a social
being is first my own autonomy so I have
a little you know being there talking to
itself and then we are all collectively
autonomous individuals so this already
makes it a challenge how do you how do
you deal with that
so we share intentions and the biggest
part about sharing intentions it's
supposed to be the earth down there is
that we have a common world so not only
are we collectively autonomous but we
have a common world so we're grounded in
something that has its own commonality
so that's the environment the
environment that we have and then
primarily we link together through our
value chains right so we have a common
world and that somehow creates the
ability for us to have shared values and
then we seek out and we kind of it's
like a strange attractor we magnetically
associate with people who have the same
value chains as ours so we get these
value chains and then we can use that to
create collaborative action and if you
see this moves it's a collective version
of autonomy relationality shared
intentions and the value change and then
we have collaborative action instead of
our own action in the world it's a very
simple schematic so what are the
challenges the challenges are we are
also in the revolution of becoming very
individuated we want our singular
perspective we are more there are more
ways to be unique now than ever before
right so this is also coming online the
same time that
our need to have scale agile in have
more collective agency we see that we're
also becoming demanding and
understanding ourselves as the unique
perspective that we have and we want to
honor that right we have a common world
this gives you a sense of what I'm
talking about these are three autonomous
individuals but there's a sharing going
on already shared intentions we're
getting closer now to actually
self-organizing to action world building
type intentions so this is an
interesting slide because they have the
same values but they're not actually
collaborating right so there's still
individual and you can see the sense in
which at what level of organization
that's happening here
they can't doesn't seem to me they can
even help each other right but they're
sharing the value of this crazy activity
that they have so when if how many of
you are like coaches or chapter coaches
or something like this so these are well
if you do the workshops
plug plug these are the types of ways
you can look at your organization you
know where's the level of autonomy are
we sharing worlds are we sharing
intentions what type of value sphere do
we have and you can use tools such as
sense making tools to ask say the kind
of state that your teams are in and have
conversations that matter around this
and then we have real self organized
teams you see there's a sense of
vulnerability when you're really at this
level because without the collaborated
action of all three things would not be
that effective so this is these are the
kinds of switches that happen in actual
actual lived experiences you get closer
and closer to authentic teamwork right
so all the steps and towards getting to
that and then you have things like teams
of teams and scaled agility then I want
it this is this is kind of a cool slide
because I think it throws you back into
something
that may be problematic in the sense of
the loss of individuality here right so
this is a team that may be able to scale
but they don't have a lot of options to
be responsive or to have new ideas and
there's always this kind of toggle when
you get to scaling large groups is that
are you are you going to diminish the
autonomy of the group and if you
diminish the autonomy of the group then
you're not going to be innovative and
creative
so there's a big toggle between this
which has got some vulnerability but
it's really kind of synergistic action
in this into many large-scale but
relatively safe methodologies I don't
know which ones I'm talking about
they're really they can pull this off
but they're not they're not going to be
as innovative because the autonomy
you're not bringing in the genius of
that other aspect of human
self-organization which is the autonomy
and the flexibility so we just have to
this is a very we would say it's an old
structure of of collecting people so I
think I'm not sure what my time is but
when we look at human self-organization
we're looking at emergent potentials
okay we're not just looking at these old
evolutionary potentials so this is a
picture of Burning Man and this is an
experiment in emerging potentials and
I'm just going to go through one last
slide it's kind of a complicated slide
but first I do it this way so what's the
challenge in the emerging potentials of
human self-organization what is coming
online for us that has never been there
before and if you put your hands
together it's kind of like this first
there's two people and when they come
into social space we're all kind of
bundled up are these are these are our
motivations and our relational anxieties
and our social anxiety it's kind of
bundled up we're all kind of closed up
and when two people come together in
social space the first thing that
happens is they have to negotiate like
their intentions and their anxieties and
what's going on here but the interesting
thing that happens and this is the key
piece that you if you remember this is
when they come together they're going to
they're going to feel the pressure to
create roles this is my identity like
Who am I going to show up with her Who
am I going to show up with him right so
not only are we trying to figure out our
kind of emotional and intentional spaces
which is very chaotic but in order for
these things to sync up we have to fall
into an identity that I accept right so
right now all of you are accepting the
identity of I get to talk to you right
and maybe that could have broken down if
I was Milo right my if I was Milo maybe
that would have been broken down but
what happens is in organizations we've
traditionally only given people a
handful of roles or identities that they
can play and this when this happens it
helps us connect because I knew who I am
and you know who you are but it gets us
stuck in those roles and what we need to
do the emergent property of human self
organization is to learn how to be very
flexible in those in that identity space
and just kind of move toward action
right so one of the challenges of going
forward is if we have these relational
values we have an interplay of needs and
wants that has to be worked out that's a
challenge and then we have emergent
identities in social space we need to
agree on how we are going to understand
each other and this creates a lot of
social anxiety it is why people actually
in many case
just say give me a roll tell me what to
do I want to understand me myself as
that roll but it robs the system of the
evolutionary genius of that interaction
so when we work with people we work with
them saying well what role did you take
what were the available roles you could
you could have taken can you think of
other types of roles so you can work
with this heuristic of self-organization
to create very very high performance
teams where innovative ideas innovative
type roles and identities will emerge
and then when that all works itself out
then you get an emergent outcome so this
is a kind of challenge to a kind of
human Constitution right now but people
have been working at this level working
without roles letting roles and
identities and social space emerge and
be flexible and be creative and I think
when I showed this when I show this
slide what I see here is if you've ever
been to Burning Man that's all what
people are doing they're wearing
costumes and showing up you know they're
practicing roles new roles new types of
ways of being human in social space and
this is a real challenge this is one of
the the real horizons of creative
creating very large very responsive
teams that can work in innovative ways
so when I when I look at the challenges
for agile or the future of work I want
to say well what is it about us that we
have to recreate as human beings and we
can we can be imaginative about that and
and this is kind of where the rubber
rubber meets the road in this this way
we are evolutionarily together when we
self organize
is that I think that's my time I'm not
sure if I started late five more minutes
so are there any questions or I could
die
I could I could speed present the last
part hurry I think you have ten minutes
okay yeah that's why I was asking okay
so I good so I'm in good I'm in good
shape okay
so one of the things that happens in
organizations if you allow them to self
organize then the power structures will
also be innovative right you won't just
have a dominance hierarchy you might
have over here at this condition have
you know we've all been in groups that
have worked really well and then the
 hits the fan and you have an expert
in the room and you just say just tell
us what to do right this is something we
know how to move toward when under
certain conditions so we're not in you
know in terms of self-organizing
complexity if we allow the genius to
unfold and we know how to support that
then you will get this balance of how
people organize but it will be in
response to appropriate conditions so
one of the things that happens in if
you're interested in this I'm going to
give you the download but we're doing a
whole day workshop on it is that the
that power will also it power is also a
complex pattern and self-organized teams
what is power
well I need to organize if if power is
my skills and resources develop divided
by my needs and wants and I just end
with a story that illustrates this let's
say I want my couch moved right and my
need is very very high because my
mother's coming over and she hates it
when the couch is near the TV and yet I
can't move it myself so I have to
self-organize with my partner to move
the couch well my partner inside of his
needs and wants
like his relational space is like oh my
god she's just moving that because her
mother is coming over and she needs to
get you know grow up and not be in there
so we have asymmetric needs and wants in
this case my needs are very very big and
his needs are neutral or negative he
doesn't have a need he doesn't want to
want to move that couch so this is
already a very complex negotiation right
from the get-go if we slowed our selves
down and looked at what was happening in
our lived bodies maybe he's getting mad
maybe I'm getting irritated so we come
together and one of the things that is
processing in the power matrix Ed's are
asymmetrical needs and once they're not
the same if he was freaking out because
my mother was coming no problem we would
just move the couch okay skills and
resources he now on the other hand he
might be stronger than me
right so my skills and resources might
be small less than his so now not only
do I have greater needs and wants which
was juices my power he has greater
resources so he really can you know I
really need him to move the couch so
this becomes a complex negotiation right
so that's this this is this part so we
got to figure out our needs and wants
and skills and resources but here's the
thing
in this negotiation I can see a whole
range of identities that might my
crystallize out of this do I want to be
you know the bitch that leverages him
well I did that for you last week and
blah blah blah or do I want to be the
petulant little victim that really needs
this help each he doesn't understand me
so that's always the third part when
we're negotiating we have our asymmetric
needs and wants skills and resources but
in the end it won't turn into
collaborative action if we can't settle
on an identity for each one of us and if
you're really honest with yourself
you'll see that in all your interactions
at work that aren't just unconscious
there's always this
third element Who am I Who am I going to
allow myself to be identified in this
relational space and so this notion of
that Third identity coming out is a
crucial part of learning how to
negotiate the power dynamics but what we
know is the less asymmetry in the power
dynamics then you can create more of
that more value through these higher
types of team performance so the the
point here is to allow for
self-organization to constantly turn
away those asymmetric needs and want
skills and resources so that the power
matrix grows from something that looks
like coercion up into something that
looks like synergy and co-creation so
the this is these are the ideas around
self-organization they're very robust
ideas they rely on simple protocols and
they're tested in practice for people
like yourself that are interested in
experimenting into new ways of
collaboration so that's it
thank you very much I will that slide
yeah just bring back home right away
yeah I'll use it when moving couches and
what have you we actually do have time
for questions
you also be joining the panel just after
lunch where we will have one very
interactive part so you can throw all
the questions you have for the for the
panelists but since we have a few
minutes we have a running microphone who
is now behind stage but questions for
Bonita
over here
Duma all right yeah please do
yeah that's a big question not I I do
have an opinion on it it's quite
provocative so I'm trying to try to
answer in a headline um oh sorry okay so
the question has to do what does this
have to do with the whole notion of the
tragedy of the Commons and I think your
question is really on target because it
has a lot to do with the tragedy of the
Commons and I would say the piece really
is in well I mean it's in that triangle
it's how we are reacting when we're
sitting down and negotiating the Commons
and I think that what what I'm saying is
that in general even people who would
vote for the Commons or want the Commons
are ideologically are for the Commons
they don't really understand their own
lived experience they may for example
give away their autonomy in that
negotiation so that's a that's the
shortest where you're going is a very
rich conversation I'd love to have it
with you but but my work is all about
let's be honest how I'm really
participating and what am I
participating with because to preserve
the Commons we have to be able to hook
up and be a gentle be doing things with
other people not just showing up oh
here's my identity I'm a good person
goes rah rah rah the Commons right so we
can it so does that help answer your
question yeah yeah thanks for the
questions okay we'll do one more
question if here we go
yes so uh repeat okay so the question is
how does what how does how do I relate
to one people when people it is true
people could two people beings can
self-organize to create a dominant
structure so then he like then he like
pulled at my heartstrings because he
mentioned horses and and I really love
horses actually this is working with
horses and training horses was been part
of this question so we we again I think
that it requires both individuals to
show up in hell in a very healthy way so
for example one of the problems that we
see and then I'll get to answer your
question but one of the one of the
things we don't focus enough on in self
organization is that we focus a lot on
dominance who's dominating who but we
don't focus on our own needs and wants
which reduces my so I can come into a
situation let's say my manager is
actually neutral on something but if I
have so many needs and want I'm going to
show up in a certain way that he might
just say no and then I'll go back and
I'll feel dominated right and I feel
dominated not only because I didn't have
skills and resources not only because of
the pout the skills or power resource
asymmetry but because I had too many
needs and wants right and and so that
that creates so in terms of horses when
I work with horses this is exactly the
kinds of ways I start understand this so
in the mantra that I do in the horse
workshops is we don't want to be
dominated or be dominators in general
that's a psychopathology but we want to
be leaders right so in the horse world
we say I'm going to shape the horse's
character I have that responsibility
they have to live in the human world
but the horse is going to shape my
leadership because he's always going to
be testing me and so you have to allow
that in that part of the other equation
in so instead of me when I feel
challenged pushing down then I say I
want to help that's going to help me
rise up and then the horse rises up and
then the leader rides up and the horses
write up now in the human world and
sometimes it'll reverse and part of that
part of being relationally being better
at being relational has to do when we do
the exercise how many relation on about
can I always be nice but having a lot of
relational intelligence is how many
types of relations can I be involved in
in my group can I be a leader can I be a
follower can I be against someone can I
be with someone can I be sucide someone
can I be ahead of someone can I be way
behind someone and most people will see
some of those things as negative I don't
want to be behind and some is positive
or vice versa and so the relational
aspect of the work is how many different
types of relations can I be in with many
different people and that makes the
environment more rich and complex so
that's part of the teaching on that it's
a another big question okay thank you
very much all right thank you very much
Bonita there's some some gifts and
chocolate and you tend to get big
questions you'll do is you'll be doing
some work shopping tomorrow
yeah and and it'll be it'll be very
dynamic we're gonna do some Tai Chi and
push hands and really notice what our
power leaks and our power grabs are and
some of it will be disturbing and some
of it we and all of it we can be very
proud of it and most of it will be fun
okay
so fun and disturbing it sounds like a
good treat
thank you for that thank you thank you
perfect thanks our job all go ha job
people thank you very much money time so
[Applause]