this is a room full of Stoics so I just
wanna get a show of hands how many of
you take cold showers on a regular basis
it's pretty good keep your hand raised
if you took one today not bad how many
of you think it's crazy to take cold
showers
all right so this next talk is gonna be
highly relevant to that group of people
I'm really excited to introduce Steve
Beatty who is a Canadian wilderness
trainer or guide sorry a personal
trainer and a wim HOF instructor if
you've heard of wim HOF then you know
what you're about to get yourself into
if you haven't heard about it then I'll
let Steve explain but basically at a
high level he is going to explain this
breathwork exercise that is designed to
bring people to peak physical
performance and to get them to their
edge to increase their resilience to
increase their cold tolerance and this
is a highly stoic exercise and without
further ado I like to invite Steve to
stage thank you good afternoon everyone
this is this is an amazing day isn't it
having a lot of fun I'm learning like
way more than I thought I was gonna
learn dare you I have a really good
lunch how many you went out for beer and
hamburgers cuz that was a bad idea I can
take you through a breath exercise and a
few minutes gonna explain a whole bunch
of stuff but we're gonna go through a
breath exercise that is going to push
your limits and it's gonna teach you to
observe your inner state of stress and
your inner knowledge of your body so
because we're pushing that that envelope
of stress within our body when you have
an acute stress response your body
responds to the stress so if you have a
big full body or a big full belly of
cheeseburgers and beer and pizza we're
gonna see it so hopefully we just had a
nice light salad no noemi's go throbbing
but it might happen so I'm a limp off
math instructor but I teach breathing
mindset and meditation you know a little
envelope you got there's a little card
in there from mindset brain gym right
around the corner I teach this every
morning that mindset brain gym so use
that card here's a little cheeky little
secret as a $20 off or a free class you
can use that for a month membership for
only $20
so do that if you're local but I got
involved in this whole stoic thing about
nine months ago a Peter contacted me and
asked if I could teach the wim HOF
method to the stoic thing I thought yeah
wim HOF method that's absolutely stoic
sucked you take cold showers and you
have to suffer more than anybody what
then I started to read about that I wait
a second I used to always think I was a
stoic but as a small less stoic as a
good presbyterian child from England
suck it up don't show your emotions
that's why I was and one of this wim HOF
method journey a few years ago and I was
in Australia two years ago taking my
masters course on the wim HOF method and
learning how to breathe and all that
week of breathing and meditating we had
this blockage that we were working on
this idea inside of us that we were
observing trying to understand something
about ourselves all week we're working
on this and it was until that final day
his long breath work practice of
meditating and we went into the ice tub
for the last time and is when I went
that ice tub
that's is anybody have an ice bath
before yeah it's stressful you go in and
you have this enormous stress response
to the cold you know fight it off and
you control it you observant and you
breathe and you're relaxed into it and
go okay this is what my stress is I
understand what this is now and it's
right at that moment where this thing
that I've been carrying all week was
right in front of me and my eyes opened
and I breathed in and it was like my
brain was this rubik's cube and it went
click and everything fell into place all
the colors were lined up and i saw my
life in front of me I observed
everything we went through this practice
where you look down on who you are from
above that's what I did I was outside my
body looking at myself and my whole life
was presented in front of me and what I
need to do everything fell into place
there's this really incredible moment of
clarity and I knew exactly what my life
was and then I had this big rush of
emotions
and I cried for the first time in 32
years lying in this ice tub cried
hysterically is the weirdest thing and I
realized that this stoic life I was
living was actually just the smallest
stoic how she's denying myself what life
is I was observing my life I was saying
no I don't want any of that don't want
any of that but the blinders on put the
blinkers on I'm not gonna observe my
life I was gonna stumble through and
ignore everything when I started this
breath work practice it gave me this
chance to look at my life to observe it
and to understand what life is I could
see the impressions and make decisions
for the first time in my life can I
change that small as to a big s just
like that so then about 9 months ago
we're talking about stoicism and how
that applies to the wim HOF mathis why
write into it a little bit and the
Stoics their knowledge of the human body
and the universe around them and this is
going back to the ancient Greeks Daleks
they believed in this thing called the
pneuma which is literally translation
the breath is the breath and they
believed that in the pneuma was this
combination of fire and air and you get
experiment with this yourself you could
actually just blow on your hand and it's
cold or you can and it's hot you can
change that combination of fire and air
no we know it's just evaporation that's
why it feels cold but that's the idea of
this combination of air and fire and it
permeates everything in the universe and
it makes up the human soul and the
pneuma in the human soul the human body
has these eight streams as our five
senses we all know the five senses
entirely incorrect but we know our five
senses of taste touch hearing smell
whatever the other one was but it also
has these other three as our sex to our
gender with this power source in our
groin we have our voice that's what we
speak with we're the only animal that
does this and we have something else
called the hegemonic on and the ancient
Greeks believed that this hegemonic own
was here in their heart is their seat of
knowledge
and the Romans moved it up and it's
actually up here which is probably a
little bit more correct and we can liken
this hegemonic on to the the neocortex
or frontal lobe of our brain and again
we're the only ones with while whales
and elephants also have one too but I
don't know if they do breathwork whales
probably do but this is our seat of
logic right here this is where we
observe our life right here and we use
this Numa this breath to activate it do
any of you have stress yeah who doesn't
have stress I like to meet you
stress is why you got out of bed this
morning alright stress is is part of who
we are we have stress and when we look
at our brain that put of an older view
of our brain we got these three little
brains inside of us and our very small
brain is our there's our reptilian brain
at the top of our brainstem and that's
involved in our movement patterns it's
involved in our five senses as our feel
it's our touches our proprioception
remember when you're learning to ride a
bike it was difficult you kept falling
off plus your reptile brain was trying
to figure it out and once you learn how
to do it you didn't forget anymore
because you just map it into your
proprioception then beyond that we have
our limbic system it's a deeper part of
our brain it's our proto mammalian brain
and that is the part that's in charge of
our fight-or-flight is our stress
response part of our brain it keeps us
alive it's really important and the
saber-tooth Tiger is attacking us you
want a limbic system in charge of what's
going on it helps you run away really
fast or fight it off have any of you
ever been attacked by a saber-toothed
tiger probably not how many of you carry
a phone with you
yeah that's your saber-toothed tiger
right there that is keeping you wired
all the time you're waiting for it to
vibrate this is what is that it's a
distraction all the time it is keep your
limbic system in charge of who we are
and because of a limbic system our
fight-or-flight system is in charge it
operates so much quicker than our
neocortex the neocortex just says well
forget it
I don't you're part of this I'll just go
quiet can we do that we can put
electrodes on people's heads and look at
the activity inside the brain and see
active and for so many people is that
limbic system-- just buzzing it's on
fire they're stressed they're wired all
the time loaded for bear we like to say
in the wilderness world all the time
were stressed out that's where we live
in this world of stress this neocortex
up here that makes us human this is the
part that understands who we are this is
the part that makes friends with people
it's what we fall in love it's where we
remember the past and learn the lessons
from before and it's where we plan for
the future our limbic system dwells in
the past and worries about the future is
that stuff we can't control but we're
gonna try
but the prefrontal cortex is what
understands things as observes us it
observes the impressions on life and
makes decisions and it's gone quiet
that's what's happened when we use our
breath we activate that prefrontal
cortex and we can use our breath to fall
into a very deep state of meditation and
that's where we're gonna go in just a
few minutes how many of you have a
meditation practice trough hands how
many have meditation practice how many
meditate every day
few of you how many of you tried
meditation before and thought I'm not
really too sure if I'm doing this right
I think I just wasted 20 minutes yeah it
hurts to sit like that on the floor yeah
a lot of people are like that you don't
know if you're meditating when we do
breath work we know that we're
meditating and breath work isn't new I
don't know if the stoic specifically did
breath work but I do know that shamanic
breath work is practiced in every single
culture around the world since the
beginning of humans every culture has
breath work so I'm assuming the Stoics
did too but I don't know for sure when
we do breath work when we just sit and
we did this right before lunch we just
sat with our breath you close your eyes
and you observe your breath right away
when you just sit quietly and observe
your breath a part of your brain called
the anterior cingulate it's part of this
prefrontal cortex and wires back into
the limbic system so your prefrontal
cortex is just looking back and saying
hey what's
I'm back there just talking on the door
oh you're feeling all wired and tired
and stressed and worried and scared and
upset okay I can see that now I can see
you feel that way just paying attention
to your breath just observing it does
that it allows us to see our emotional
state when we take control of our breath
which and what we're going to do we're
gonna change the way we breathe again a
different part of our brain wakes up I
have to look it up the camera in the
name of it the caudal medial part of the
frontal cortex wakes up on that part of
our prefrontal cortex is what is in
charge of our executive function by
taking control of our breath and
changing the way we breathe we change
the way we think we change the way our
brain works and we're able to look at
the impressions to observe our life and
then we're going to modulate our breath
deeply and take you through a very deep
the wim HOF method style of breath work
the power breath that I teach at mindset
you're gonna be taking deep full breaths
of air over and over and over again and
you're gonna start to feel kind of funny
your fingers are gonna tingle you might
go numb around your nose and mouth and
you're gonna continue to breathe deeply
in and out over and over and over again
and finally you're gonna take a final
big breath in and you're gonna let it go
you're gonna hold your breath with no
air in your lungs for a long long long
time and that's during this state where
we go from a focused attention on our
breath to a wide insight view of our
entire existence we're gonna do this
three times so we're gonna go deeper and
deeper each time it's pretty wild
there's one try it out yeah
so when everybody take your phone out
you know I'm gonna swipe up from the
bottom and press a little icon for the
airplane put on airplane mode you do not
want to be the person whose phone goes
off during this meditation it's rude so
turn your phone's off
let them away so the first thing we're
going to do we're just gonna do a little
breath meditation I'm gonna guide you
through it's a lot of people when you
say meditate on your breath I think okay
I'm breathing I got my breath meditation
I'm gonna guide you through I'm gonna
teach you how to do a breath meditation
it's kind of tricky and then we're gonna
move directly into a breath modulation
where you're gonna take control I'm
gonna move towards a connected breath or
a circular breath normally when you
breathe you breathe in and out and then
there's a little pause they breathe in
and out in this little pause we're gonna
move towards the connected breath is
gonna be a steady like so I'm gonna do
that for a while and that's going to
wake up that front part of your brain
and then we're going to move into the
power breath which we're gonna be taking
full breaths of air and when we're doing
this I want you to start thinking about
where your breath is coming from
just like the hegemonic on who are Numa
has eight streams or five senses and
then we have our sex our heart our
throat and our head we're going to
breathe up from our groin from our root
from our pelvic floor I'm going to
breathe from here and we need to feel or
have an awareness of this energy rising
up every time you breathe in up to the
top of your head to the seat of power
the seat of knowledge right here inside
your head your hegemonic on or here if
you're Greek here if you're Roman
doesn't matter I'm not judging but I
want you to feel this rise of energy
through your body each time there's
gonna be full deep breaths of air
bursting your lungs at the top don't
don't burst your lungs but very very
very deep breaths of air now I'll tell
you to breathe out finally and you'll
just stop and hold your breath and I'll
guide you through that a couple times
now people who should not do this kind
of power breath work
if you're pregnant we haven't tested
this on pregnant women we're probably
not going to but I do know women who've
done it and also if you have
uncontrolled epilepsy doing deep full
circular breaths of air and breath holes
can trigger a seizure right so if you're
in any of those two categories just do
the breath awareness just stay with us
do your breath awareness do the
connected breath but don't go super deep
with it if you're doing this breath work
and you're thinking I'm not too sure if
I like this isn't it feel very good to
me don't stop don't do it don't stop
breathing keep reading
well I said we go back to that breath
meditation part that we start with okay
so I want everybody make yourselves
comfortable your feet are flat on the
floor you're sitting up nice and
straight in your seats so slide your bum
back sit up nice and tall spread
yourself out if you need to if you got a
seat next to you just spread yourself at
three the people at the back already
spread your chairs out people at the
front are all nice and close still it's
like the rebels on the school bus around
the back so he's sitting up nice and
tall some nice gentle music is going to
start I'm going to close your eyes place
your hands wherever you want your hands
your body to relax
you're gonna bring your awareness to
your breath
the part of your breath that resonates
with you
[Music]
bring your awareness to the end of your
nose you feel the rush of cool air
moving in through your nose
a rush of warm air moving out through
your nose
[Music]
like your awareness rests solely on your
breath as you feel it moving through
your nose trying to hold your awareness
for a full cycle of breath as you
breathe in and you breathe out
and he repeats
if you find your mind rushing off to
other things
that's okay
that my friends is meditation bring it
back to your breath fully aware of the
movement of air in and at
when your awareness to your belly to the
rise and fall gentle expansion of your
ribs
this feeling within your body fully hold
your awareness you gently breathe in and
apps
without control just observe your breath
gentle movement of air in and out
the body's relaxed
[Music]
fully aware of your breath
come aware the sensation of touch
temperature of the air on your skin
feeling of your clothes
pressure of your body in the chair
Kirra wearin is explore the sensation of
touch
[Music]
I'm aware of the sense of sound hearing
open your mind and body the vibrations
of the music sound of my voice sounds
the building
[Music]
fully aware of your sense of hearing
[Music]
your awareness to your sense of smell
taste
[Music]
lingering taste of lunch coffee
if your awareness fully rest your senses
of smell and taste
even with your eyes closed when your
awareness your sense of sights
darkness behind your eyes shifting
shadows light and dark
pops of lights
fully aware sight
your awareness back to your breath
[Music]
your awareness sink deep within you
become aware the deep organic rhythm of
your breath
[Music]
fully aware the time it takes to breathe
in
and out
the pause between breaths fully aware
its rhythm of your breath
[Music]
the rhythm of your life
to observe your breath
[Music]
move now towards a connected breath as
you breathe in and out
and then
and outs without pause at the top or
bottom without force light control with
a deep connected breath circular
to take control of your breath come
aware of the breath rising from the base
of your spine
your pelvic floor
breath rises from your sex and moves up
your spine
to your hat
the wave of energy rising with your
breath to breathe from your roots
through ballet your hearts your throats
the seed of your knowledge your head
breathing steadily in and out
observe the sensations in your body you
feel your breath rise up within you
see your breath it's a wave of energy
rising up your spine with every breath
in and as a breath falls from your body
your body fully relaxed
[Music]
as we move towards a deeper fuller
powerful breath you'll fill your lungs
to the top breathe fully in three two
one let it go three two one
deeply in three two one
out three two one in three two one out
three two one
and
out
and
out fully aware of the control over your
breath as you breathe fully in and out
the deep rhythmic connected breath
breathing from the base of your spine
the wave of energy rising up through you
but your body move with this wave your
chest lifts up towards the sky as you
breathe in your body fully relaxes as
you breathe out we're you getting deep
in your belly two ribs expand the wave
of energy rising up through your body
[Music]
you're aware of sensations the tingling
in your fingers lightness your arms and
legs breathe deeply in and let it go
wave after wave of breaths
fully in with every breath deeper then
you need your mind is on your breath
you're aware of your body narrow focus
of your breath feel the rush of air
moving through you a wave of energy to
breathe deeply in and out
[Music]
mine stays with your breath
you feeling numbness around your nose
and mouth you're in full control
breathe five more breaths deeply and let
it go deeply and let it go
deeply and let it go deeply and let it
go last breath breathe deeply in a small
hole to the top of your lungs and let it
go and hold without air
[Music]
narrow focus on your breath it's gone
surrender to this moment of your breath
hold you're Wearing's expand the full
insights to your mind
body relaxes
push past your desire to breathe deep
within your body
you feel an air hunger build within you
focus on where that energy is that
anxiety and stress is coming from
becomes too strong a sip of air in and
out and hold your body relaxes
[Music]
breathe full in and hold at the top of
your lungs hold feel a rush of energy
through your body
Russia bless
[Music]
let it go
breathe deeply in three two one out
three two one
in out
[Music]
deeply and
let it go
deeply and let it go find your rhythm
breathing deeply in with every breath in
breathing from your root for the wave of
energy rising up your spine to breathe
deeply in with every breath deep in full
see your breath is a wave of energy
rising up your spine with every breath
in
[Music]
in full control of your breath
[Music]
breathe deep from your belly breathing
up through your body
[Music]
imagine this energy is rising from your
feet as you breathe in rising from your
hands as you breathe in breathing fully
into your head with every breath the
wave of energy rising up deep full
breaths
[Music]
fingers begin to tingle your arms feel
lights
you're Wearing's of your body expands
beyond yourself
in deeply and
wave after wave of breath rising through
deeper and fuller ten more breaths
deeply and let it go
[Music]
you breathe and contract the muscles
from your pelvic floor and squeeze the
energy up for your spine with every
breath in deep full breaths the energy
rises fully relaxed as you let go five
more deeply and let it go deeply and let
it go deeply and let it go deeply and
let it go last breath breathe deeply in
holes for a second at the top and let it
go and hold
you're mine go
it's Randor to this moment of your
breath hold
mine turns inwards explore your
subconscious
[Music]
and to realize your true self
your true nature deep within your mind
begin to awaken
push deep within your breath hold
relax
your body go
to mine wake up
but air hunger becomes too strong a sip
of air in and out hole deeper into your
body
[Music]
and feel a connection deep within
you can feel a connection to something
greater something unknown and mysterious
vo deep within
[Music]
breathe fully in and hold at the top of
your lungs and squeeze from your root
squeeze from the pelvic floor squeeze
through your spine up through your body
squeeze the cerebral spinal fluid back
into your brain squeeze of that
hegemonic on the seat of knowledge and
power seat of who you are feel the rush
of lists and energy
let it go
breathe deeply and let it go deeply and
let it go deeply and let it go deeper
fuller quicker than before deep full
rhythmic breaths charge in your body
find your rhythm deep fast breath
filling your body all the way up the
rise of energy rising up your spine with
every breath your body fully relaxes as
you let go deeply in let it go deep full
breaths there every breath in feel the
rise from your roots base of your spine
your sacrum your breath rises up through
you to breathe up from your feet
the energy rise is deeply in with every
breath your body fully goes the air
falls from you
[Music]
for that wave move through you
deeply in with every breath
[Music]
your awareness of self expands beyond
your body your sense of self expands
deeply in and out deep waves of energy
moving through your body
[Music]
this wave of energy rising up your spine
the movement of energy through your
spine into your head
deeply in and out deeply in and that's
ten more
full rhythmic circular breaths your body
go the tingling and numbness in your
body
the rise of emotions observe understands
five more deeply in vladica deeply and
vladica deeply in vladica deeply and let
it go last breath breathe fully in holes
per second at the top and let it go and
hold without air let it go
[Music]
mr. mine free free to explore deep
within
your subconscious wake up
[Music]
your eyes roll up in your hat you look
towards your midbrain
[Music]
hegemonic on
aware of any sensations in your body
if you location of stress and energy
short sip of air if you need hole deeper
within
[Music]
breathe full in and hole to the top of
your lungs squeeze up your spine see a
ball of energy around your body to hold
this ball of energy expands beyond you
fills this room in this building fills
this city and expands beyond this planet
this ball of energy expands beyond the
universe and connects to the light
feel this presence
open your mind to this experience let it
go
return to your normal breath your eyes
closed you're calm and relaxed
[Music]
your mind is open
and your awareness to your hearts
the emotional center
observe the sensations and the emotion
sitting in your heart
[Music]
and bring to mind the face of a loved
one
[Music]
family member chairs pets
we're an experience you love bring to
mind this image feel the emotions in
your heart grow through the hearts the
joy love be aware the beat of your
hearts the rhythm feel the pulse through
your body
[Music]
see your hearts as a pulsing lights of
energy within you
now there every pulse is feeling of joy
and love pulses through your body so you
feel this joy and this love but every
cell of your body every fiber of your
being
see those pulse of light radiates from
your chest
radiates away from your body for this
room
see your loved ones
the pulse of your hearts radiates upon
them see your colleagues
see the strangers in the streets the
unknown people in the coffee shop
it's pulse of love enjoying your heart
radiates from your body
allow this sensation this joy and this
love be your meaning your purpose you
see your life this entirety
as you pause
[Music]
to reflect
[Music]
to observe who you truly are
who you truly want to be
[Music]
see yourself come back into your body
you feel the rush of cool air through
your nose
the rise and fall of your belly through
the contact of your body in the chair
come back to this time and place
[Music]
you wiggle your fingers toes move your
arms around some movement back into your
body as you come back into this room
[Music]
you can do open your eyes
[Music]
[Music]
not sure if that's how the Greeks did it
that's why I do it I'm Scottish those
I do this practice every day and it
gives me a moment to look at myself feel
and understand to reflect gives me
clarity every day I do this not
necessarily all this some ways smaller
have a little saying I like to keep with
me
stop drop and breathe it's great little
saying we're near a little kid in school
and the firefighters came I said when
you catch on fire I'm gonna catch
on fire I don't want to grow up catch on
fire on the inside all the time when we
catch on fire on the inside when that
limbic system starts firing and takes
over takes over who we are it's this
part that's us the hegemonic on
prefrontal cortex
it goes quiet so when you're feeling
that fire inside stop what you're doing
plus you're driving on the highway then
do it later stop what you're doing
drop into the moments and breathe it's
that simple
breathe the pneuma the source of life
allows you to reflect thanks
[Applause]