all right so I looked at this stuff that
you had sent me on the Dow stack I've
looked at several times before I always
get the Dow stack in the hole of a chain
confused
they both are a little bit of an enigma
to me do you know the difference
like can you explain the difference
between dowel stock and hollow chain
because I feel like you're gonna
probably there is almost no common so
they it's it's very hard to say what's
the difference they have very little in
common in my head they're very common
because I don't know I don't know what
makes them different and I don't know
people bring up one or the other quite
frequently really okay so there is
almost no almost nothing in common for
them apart from good spirit and good
people but and good mission but a whole
chain is basically a more low level
technological solution so it's a it's
actually hard to explain but it's it's
sort of if you you know torrent you know
torrent this is like the closest analogy
that I can give torrent you know file
sharing network yeah yeah I'm familiar
with it from like that 90s early 2000s
yeah right right so it's a distribute
acknowledged distributed technology that
allows people to to share files such
that the files sit over the network and
they there is no centralized server and
and thus there is no one that shut down
that that no server so blockchain is
something like that but the difference
blockchain in torrent is that in
blockchain there is a consensus so all
nodes in a network hold the same copies
of everything so there is commit screen
it's called consensus basically protocol
or tells database and torrent is it is a
visual data database without consensus
and then people have have changed
blockchain to also or advance progress
blockchain to also run software
in consensus and the way I understand
hollow chain is kind of like that
Nauticus edition of software distributed
software running but sounds something
more like torrent such as there is no
consensus it's not a blockchain there is
no consensus between all nodes but still
it can run software so it's sort of like
a data software distributed layer
without consensus something between
between the torrent and blockchain
something in between
so it's a very techy thankee part
although I know that they have
interesting governance but governance is
not their main thing but they're there I
mean they have an interest in governance
in that stock we are we are totally not
building any technological
infrastructure infrastructure by
ourselves we're using existing
infrastructures including a theorem for
the blockchain and ipfs for the data
storage
they're both distributed and then we
does that we are building infrastructure
I mean the the first goal of the stack
was to build governance infrastructure
so on top of aetherium building
infrastructure for distributed
governance or using aetherium building
infrastructure for distributed
governance of organizations or networks
or collaborations etc so this is what
these law was like the high level first
mission of tau stack
since then we've developed this full
stack of layers or technologies on top
of ethereal to support yeah so
governance of you know of generic kind
and we also developed particular
protocols for governance for but in
particularly focused around scalable
governance so not not necessarily
focusing on governance of 30 people but
more solving the biggest question of our
biggest problem of governance of 30,000
people
this is totally totally different room
in total different problems and
solutions and then on top of that we
also build particular applications for
governance of groups so our first
application with the vilification that
was more targeted at the crypto audience
it was like fully or fairly
decentralized but because of that had or
has the cost of being not very UX
friendly or user-friendly
feel the technology that the blockchain
offers if you want to have fully Center
ization you pay me with the user
experience that is still fairly shitty
and now we are launching in about two
months we are launching a new app which
is targeted at the mainstream so firstly
we are narrowing down so so far we were
not fully generic but somewhat generic
about the governance or the entities if
you want to govern with and now we are
narrowing down for social collaboration
so we are starting to focus on social
collaboration and we're also turning
into offering to the mainstream and in
order to supply a perfect UX for that we
are compromising on the level of this of
a technical civilization such that we
can reach the mainstream today and over
time we will but we are we are
decentralized compatible such that we
can over time increase the center
ization of the infrastructures as they
advanced technically and this sort of
collaboration app we call it common it's
somewhere somewhere between Facebook and
Kickstarter so you have in when you
think about it in terms of a social
action or Co action you have two worlds
which are completely unrelated today to
each other so one world is the social
media world so particularly Facebook
they're around billion billion groups of
Facebook and almost every topic if you
think of has five with the Facebook
groups so if you want to make like a
social action today the first thing you
do is just to open a Facebook group you
can quite easily get ten thousand people
to the group if you know if it's an
interesting topic you'd get tons of
conversation but sorry but not really a
co action or particular significant
action around that it's very hard to
trigger a real action on the other side
you have platform so crowdfunding
platform particularly social
crowdfunding platform for social
initiatives you have Kickstarter
GoFundMe and and many more I'd remember
there's many more social activity
crowdfunding and but but in that case
you do you do have the ability to raise
money and because of that you do have
the ability to trigger meaningful action
but it's very centralized like I raised
money from many many people and then I
need to do without money something and
since I need to you know to generate
that trust I need to raise money from
ten thousand people so I need to
generate a very high level of trust you
know to show that I can actually execute
and thus to liftoff a meaningful
campaign would take quite a lot of
talent and effort and thus we've seen
very little number of those so we are
actually combining I think that there is
no other place that combines the social
media or the social groups with the
fundraising and we are combining those
two into an app such that you can open
groups you can also make conversations
but you can also raise funds by the
donate but you can also externally but
also the members of the group basically
donate themselves and once you donate to
the group you also have the voting power
and that's where the interface between
them start to be interesting interesting
the fund is being raised by the group is
then co-managed by the group themselves
so that's the that's the app called
common so you can open a common the
comment can be to support a a global
initiative to say the Amazon it could be
a local initiative to build the park or
fight with the municipality or or former
political party or just organize the
festival or anything you can have in
mind you can share it in your social
media people can donate externally or
become member by a minimal donation and
get voting power in that group then once
you hit a minimal threshold of campaign
like a funding of minimum threshold of
funding all the group can start using
that funds in order to to pursue that
the cause they're organized around so
this is a this is basically the most of
our focus today is around code we still
continue to build the infrastructures
and code you'll develop the application
for the the board technical application
for the crypt audience but most of our
focus today is around common we're
explaining to launch the app in a closed
not lost or in a quiet but not closed
quite beta in about two to two and a
half months and and maybe a little bit
after in a public in a public launch and
we already start today to work with we
have we've already listed like dozens of
using interesting use cases and several
dozens of potential confounders so we
are starting to have those conversations
you could choose maybe the first ten
Commons that we will really support
strongly to launch them with the launch
of the app I think you're muted I am
totally
sounds like say I was really excited to
hear about the Commons app when you
brought it out because that is something
that I've had in my vision is like
Kickstarter meets meets face book as far
as you know like every other face book
feature has been spun off right Twitter
is kind of like the little blurbs and
instagrams the pictures and something
that a lot of people use Facebook for is
social justice is environmental causes
and yet there isn't hadn't really been a
like there is Kickstarter there is
patreon there are but it's not like if
you start a funding campaign on there
it's still a popularity contest it's
still about do I have enough friends to
fund it and so with a lot of community
building apps it seems that you have to
bring your community to it it sounds
like this might be different and it's
about building like the bigger community
of people and then they can find causes
that they can support or do I need to
bring friends to iterable and help me
find friends one question
well it's it's in that case that's the
big difference that's the big difference
of unifying social media and
crowdfunding let me let me try to
explain that when you go to when you go
to a crowdfunding platform do you spend
time on it you don't spend time with you
just get a share you get just a link to
the specific campaign through your
Facebook group or Facebook Twitter and
you enter to that group and usually
either you donate or not and then you
would go out maybe you own the way you
would seem to more campaigns but you're
not actually spending time on the
platform there is nothing I mean it's
not there is no activity could be done
on the platform yeah so the traffic on
the platform is very low and because of
that it's also not it's not there is no
social element to it and also that's why
it's also not mobile native none of the
none of the crowdfunding platforms are
mobile native both of them don't have
even mobile and even those who have
mobile apps such as Kickstarter it's not
the main traffic made up of traffic is
the web traffic and and the average time
a user would spend there is very very
low
you know and that's also the the
transition between networks is very low
like you transition on you can say it's
like Corona
it's like Corona how transition how
infecting it is like terror para
campaign you enter how many other
compares on average you would see and I
think that number is very very low
Facebook because it's social media
because it's social you spend a lot of
time in there
there is a lot of activity and
engagement you can do there so you can
spend hours in in there and because of
that the infecting parameter is much
higher you can go you can enter for one
group but you can see any other group
because you stay there it's something
you can be you can be there you can make
conversations four hours a day or four
minutes a day and and keep talking start
is more like I would spend there ten
minutes a months maybe so that's that's
why that's why the numbers of people
that you'd get exposure to you know
people who are already interesting these
kind of things would be much higher then
then the number you'd get in a
crowdfunding campaign and more so the
engagement factor the engagement of the
user with the platform would be much
much higher yeah it's really it's really
something between the facebooking and
Kickstarter but yes of course you can
you can still bring your friends you can
still share it you know you can share it
on Twitter and Facebook and the thing
but a big difference is the it's the
potential of virality that you have here
because of the group collaboration so if
I'm raising of Kickstarter campaign I
need to put all of the power to bring
10,000 people I need to bring and those
people who I share with most of them
would not even share it with other
friends there it's not it's not very not
very comfortable to shino to cut like
spam people but donating money to
someone where here it's totally
different I'm not donating to you if
you're up in common or if I'm open to
come right
telling you donate money to me I'm
telling you I'm putting some money into
initiative do you know join it's totally
different dynamics and and if you join
me I expect like like any network
topology out of a hundred people ninety
would be just passive donators but nah
and I will be the father the 1% will be
maybe the founders or the very super
active full-time committed but nine
percent would be very very active and
they will share it with their friends so
I don't need to bring that of people I
need to be just I need to bring just 100
people because out of the hundred will
become ten active people each of those
each of those nine will bring another
twenty out of 200 you know 20 will be
active each of those 20 will be and so
on so forth so so there is much more
continuous process you don't need to
generate a huge campaign in order to be
you know meaningful you can just as long
as you have the reputation in your all
think circles quite easily you'll be
able to just roll it out and so that is
that's what I mean by bringing my
friends right that I like I'm
comfortable starting a campaign and
putting it online but the chance is that
my friends are the ones who fund it it's
next to zero and then they you know like
do I have to rely on my social network
or just like on Facebook if I share
something and someone shares it I'm
gonna get in contact with friends that
were never my friends right like it
helped it could do marketing for me so a
user who cares about various projects is
Commons my portal to all of my project
so that I have a dashboard to my you
know that we're saving the Amazon and
we're creating this local garden and I
can follow those and be as involved as I
want and see where I'm putting my money
and vote where I want or is it more for
the single project funding and it's to
run that and I'd have to like login to
each individual one I don't know it's
totally actually the best would be just
to show you that I mean I just have it
in mock-ups in about two months it will
be free functions it's already a working
version but I don't have it
my phone let me show you some mock-ups
it's totally the second like you you you
have like if like you have both like a
browser we can Brown we can it's like a
feed of Commons you can get also of
Commons to look at but you also have
your own feed where you get all of the
activities around the commerce you
followed or the comments of your friends
and so on so forth so we just if you
want you can share screen there's a
bottom button that says share scone yeah
it's just loading the I don't know why
it's not so fastest I think that they're
actually really hit alignment with each
other and if so yeah doing solution
racing with this app would be huge yeah
I think I really think there is like a
huge be vacuum in there yeah they I'm a
super user of the app there is like 20
projects I go to open like every now and
then I think oh if I just had this app I
will open that project now and I can
bring easily 50 people 50 of my friends
to join them almost there
I don't know if it's my internet or okay
okay now I start to see the new cops
I think my dirt is pretty slow
and I mind sometimes has problems during
peak periods but seems to be doing
alright right now
yeah it's downloading woke up so don't
think like another we just keep talking
and like in two minutes I think it will
be ready alright I can um I can tell you
about our projects and what we're what
we're up to because I think either one
or the other and I'm wondering how they
how they mesh together whether we can be
using yours come June or July once it's
less beta is beta is June the end of
June right but anyway so right now we
have together Tech which is our
technology cooperative the ideas that we
own and operate technology together but
because that's how people are used to
they're used to logging onto Facebook
and like it gives me what I want and
it's free it's not they don't non tech
people don't necessarily understand what
the power of tech is and to own it so
what it looks like right now is people
with projects people with their own
individual projects most of them tech
but not all of them bringing their
projects and how can we create the
infrastructure that supports all of
those how can we create common funding
common marketing in common you know
sharing tools and doing that so that's
what together tech is right now so it's
a bunch of project folders like my
brother has wiki election which is going
to be like an IMDB for politicians but
he's doing it under like his vision
right he's not necessarily he's he's
doing as open as he can but he's taking
ownership of it he's putting the money
in and he's taking the risk and he's
doing all of that and so we're trying to
figure out how to do that with the
project holders and then my project
under that is solution raising which is
a I'm not a tech person I don't know how
to code but my brain comes up with
technology that would help the world
constantly which is how I'm like we need
a technology cooperative so we can just
create the best ideas and fund them
together and basically do it clément
right like fund them together and decide
what do we want this to actually be not
my vision what does our vision of a food
app look like what does our vision of an
education have to look like that isn't
one person or a tiny group of people's
vision and so solution raising is my
near my most recent iteration of this
how do we create solutions together so
it's an hour-long conversation we've had
nine of them so far and we spend 15
minutes talking about what is currently
done in that space 15 minutes talking
about our ideal version of the future
and then a half an hour talking about
what we could do right now if we had
10,000 people and $100,000 and so we've
done one on transportation we've done
one on food we're gonna do one on
packaging and materials this Wednesday
last Wednesday was on fragility and but
but easy just just understand is it is
it the technical solution or right now
is it's a group it's a particular group
thinking about this or it's anyone who
wants to come and have a conversation
there's there's been between I don't
think I haven't done one with less than
three people so between three and about
six people is what we have them with
ideally the idea is to come up with a
actual process that involves 10,000
people so we can't with an amazing food
up but what I want my previous iteration
was idea Cafe was an idea on how can we
have a hundred people a thousand people
having a conversation that's actually
generative and so solution raising is
only those five people having that
conversation but if there's a way to
have let's say a hundred people broken
into twenty five groups of four and
having all of them have that
conversation and then taking notes and
then you vote on which one's the best
idea right and then you make that one
better
socializing right now is a conversation
or it's a organization it is just a
conversation but eventually yes the
ideas we would create tools for
conversation because there's look we
have these nine different sectors that
we we've been able to eat talking for
one hour come up with a potential real
world changing solution in an hour right
we didn't make it we didn't we don't
have the ten thousand people we don't
have the hundred thousand dollars but
ten thousand people equals a hundred
thousand dollars they each put ten
dollars in so hearing your idea for car
they the Commons I'm like oh can I put
and I a solution raising so let's say
have education and then work through
that process how do we know what
actually comes out the other end cuz I'm
more interested in that
I don't I honestly don't care what
education app we make I know if we
create it together that's gonna be way
better than any of the for-profit ones
that are out there cuz it can start less
good and we can iterate it and make it
better and better with agile with agile
right nothin and having the people
involved that are using it and hopefully
that brings the UX up because people
like me need good UX like I'm not going
to use it unless it's simple and
beautiful and if it's open source it's a
little too complex for me generally
speaking most open source stuff even
though I love open source the idea that
got them yeah so I agree I mean so you
cannot you can open a comment to launch
an app that benefits the public rather
than the its shareholders you can you
can you can comment of things about
education solutions or yeah basically
anything we we right now we don't
provide the technology for the
conversation the conversation is just
simple conversation not particular
conversation might think this will
develop over time or you can also have
you know if you have if you want to have
a more complex conversation you can also
have it outside yeah we do provide
technology for simple conversation in
the app but not like fancy or very you
know special conversation for large
crowds it's it's very similar to the way
you do conversation Facebook you can
write posts and each has its own common
thread and and we both of the app it
provides the ability to raise proposals
funding proposals and then to you have
conversations on those proposals and
then people can vote and if it's gonna
if they're approved then you know the
funding is automatically going to the
beneficiary school I guess that would be
is what order does this take like what
order is it take place it like under the
under the umbrella of the Amazon right
there's tons of people who want to save
the Amazon so I put out the Amazon
campaign like you said and then it has
it gets 10,000 people I'm just going to
say $100,000 that's where my mind is now
do we decide what to do with that money
or do I say no I know how to save the
Amazon
we involve the the local indigenous
people they have a policy we want to
raise $100,000 to do this ABCD and then
fundraise money for it so that's a
really good question
you can do both but I think it's it's at
least at the beginning I would expect
that better Commons would place agendas
before raising money at least initial
agenda the agenda can then be iterated
by the common so part of that just as
you can just as you can propose a
proposal to ten people to vote on that
that will trigger funding you can make a
proposal to change the agenda so you can
propose a change an agenda you can vote
on the agenda constantly changing and
amend the event agenda so I think they
will change but I think that the better
common at least at the beginning will
start miss the founder I will not just
say Amazon will be too vague I would say
I think they you know the biggest thing
we can do is to buy buy lands and
protect them from deforestation so my
agenda is to basically buy lands this is
like the big goal and for that we want
to raise ten million dollars and I'm
suggesting do it in four steps stage
number one two or three four and so on
so forth like I would be like a mission
agenda and I think that would be much
easier to raise funds to even though it
might change the agenda later I mean the
commode might change the agenda but
still it will be much easier to a great
people to into action around the
particular agenda even if it's per
Marshall mm-hmm absolutely so um that
that part which I kind of saw in the in
the presentation that you you sent me
was that you can break down like you
said the by and they the wine the lands
in the Amazon in two different tasks and
those tests are kind of broken down as a
project like can I get help with that is
that what the crowd does also or do I
have to do that as my other initial
campaign but then people can change it
alter it
eventually they the common decides how
to use the fan so
come on so I mean the common could
decide on each each and every step or
each and every funding practically I
think at least it's in the beginning I
think better Commons would have either
narrowed down agendas so like I'll give
you example let's say we want to do we
want to do a common for supporting women
[Music]
enterpreneurship s-- and intrapreneurs a
it to basically give grants for women
entrepreneurs to start very very early
startups before pre pre proceed just
grunts so wanna raise by this would not
be like 10,000 people it will be more
like maybe 500 investors more investors
that will raise I don't know $100,000
500 people each put putting two thousand
dollars and and generating that grant
and then the the the activity is very
very narrow down basically the common
let's say just those 500 rest are just
speak every month they pick the winning
grantee and and because of the mode of
action is very very defined it's very
easy to iterate on it so I came for
example but basically what I'm saying is
that either I think that successful cons
at least in the beginning before we
developed more infrastructures for
decentralized project management I think
that the successful comments are either
gonna have very particular narrowed down
mode of action that would be pretty fine
in the beginning so that it will be easy
to agree what to do next or it will
delegate power for example let's say we
do a common to run a festival so just
local local or if or a farmer markets
market so we raise the money around the
cause but then the actual project
management of the cause is quite
intricate so someone likely the founder
maybe some others are offering
themselves
I will run the project management I will
make it very transparent
you know I will ask for each budget that
will ask again again I will you know
present the result and present the
expenses but eventually I will run the
project management now the common can
fire me at any time and not giving me
the next budget or give it somewhere
else so yes I think at late stage later
I think like you need a year or two
years from now I think we would have a
tooling for this centralized project
management right now because we don't I
think either the motive faction will be
sort of like templated we call that
template that we have we've kind of like
categorize different templates for motor
factions for Commons or delegated I'd
say I'm so happy for this app to exist
you put three pots for now I hope that
it's user-friendly enough that I can use
it but I'm pretty good to figuring it
out unlike the other ones that I won't
even mention that I'm not a fan of every
time someone brings them up like no not
again not again I don't want to have to
go and learn that but this sounds like
both the mission and so one of the
questions I have is when you raise money
so let's say we were able to do a
solution raising I managed to find
10,000 people who care about education
they each put ten dollars in we went
through this project we created an app
that was awesome for education who owns
it the 10,000 people evenly is that all
decided during the process or it's owned
by the common it's owned by the co and
that's where the blockchain comes in
it's literally it's not sitting in
anyone's like it's controlled by the
common mmm-hmm by the tennis people via
via gov the governance mechanism we had
a vote but it's not owned by any one of
them it's owned by the common and
including so so my I know other people
could have the opposite problem but the
idea that 10,000 people let's say we
created $100,000 saying there they each
know they put in ten dollars and then it
goes up to a million dollars they're
like well my money just times to ten no
it didn't because the idea is more
people came on board you're not creating
something to gain a profit you're
creating something for purpose and so
the next 10,000 to come on board have as
much say as the previous ones right that
it's not you're not deluding it
because you're if you're bringing your
ideas on board awesome right like you're
the next yo it's a social media that's
like more people come on board better it
is but I also on there have no ownership
like in a Kickstarter account right like
it's like listen this is ours it's the
Commons and it's so is Commons owned by
the common then you mean you asking
you're asking if the Commons app is all
yeah yeah eventually that - yeah I mean
that right now it's it's I mean we
that's that's where I told you that we
are compromising with the technologies
right now technology is still somewhat
centralized partly decentralized
somewhat centralized and we will be
running that centralized we're like part
the servers but eventually it will be
fully decentralized yes the food the app
itself will be decentralized and
controlled by the Commons exactly mm-hmm
I'm excited
yeah I can show you yeah right now we
start with one man one vote and simple
we can also do variation on that what we
want to start simple
let me yes sure screen it all should pop
up at the corner I'll have to add it so
you can let me know and you want about
it it'll like be a third participant
there you go let me to add it so you can
see it or can you see it on yours so
that is right now I'm just showing us
you can put it up on your screen and
then I'll put it up if that makes sense
yeah please good all right all right
yeah we see the movies here to be easier
yeah so so for example as I said before
like you have this sort of like the
notion of exploring Commons so you can
see sort of Commons and you know the
data of those Commons the funding goal
how much was fun founded already and in
the timeline for the first funding goal
the funding doesn't end at a timeline
but this is kind of like the talent to
complete at least some amount otherwise
the money goes back to the donors
anyway so this is this is one part there
is like the creation of the common which
is very easy just just step by step
creation of the common like helping you
to understand what economy is and how to
how to build it to have like like the
common in the description just some data
about the funding the agenda of the
common in the beginning we would like to
help co-founders you know to build good
agendas solid content then of course
resolves the log in creating account
yeah member profile or each member
profile you can see each member you can
see you know the comma the Commons this
is this would be changing that was
commerce the commerce site that is she's
part of the proposal she made each
common would have its own mini profile
that that you could see just by hovering
I mean just by clicking in the browser
and then you can enter it and see the
full agenda of the common you can see
the conversation that the company is
having so the the conversation the
funding proposals this you know although
opera proposal right now the
conversation looks like this this is the
conversation like so like instead like
something like Facebook basically post
by the way these are not yet some of
some of them are designed something some
of them are not final yet like this one
for example would still be designed I
mean all of them will be redesigned in
terms of like more flavor more better
design but yeah but many of them are
already in terms of why friends already
completed so this to be like a
conversation commenting on each
conversation yeah I would seem to be
able to see the members of the common
the new members that are requesting to
join even the approval of new members
would be decentralized so the common
each each each new member is approved by
the common you
you have an agenda you have a course of
action for example here in the course of
action you might be detailing the way
that you're suggesting the college
should act with now of course once you
once you have the funding in the COBOL
can vote and approve anything so this
course of action is not binding but it
since all people join the common with
this course faction
it's very likely that they're supported
so it's kind of like will already be
sort of like the default yeah so this is
yeah this will be like funny proposal
how funny puzzle will look like here
I'll see the cost at the top that says
200 is that like per person or is that
what they need overall no there's there
is no nothing nothing here happens per
person it's basically by the way I think
the word cost is not good because these
are still not is haven't yet been
finalized but basically this is just the
amount of funds that the the requester
is asking from the common so it's always
coming the body get gets into the
comment by the individuals once the
money got into the common the money is
owned and managed and controlled by the
entire come on and then you can request
money from the company in order to do
something for that for the benefit of
that goal so you can run a campaign and
ask for the cost of the campaign and
then run the campaign on behalf of the
common benefit for the benefit of common
or you can purchase land or yeah I mean
you can be a nonprofit that is basically
purchasing land for that come on or or
or it can be a you know buying buying
buying seeds to make a big planting
activity or whatever the cause that you
were promoting to begin with
do you have a picture of like what my
dashboard would look like not as
somebody who has a project but as
somebody who's involved with many
projects uh okay now I understand your
question yeah so we this is so firstly
there are two things that are somewhat
related but not exactly a dashboard but
this is a good question I'll tell you
what something about that so this here
you can see all of the cones that you
can explore like the suggested comments
but you'll also see your comments my
commands mm-hmm so you can basically see
you can scroll between all of the
comments that you are part of and each
of them you can see kind of like the
high level details of it but it's not
really a dashboard and the other thing
that is somewhat similar is a feed this
is my field where you see a stream of
activity in all of your the covers that
you are part of and this is exactly
exactly a good question which we talked
about I mean whether whether this feels
more like a dashboard view or like a
feed view and I think I think feed view
is more it's a good question means
question we had a lot of debates about I
mean feed is usually used for something
that has a very high stream so social
activity conversations very large groups
usually tend to fit more like feeds and
dashboard is something that you is maybe
slightly smaller and more organized
groups more like running a company for
example would be a dashboard so here
it's somewhere in between because it's
somewhat in some in one in some sense
it's organizations but it's the same
time it's very very big organizations in
many organizations and many
conversations and many proposals so I'm
not sure if dashboard would fit so but
this is a big question we had actually a
lot of good recession about it whether
we should have a feed view or a
dashboard view
and eventually word with a feed view but
this is something we will discover maybe
we will discover that fetus is not the
right structure and we'll change it to a
dashboard but wondering like how the
reason I'm interested in dashboard is I
want to know it's if I'm involved in
many projects where they are right which
ones like the next one to launch what am
i voting on what's up for voting on all
of these if I care about voting so I can
kind of take a more peripheral you know
like put 10 bucks a month into like 10
different campaigns but take more of a
peripheral right right
so the yeah and so firstly you do have
you do have the data so for example when
you enter when you enter in each comment
and you have your comments right you
have your comments and then when you
enter the common when you enter this you
go over here and here you can see all
the proposals that right now are active
in that comment for example or later
this is this would be the history the
thing that were already approved here
history and I mean and later you'll also
see the statuses of the activity that
was triggered by that approval so in
some sense this is the dashboard of the
comment of each comment separately but
there is no one dashboard for all of
your comments so there each H cone has
its own dashboard of where it is right
now but it's not there is no one
centralized dashboard for all of them
and that's why the feed gives you an
also later notification you do have
notifications the feed basically brings
to you the more all of the most
interesting activities around your cones
so for example the the new proposal that
you could vote on or I mean there will
be Y my fitness with modifications so
you get notified all of the proposals
that around your common that you are
waiting for your voting so basically the
FINA notification will aggregate all the
activity towards you rather than you
sitting on the stack that's a difference
between a static dashboard and a
streamlined notification or acting or
feed
so but well yeah okay so again so this
is it this is a good question maybe
maybe we'll find out - what is it better
view mm-hmm because I know like I'm
thinking of the two feeds that I know
which your Facebook and Twitter and
under neither of them are great from a
user standpoint right they're both there
to make Twitter and Facebook money and
and eyeballs they're not there to
actually help me get my message out or
find out what's happening into people's
lives I care about or something and so
um I guess like how do I know like
what's in my feed right like on Twitter
if you don't see it right away and no
one's gonna see it right like it's about
kind of the instantaneous whereas
Facebook's kind of kind of the opposite
where it's about the number of eyes
who've seen it and engaged in it so is
Twitter but it's different like Facebook
you'll get people liking stuff and
commenting four days later that
generally doesn't happen on Twitter but
either option I can click on the thing
in my feed and go to their profile and I
could see everything they said if I
wanted to so it's still Ritter but I'm
running their note and do that unless
it's in my feed right so likewise here
you once you click on the comment it can
go and see or think about all of
everything happens in the common the
feed is kind of organized I mean we
haven't yet drilled down into the what
what you know what and how things should
flow in the feed but generally the
purpose is to show you the most
interesting I mean here we don't have
any issue with eyeballs so the purpose
is not to create the most eyeballs the
correct purpose it's create the most
engagement for the thing that you want
to engage me yeah and so what are the
ways that I can engage as someone who if
I'm just a user and I'm not gonna be
putting in any campaigns let's say I'm
just like a funder on Kickstarter as
opposed to someone putting out a
Kickstarter campaign I can put money
into things I can fund it I can vote on
the things once I'm part of that
community and right you can you can make
so there are there are many so there are
multiples usable steps that you can like
sort of like a levels did you get engage
with the minimum level is just being a
funder you just
the stuff right the next the next level
which is the easiest is just voting so
just voting on your preferences of usage
of the funds so you just get the feed is
getting you know the more interesting
composers and you're voting yes/no on
them another level is the conversation
you can read conversation but you can
also engage in conversation you can say
what you think about things and engage
in conversation yet another level is
making proposals you understand the
agenda of the conversation of the of the
of the common so you have an idea how to
use the funds and you want to actually
be an active member of the common so
you're making proposal to get funded and
use that funds in some ways and then the
highest level is if being a founder to
open your your own come on so there it
is like a very you know a for example in
kickstarter either your your founder or
a funder that's it and there is no
nothing in between it also found there
is a very high very high threshold
because as explained before it wouldn't
take you an hour to open a campaign will
take you a months and if $50,000 a
effort to open a good complaint or three
months actually and here because of the
fact that you don't need to bring the
ten thousand people by yourself you just
need to bring the first hundred I would
say that you would work an hour or a day
to open the common and because that you
see many many more comments so so
basically there is many activities you
can do between just funding and founding
a newcomer there's many activities in
between you can do and because of that
you can be much more engaged gonna ask
once you guys are in beta and it's
actually out in the world and people can
go to it um like if I had a head
campaign on there and I posted it on
Facebook and on Twitter do people need
to sign up for the site in order to
participate if they want to donate or so
that's a good question so we are going
to have
so basically the we are going mobile
native so the we're firstly developing
the sorry mobile first first developing
the mobile app so if they would like to
have the full functionality that we need
to download the app but we're going to
already the first version we are going
to have also a web page that when you
share with your friends it will go to
the web page so they can see the agenda
of the common and everything they could
see already there they can read
everything in the web page so they don't
need to login sign-in or download the
app or anything
and then once they were to FUD
they would need so this is still not
final I mean eventually in there
definitely the second version they would
be able to fund directly from that web
page and maybe it's not yet financed
maybe in the first release they would
only be able to breathe and in order to
find they will need to get into the into
the app but I'm trying to enter also
that funding from the web page into the
first release they depend on timelines
but basically yes eventually yes you'll
be able to fund and do stuff directly
from the web page although once you want
to become a member and for example make
vote and all that you do need to sign it
because you are basically getting your
your identifiers your your vote so yeah
and that was one of my other big
questions especially since there is the
voting process in it and it's one person
one vote
what if you guys have in place at the
moment for making sure it's one person
one vote but if I have a hundred dollars
and it's ten dollars for the campaign
instead if he donated a hundred and
getting a vote I signed up for ten
accounts and have ten votes right it's
right right right right so so right now
I mean right now the signup is very easy
it's just with your Google and just with
your Google account so yes you can
generate several accounts but hey it's
not that easy to generate multiple
accounts Google comm you can generate
maybe three about ten is already if you
can generate them but but that if they
are totally fake then if you remember
when you are trying to become member you
it's not enough that you are donating
you also it's like a Facebook group with
administration but the administration is
separate so you're requesting to join
and then the code is is is approving you
but just like in any Facebook group if
they see just now you must be person
with no details and doesn't seem like a
real person there is I mean it's not
likely that the comment will approve it
how does that work cuz I mean I'm really
happy that you guys are doing Google
sign-in because it's one of the issues I
have with one of the other things is
they don't do that every time someone
wants me to use it I have to have a new
account like this is not helpful this is
no elbow um but I know what that looks
like for Facebook because it says you've
been a member since X you can see how
many friends they have actually don't
know what that looks like for Google
even though I use Google to sign in to
almost everything like how do you know
whether something real with their Google
account that's that's true that's true
so that actually that's one of the so in
fact I mean this is one of the I would
say a first edition for the second for
the second version I mean what I see
here is just the first release what is
missing here is just what you're talking
about which is social verification and
and social occasion sauce just for
timelines sort of infinity they enter
the the first release but I'm almost
sure it will enter that the beta
familiar with bright ID I'm familiar
with the name I never looked at it in
detail but basically yeah we also just
build we've developed is something I
think similar but but basically social
implication will could be signing
signing up with Facebook mm-hmm and then
you like showing your profile like
showing you that you're real yeah yeah
so right now it's signing a sign up with
Google but it could be I mean I think I
think that one option is that we will be
able to sign up with your Facebook or or
at least integrate your Facebook such
that your profile will be visible and
your friends and all that mm-hmm
um I mean I'm really interested in all
this stuff and how it works cuz it's all
the things that you vote with my brain
but as far as like you'd said before
with the approval that it's it's
like the group decides on approval I am
on Facebook and it generally is the
admin's who say yes or no but only one
person it's like I could say yes and
then the other man's could go and kick
them out but like it's a lot harder
process is it like are we voting on it
then I'm like yes I think they're real
person and it's a percentage or a
certain number of people have to say yes
versus the no how does the group decide
it's it's basically there is there is a
whole decision protocol for whether it's
joining new members or whether it is for
funding
here is a decision protocol it's in so
basically I mean it's it's simple and
complex I'll tell you the simple part of
it simple part is that a if vote is
being approved if enough made for a vote
to be approved a majority of those who
votes needs to say yes this is easy is
it on the stand so majority of those who
of those who voted need to say yes but
there is also an additional condition
behind the scene that needs to take
place and this is like the main of our
our invention or mega for technology
which is to ensure this vote has is
representative so let's say you have 100
people and only 5 people voted and 3
said yes to said now how do you know
that these 5 people actually represent
the hundred because here at all and so
we've invented this we've invented this
extra technology that's supposed to in a
way verify when a local decision is
actually representative of the global
but the user the user would not see
anything about that okay so that's like
if I'm trying to decide on creating a
park in Vancouver it needs to be
Vancouver people doing that if it's if
it's a local project and you can't have
someone from like Seattle or Mumbai all
right yeah but it's not it's not going
to happen like that it's just it's a job
graph is just a matter of like again
like you have a hundred four hundred
people need a common and just five voted
and ensuring that those five actually
representative of the hundred that did
not vote and of course you cannot well
in some sense
technology read the minds of the hundred
so we did with information that it has
the way that it happens is that actually
people are making estimates or guesses
or predictions whether they think the
votes are representative or not so
instead of being quorum that like in
order for that for this this thing to be
decided on we need sixty percent of the
people to vote your the numbers in so
matter it's whether that number is
actually representative if one hundred
percent of people vote it so try and get
so there is let's say the five people
voted or ten people voted out of the
hundred you are you're a you want to
know that these hot teller are likely
representing for the hundred I am NOT
explaining you how how that happens but
basically what what happens there is
that some other people do you don't know
about it you don't you're not aware
about about run some other people who
are do that further for-profit they are
estimating if in each proposal they're
estimating if the proposal is
representative or not and they have ways
to do that but the but the way that you
ensure that they are doing it correctly
is that when they do these guesses or
there's these predictions they they risk
some money if they if they're failing if
they're making wrong guesses they're
losing that money if they're making good
guesses they're they're earning more
money so that they have an incentive to
run all sort of tests and algorithms to
verify as much as possible that that
votes are representative basically there
are the guard guardians of the voting
process okay yeah it's I'm not getting
into too much details there but sorry
magic algorithm works for me exactly
it's a it's actually magic algorithm
plus people yeah perfect perfect that's
that's always what I invoke the magic
algorithm that I have no idea how to
make it exist
someone can have it I've heard people
come up with them before nakatsu bases
yeah I know I'm like I've said many
times I'm very excited for this to exist
in the world and like all technology
technology that we own individually is
risky because it's like well is it does
it take off are there enough people does
it make enough money does it make and I
think anything like on the Dow stack and
and holo chain has part of that figured
out that like well it's it didn't of
itself brings people together and then
figures out the funding model but then
that's what I'm passionate about is how
do we oh I don't I care less about
owning the technology together or more
about being able to use the technology
and Trust it and that generally just
needs only that together or the comments
Oneidas you can see full transparency on
the finances and governments and make
changes and see what the process is to
make changes yeah so that's it it's a
little bit late here I guess I should
head to bed yeah it was great chatting
with you
I'm sure likewise if you if you're I
mean if you have I don't know comas in
mind like we're starting the
conversation with founders already know
if you if you're medical I mean if you
have comas that you think that I mean if
you have project that you think would be
relevant to be launched as comments I
would love to connect it with the guy
that's in charge of that you know theme
yeah absolutely I mean I don't I'm
interested in the process of how can we
get 10,000 people together and actually
create something together so that
everyone feels like they're involved in
it to the degree which is it sounds
exactly like what you're doing that
people can fund it but not necessarily
vote if they don't want to or they can
vote and they can be sure involved as
they need to be and the group itself can
decide on things that the founder didn't
necessarily decide on I love all of that
um I don't know how I would create a
common because what I'm trying to do is
the solution raising so it's like a
solution raising on solution raising how
do we get 10,000 people together how do
we get $100,000 and that's more like
this already solves that but I would be
interested in doing any Commons on any
of the things we've done a solution
raising like education like food and I
think it would be more along the lines
of asking a question like when I did the
food one it was the question was like
how do we
feed ourselves right how do we be
inclusive of food and so something like
that we're like that point of the tech
the app is to solve that for us right
how do I feed myself how do I feed
myself nutritious delicious food for the
least amount of money figuring that out
collectively and then and then going
through the process of creating that
like I I'm not short on ideas I guess
what I'm saying it's more about like how
could it be made into a Commons because
I don't in any way care about owning it
I want it to be owned by the comments
like I want it to be something that we
feel together is ours and not that it's
mine or yours or you don't need any
individual or tiny group of people it's
like how do we actually create this so
yes I'd like to be put in touch with the
person and maybe they can help figure
out what that would look like and even
if I don't put something on the Commons
I'm sure they'll be something that comes
out of that okay so yeah I mean if you
if there's anything coming up let me
know anyway I'll make the introduction
with a guy called I and yeah just let me
know if I mean if you want to use the
recording for any any other purpose it's
gonna be the next question is we can
stop recording and then I was gonna ask
you what we can do with this record Ian
so this give me once again goodbye