and what I really get to sense is that
there's more what the way that you're
revealing authenticity is it's more like
a way that I can be in the world where I
in my concern in the way I take up my
concerns that I find myself in and
address like as an embody being as
others as my projects all those things
is with the kind of do I really take it
up and live as if I am the world world
itself right it's a how and it's a kind
of it's a quality of the concern in and
it has to do with the kind of presence
of mind and a humility and an openness
that is it's trying to find that fitting
response that's somewhere between what I
uniquely bring and what others uniquely
bring and the particular unique
circumstances in situations it's a
conspiring of many different elements
hello welcome back so wait you just
watch was the very end of this part 1 of
a video series I'm doing with with Corey
Anton and on his book suffered an
authenticity so I'll talk a little bit
about that in a second but first some
housekeeping so as I've mentioned before
that circling Institute my company where
I teach and do classes is doing
everything I'm not lying right now
because of the coronavirus and we've
just been inspired by how well it's
worked by starting our first online
course in which is called the artist
circling which is training to facilitate
deep deep conversations a little bit
like the ones the ones that you've been
watching on my channel and and you know
my dialogue here with Cory we also have
a weekend coming up next weekend that
this coming week over the weekend after
that it's in that to will be online at
Saturday and Sunday from 7 and 10 a.m.
until 7:00 we also dropped
events and links for all that is down
below all right also if you're
interested in doing one-on-one coaching
with me please email me and that's below
as well
all right so authenticity and self or
cellphone authenticity I'm just gonna go
ahead and I'm just gonna go and read you
a piece a little very basically
summarizing paragraph of the book the
Corey wrote says as a habit of
passionate responsibility authenticity
is the practice of openness by which we
are called to feeding responses
authenticity
therefore reveals itself as a kind of
play
it is an or ordered request and a
blissfully seduced obedience more simply
addressed it is a dutiful autonomy one
liberated by indebtedness so as you can
see with that he really goes deep into
authenticity but in this book he in
order to really reveal authenticity in
an original way and authentically he
really takes on very very deep notions
perhaps the deepest notions that there
are for us are very ontology our very
existence in the world and what I really
like about this book and I really like
about the way that Cory thinks is is
that really get to sense with him that
there's a gratitude from which he speaks
from and from which he thinks from
there's a there's a line and Heidegger
all often talks about thinking as
thinking thinking and thinking and they
really get that sense with Cory that
there's a liberated release meant if you
will of gratitude and a sense of
violent well not even volunteered but
grateful indebtedness to having existed
and it really comes through in his
thinking and in that he thinks in the
way thinks the way rights and the way he
was in this interview with me so no
further ado here's Corey and me talking
about his book self had not been to City
link for that is below okay hey Corey we
just jump right into his there's a lot
of fun so one of the things I wanted to
do is is actually take this take this
video and really hone in on your book
self puttin authenticity and in what I'd
like to do is is do do three videos we
have to be careful because it's like I
think if we go into one section we can
go out for ten hours on each section
because it's so packed right there's a
lot there but then what I'd love to do
is do the one your your other book the
what is it the one that significance in
it yeah and then yeah and then the one
after that the the latest one that you
have coming up did it come out no it's
this is why is still in motion right
right well you know I I would have to
say it's it's part of what I'm
interested in understanding right cuz
because I have the experience of reading
your book right and it is quite a I
actually have had quite an experience of
reading it the experience of
understanding the things that you're
writing about has me wonder what it was
like to write it right and I and I get
this sense there's a lot in the
vocabulary that you use the way the
perspectives that you define and come
from and a lot of the language that you
do there's
lot I have always this feeling of like
kind of stretching long write multiple
dimensions of like something refraining
back and it this this notion of
stretching and tethering and long gating
and a lots of vocabulary like that and
it had me wonder about the retaining we
are waiting yeah and and it was really
interesting because each it was almost
when I was going through it and then you
know writing different things down and
things I wanted to talk about with you
from the book wearing there realizes
like almost we could read we could pick
a paragraph out and read it and the
whole book is contained in that
paragraph right in a lot of respects
it's like because I and I think that's
revealing of the other of the
perspective that you're unfolding in the
book in about the self and about the
connection between the South in the
world and the world in the earth and of
being there's a there's a whole there's
a holistic or you reveal a whole a
holistic miss that I think really flies
in the well is to fly in the face but it
it highlights it highlights certain
perspectives right that really that
don't don't really you know when it the
right thing like materialism and and in
like extreme post-modernism
it was very heavily influenced by you
know the really fine degree and people
like certainly of 30 Bateson but you
don't in a totally different light I
would say in some way because I was
adopted I think I've always had the
sense of seeing myself as more a child
of the universe or a child of the earth
and a somehow part of the earth and you
know when I was young I had had various
I don't know I guess wild transfer
experiences that were three profound and
you know I think there
just realisation that and that that
we're inherently of the herbs with
something that's doing we've emerged out
of it and and you pay attention to your
experience you start to notice the
different ways that there are features
of the world they can't really show
themselves without your presence without
your being that it's part of the world
is what it is because you're there
making this you know it's certainly
everybody say like my hand right here
you know how much about my hand is what
you're doing
it's not to play the skeptics game like
we're making it up or like you know I'm
not asking where your are they're
dragons and your socks you've given
something it's that when you do say the
hand it's the lane which is allowing us
to focus our attention and to sort of
this thing we're going to call my hand
and so rather than the question of you
know is there a world beyond experience
you should have asked how is the world
that we do experience partly what the
world is because of us of our capacities
of our worldly capacities whether
they're a badge nation or in motion or
the senses you know I think a lot of the
book also will be influenced by people
like Heidi read Sartre you know I think
for them the the emotions their forms of
kazuma
of an atonement to the world their their
understanding of one's situatedness in
certain things and they're not
disclosure that you could achieve
exactly in articulate speech we're going
to disentangle things but feel a certain
way it's disclosing something about you
and the world in your current
relatedness situations totally and I
think what I what I appreciated about
the book right is
is is that it really through reading its
I dare anyone to read it and then try to
think of themselves as an entity like a
like a thing in a in a world amongst
other things it is it you really really
open that connectedness up with things
right I mean I think your true leaders
were the absolute body very influential
I think that's a wonderful book anyone
wants to the other one you know turning
stuff and having that in the hierarchy
of
this is our supreme just supreme to
understand how one is integrated all the
way in from really not being anything at
all to just a certain level of analysis
a bunch of chemicals and particles
within a certain one sort of disappears
into the aggregate known as humanity
just disappears into something like you
know earth from a distance is very
strange and for these workers this is so
fast right like a robust account of what
it needs to be or oneself as of the
earth tipping I think Watson say just as
extreme flowers with people's yeah we've
come out of the world and then you know
it was we come out of the earth and then
the world comes out of us and so it's
like we're not really on the planet the
planet yeah it is funny you were talking
about before I really got that sense of
when you were when you when he talked
about how University was really this
place where you blossomed right from
being in the woods in in in in Wisconsin
it's like yeah tell us a little bit
about where you're from and and what
girl
was like and you know I was adopted by
an older brother I think he was adopted
by a Native American and he had a lot of
fun you know I definitely was an 18 year
old drinking state in Wisconsin and I
grew up by Alpine Valley anybody knows
what that is
you know what troops look billion shows
you sound police tons a little bit must
muffled is there something you do with
your mic I could try that is that it's
about the same that's the best thing
okay let me cook I can do that is that
better that's good
yeah that's good I guess I would say
that you know I had 12 years of Catholic
school I never had anything when I was
about 16 I was thinking about the priest
I was at least considering it roughly
and I'd worked at a monastery for years
and a lot of you know interesting people
from around the world and they would you
know say grace and nine or ten languages
every mealtime and inspiring but end of
it all I ended up be two kids in my high
school who refused confirmation you only
came down to this belief in life after
death I was like well I don't know it
just doesn't really make sense and that
there was just all kinds of questions
that I had and I think there were there
were people who went all just phone he
confirmed that you'll be happy in and I
think that for me it was interested that
was part of a path that later in my life
I started to ask you know why did I care
so much you know not wanting to say
something like I didn't believe in some
ways but
ended up deepening my my beliefs and
other ways just in like the realization
that it meant something to me to not go
through the motions that I thought that
it was strange that there were some of
my young classmates going well no one
really believes any of this stuff man
just go dude make your parents happy why
are you making a stain I'm just like I'm
not gonna do that and I think the as I
said the older I got is I got into more
college age I think I started to ask a
lot more questions about you know what
are the possible places for a robust
spirituality amidst acceptance of
science amidst acceptance of death you
know how can we find real fellowship and
community in the fact that there is just
one community that we need I think we're
all dying together and I think sometimes
religious opposition of language dozin
people in here all this kind of stuff it
doesn't help
yeah right so there was a wait so you
were adopted
like were you adopted as an infant er
yeah five weeks and you like grew up
adopting I know I was adopted in the
same way my name didn't my parents never
sent me yeah they say I think there were
so many times on through my life where I
thought things along a line of like
anyone could be my bear so there was a
sense of being raised in a more open way
by by the world itself I mean like my
parents couldn't answer so like 40
here's a crazy story I mean I posted a
video on this film I my adoption story
but uh something like that but he had 40
I had met my biological mother so I got
married to my wife and she's Greek and
she was saying oh you know you should
find out about your biological mother so
it was a closed adoption but I got a
lawyer and and it was pretty amazing
because you know for my for my my birth
mother
you know she her mom died when she was a
teenager and her dad got remarried too
early for her taste and she got
rebellious went up to Madison got
pregnant and ate me up for adoption for
her this was you name the negative
emotion it was embarrassing
it was worrisome it was expensive it was
filled with weight and again shame all
this kind of stuff
where's my parents who couldn't
otherwise have children this was the
most giving generous loving thing that a
person could do and so when I went and
met my biological mother
my parents had put together this huge
package of stuff from me growing up
pictures of me riding ponies in the
parade and you know pictures of me at
birthday parties and and they wrote a
big letter about how much they loved her
and how much they want her to know how
much her generosity is probably painful
as it was it's really appreciated and I
mean it was a really heavy moment you
know I mean I got to meet my biological
mother we went to that we met in Chicago
at the Chicago Art Museum and then we
went out to the Russian Tea Room held
hands and then we talked a little bit
and I was it don't really have any
relationship with her you know I just
wanted to say thank you and I did and it
must have been wondering about like was
was it a trip to see likeness in the
face the first time I never experienced
family resembled so it was pretty trippy
I bet that was you know I think the
other thing is that it it didn't shatter
it but it organized some of my self
fashioning you can do anything with
self-discipline because I was such a bad
grade school student I suppose student
and we're so unlike my brother and the
rest of my family and you know I I
discovered books on my own I mean
they're not really intellectual they
never question my love their love
through music beautiful loving again
about theirs really but I think I
dedicate my book to them to them I mean
it was but I think that I
just very very different and I
discovered it and I think I imagined
that it was me getting up early and
hitting the books and study and I did I
studied really hard but when I met my
biological mother I think I ended up
accepting that I might have had a little
bit more biological or genetic
advantages from the get-go and I think
my modeling of look anyone can just get
up and study and do it all in any
transform themselves
it got modified a little bit I still
believe in the transformative power of
study and but I also you know I've been
humbled into you know realizing that I
have now I learned about her she was an
educator and she was you know she was an
English teacher and I have two
half-brothers one who has a Harvard PhD
in musicology and one works for the HUD
program in DC so you know there's a
sense in which I ended up going wow it's
kind of you know I think we can admit
that you know there there are gonna be
certain kinds of natural aptitudes that
people have and that was humbling for me
so I think I wanted to believe in my my
self-made story up until about age 40
right well I imagine is kind of like
athletics a bet I mean I think about I
noticed I noticed people who are really
high IQ right it's almost like that they
can they can grab with their mind right
whereas it's but I have a feeling it's
pretty it's pretty similar on some level
like I you and all that kind of stuff is
pretty similar to court like the ability
to be highly coordinated with your
little audience sports to stuff like
that yeah so I think the other thing too
is like my dad is such an amazing it
wasn't amazing he's just amazing he was
one of those very rare three sport
collegiate athletes when he went to
college on I think a scholarship for
baseball but he played college
basketball and football you ended up one
point he was in the like the
Philadelphia Eagles training family just
incredible athlete and I know a juggler
juggle five balls and I think I'm pretty
good roller skater kind of stuff that
was never an athlete I was never ball
team I was he was great great like a
coordination I just sports were just not
my thing you know
I was horrible a concert kid that's
crazy experience and do you remember do
you remember when when the world of
ideas
and of what has you as a professor today
do you remember when that opened up you
grew up it sounds like you know you grew
up in the woods and in Wisconsin I'm
from Illinois I know exactly what you're
talking about you know it's funny
because I can I can also recognize the
Midwestern and you its artists identify
what that is but there's something there
kids tricky to talk about without you
know giving the wrong ideas I mean
somebody was about just discovering
books in some way it was about certain
people in my life I mean suddenly it was
as crazy as it sounds you know smoking
some marijuana and sort of be thrown
into some soft awareness about things so
I mean there's almost two different
things but I think we need the real
getting into college in some of the
classes I had with in particularly
meanies there when I met be fair that
pretty much rocked my world at the time
I was a psych major I thought I would
just pick up a minor income I thought
was very little bit of communication as
a minor and I had a course with Leif
their communication the condition and it
completely blew my mind and I would go
to my psychology professors and I was
like you know I think maybe
communication is more what I'm
interested in than in psychology and and
I ended up double majoring in comm and
then I ended up pursue my graduate
education also you know it Purdue when I
work in communications about half of my
degrees and philosophy
continental philosophy people those rich
people yeah who is out Shabaab when I
was in my PFC program and he had a huge
impact I think that's one of the things
that you know I heard the wonderful talk
that you had the interview that you're
given with the woman sexiness oh yeah
yeah young and she was talking a little
bit about this you know this willingness
to be honest
and nobody yourself and they
have no sincerity those are a lot of
those dynamics and I think part of what
was also though interesting to me is
that some of my favorite professors they
were very different it's not as if there
was this thing called a great professor
not eat meat they are in Cal strata
could not be more different
they're just a little different as
people in their demeanor in the way they
the way they think of themselves and the
way they interact with their students
the way they think that their work and
and that was really an education itself
because when I was young I was just
doing my undergrad it was almost like a
cult like following around Thayer and he
really did have this call finally he you
know he was known as The Wizard of or he
has this huge Institute after him now he
does all this transformational
organization stuff he was the person who
redid and created the Johnsonville
revolution there with welfare and you
know I was really into the
organizational psychology and leadership
and all this kind of stuff like that you
know it was just lame soft-spoken and
you know really thoughtful like Harvard
scholar who could read Greek Latin then
he really changed my whole sense of
ideas falling into history rather than
again this trying to promote himself
that was love yeah yeah that part that
part with wish frog he's I loved it I
loved his work I loved and he is really
really really to eat there you know he's
there because he's really well-known and
I've been to so many conventions Danya
and the business whatever for like
thirty right this thing this is my 28th
year I've been all kinds of conferences
over the years and you bring up the name
meet there and boy is it a love of or
Hatem some people they look at you like
oh you knew him you study with him I
mean they're gonna get down and go you
don't give us the secret you know
where's other people they start to get a
twitch
I have never I never heard anyone ever
yeah I mean he's just like a saint
yeah he was really loved by everyone in
it was it with him is that where you
discovered her magnetic phenomenology
yeah I had well Louis Gordon use another
one so this was huge so I had a class
with moose fourteen called embody
ambiguity and anonymity and it was like
buh buh beak kind of stuff when we were
reading you know eaten nothingness at
evening time and merleau-ponty is
visible and invisible in the prose of
the world and just all kinds of stuff
just mind-blowing and I'm there with
Lois and we had this assignment was 3d
and nothingness whatever for the week
and I'm in there it was a huge book yeah
and we're talking about reflective pre
reflective and I am reading it in my
mind for whatever reason I was sort of
aligning Sarge's work of the pre
reflective to be the pre-linguistic
and/or the pre verbal sort of like the
unconscious in some way and then the
reflective to be the moments of speech
at the moments of discourse and I said
to him is that right and he went oh no
that's not right at all he goes no you
speak reflectively all the time you just
don't know Stu i when you're doing it
yeah I had like hundreds of pages of
Sartre
but wheels were just going in the
tumblers just started I started to
relook at the book and it just blasted
me into this with the realization that
in the same way that I'm an absent body
largely lost into the horizon of
situations
I'm routinely
to myself or to others without being
ematic being aware of the words
themselves instead we just lost an
immediate horizons in the same way that
we're lost in the landscape of the
situation's which itself is an absolute
body
it disappears for the sake of me in the
same way that my body is self effacing
the sake of the world it makes its old
one out what I'm hearing is like it
makes it so you could understand how it
could be missed
right and so the thing that's most near
is what's most concealed right you go to
look for it describe your existence and
you would just end up with the product
of reflection which end is very
different from the thing that you're
doing in order to reflect right and be
you in that position right yeah I mean a
different way to sort of come at some of
this is to say you know if you try to
give speech stereotype sounds languages
you're familiar with like Chinese I
don't speak Chinese
but I could give like ma Chinese sounds
or Spanish I could give my French you
know but if I try to say you know what
does your native tongue sound like do
you know you don't even hear your own
native tongue you hear it's actually
more incessantly so all day long that
you don't know what your own native
tongue sounds like so you can't give
like stereotype speech sounds of it
which says so much about perception and
so many things but there's I think about
one of the things I I appreciate him
when I was watching your videos years
ago when I started watching them that
you do this thing right when you when
you talk when you talk you know at least
on YouTube and since we've been talking
here too which makes sense given the
experience that you had at the pre
reflective and the reflective and that
whole thing where you thought it was
this one way and then he said no no no
and all of a sudden you said hundreds of
pages of Sartre went cuckoo whatever
that is
it's like those are that that perfectly
describes the most deep moments of
learning for me of where it's like where
there's this way where I have some
assumption or there's some some vague
notion of something right and I may know
that it's kind of vague or I'm unsure I
may not but there's a kind of a hovering
sense I remember this too reading
Heidegger because I just started reading
Heidegger on my own I I am I mean I
consider myself officially insane for
that you know the bookstore and I didn't
even know what design was but there's
something about my particular brain that
can tolerate not like I can tolerate not
understanding something I think more
than most people can Tom that's huge
that's huge yeah yeah yeah say it say
more about that well one thing tolerance
for ambiguity I mean these are part of
the signs of real learning I mean it's
sort of like the opposite of the
dunning-kruger effect
I need familiar with the dunning-kruger
effect well there's an inverse Torah
there's an inverse relation between how
knowledgeable someone really is and
their confidence as people who are
really knowledgeable who sort of tended
to delay there's people who are kind of
ignorant their utter ly confident and
somehow still ignorant and this was
generated out of a what happened was
there was a guy who tried to rob two
banks by firsts pretty lemon juice all
over his face because we learned that
lemon juice can be used as invisible ink
as we thought that his face was covered
in lemon juice it would be unforeseen by
the video cameras and when Donnie and
Kruger heard this they thought that is
about the dumbest thing I've ever heard
[Laughter]
that's awesome
well there's something and I also think
that doesn't isn't that what hurt like
the hermeneutic circle basically is
right yeah okay so the circle to me this
so Donna Murr Donna work tools this and
some way out of hiding nerd I don't have
the book here but I'm trying to think
it's like section 17 34 again but it's
he says
this is what Heidegger writes he says
any interpretation which is to
contribute to understanding must have
already understood what is to be
interpreted and the interpretation which
is to contribute to understanding
must've already understood what is to be
interpreted and so I think what so I
think what happens is many people they
kind of approach it like this they say
there's something out there I don't know
it and not what I need to do is I need
to interpret it in order to get to
encounter with it whereas I think for
Heidegger know there's always a for a be
then I've always already been exposed in
some way to whatever it is I now want to
think about the cheek part of it has to
do with when I come to self-awareness by
the time I come to self-awareness I find
that I've always already be done sort of
what we were giving that like I grew up
always knowing I was adopted it's not my
parents that we gotta make our you're
about that no instead my self-conscious
disapprove it in a small way and they've
kind of merged in that a long David
stretch and so part of the hermeneutics
is once you find yourself now I have to
do some of that depth back circling into
interesting interesting so that kind of
because there is that quality of and it
does seem to me that you know especially
with the relation you really know this
with your relationships right if they're
if they're you know authentic
relationships it's like you're going
along I'm still learning things about my
wife that aren't like they aren't like
brand new discoveries they're like oh
that's why you say that over and over
again there's this whole other dimension
that it's not like I didn't know that or
I didn't see it but the significance of
it like displays this understanding of
this unfoldment right that is is
continually a sense that I've been
relating to something in her that I
haven't been quite aware of it's been
just at the periphery but I've been
oriented around it and then we have this
conversation and then BOOM she tells me
a story she never told her so
like that all these articles and then
there's a this experience of affinity
right of intimacy I think this is one of
the things I really appreciated about
your book about like the way that you
talked about sociality with other right
this sense the sense in which that fee
that well one-one you go you really you
take some time in the book to really
deliberate about the the understandings
and misunderstandings of authenticity is
really like all of them are banked out
of presumption of what itself is right
it's very important to the grounds of
that and start to unpack that right and
you and you unpack it you know just like
what we were talking about this is why
this really spoke to me is is a sense to
be an Randy and I mean you're a helpless
completely dependent upon others for the
first several years of your life you
come into the world through another
person in your sense of identity your
sense of community whether or not you've
been beaten and shunned and how you've
been interactive at least become
formative elements of who you are it's
not as if we're ourselves yeah I think
the Stoics are really good the storks
are wonderful in saying you know be
clear about what's under your control
and what's not only your control digital
about all that and that's true and this
is great advice but for the
developmental psychologist issues are a
lot more complicated than that because
as a child you don't really have the
defences against what others think about
even say about you it becomes part of
your identity again Artie Lange lays
this out so beautifully where he talks
about it so somebody says to me you're
greedy and I say no I'm not and then
they say no you're greedy and I say no
I'm not
now I'm not stuck with their belief that
I'm greedy but I am stuck with the
feeling of being misunderstood as greedy
so the disavowed identity becomes
important before paraded into my
identity so there's no way out of having
to deal with others views even if
they've been interjected in their
disavowed state
so so in other words there there's that
this is what I really like I I it helped
me understand what I understood I like
in a lot of ways right um and this is
what I really liked about this I'm like
oh yeah like going through it again I'm
like oh I had such a deeper
understanding of what I was
understanding I understood from the
first time I read it right understanding
this again affair line right to
understand is to be pleased to put one
knows I mean that's why the
understanding always happens at layers
it's like sometimes we go
I can't believe and the others and this
is what you say is like others are a
condition of my existence yes my own
existence yes so in other words and this
is this is a big part of what you're
talking about when you start to at the
the last chapter when you when you
address authenticity explicitly again
from having looked at the self as as
these vectors we call them the four
vectors there's the the embodied right
there's the symbolic right language
there's the the social right and then
there's the temporal there you go
underneath all of that right and in
doing it I really appreciated how you
how you one of the ways that you got at
it was looking at some of the views
about the self right to already exist
right Dora Klee so like one of the way
the learnings that the truth the two
that I recall you really be kind of
deconstructing in a certain sense in
indeed deconstructing them what and also
celebrating that even they're a mistake
of what they missed was pointing to the
very thing that they missed right and
there there's a way of celebrating when
when you when you are with in your
scholarship I've noticed that like you
do you mentioned that in the last talk
that we had that you're more of a
celebratory fellowship right I mean I
mean there's so much out there that lets
spend time you know learning what we can
from what's out there
had just sitting people because you have
a great import of this you know I would
give the exemplars and I I'm not anti
feminist at all I mean I think I would
ask me a my concern with a lot of you
know equality rights if they are said
yes
but I saw some people in graduate school
it was a long time ago now 30 years ago
right but I still keep in graduate
school who they would be like young
feminist scholars everything we would
need they would give a feminist reading
on and so you know they were open with
now this author used the you know the
male pronoun this number of times and
this rate so just and I feel like but
what did you learn from the author but
what did you meet them on their grounds
at all no so there's this sense of women
once you have a really good critique
whether it's a Marxist critique or a
feminist critique or any kind of
ideologically brawny critique because
ideologies are through and through you
can do that to any text and that becomes
you know a way of meeting text but I'm
not sure how much growth goes on that
it's important to be able to do some of
this and I only have those resources for
criticizing but yeah I I always tried to
see you know what can I learn from this
author I'm not interested in taking
authors to task because I'm you know I'm
gonna I'm going to tell them what they
like there are too many people it might
be right you don't you're not you're not
Italy Italy illogically possessed by a
perspective right and I think it's like
it sounds like it it sounds like so so
right there right just what can I learn
from this author right used to just when
I think about an ideology as an ideology
because you already show up already with
like a bunch of presuppositions right
and beliefs I mean you put things in
terms of that so the learning the
learning is just also a like a like a
more of a rigidity great that like self
confirms itself and that's what's
dangerous about ideologies I mean I
think that's probably why I got into
communication you know when I this was
this was my doctoral dissertation so I
mean it was the product of a very
focused and when I was on the job
interview here at Grand Valley this was
98
right so I'm basically reporting on the
book and I'm handing out various things
in and then I in his for Tom theory
position appearing in the competition
and I hand out the the what about Stu
the bibliography in the book you know
and I'm saying all these and sort of
stuff I'm interested in and one of the
guys my closest colleagues have it up
Robert Mayberry at the interview stage
he says to me know this is a
communication department and this is a
hiring mutation I'm looking at this NOC
Rafi handed and there are people here
from philosophy but history and
psychology and sociology and
anthropology and like you know do you do
not see that this was a communication
call here and I said oh well you know
I'm interested in the phenomenon of
communication I don't really care what
discipline you come from there's part of
why I like communication he laughed and
he went oh that's exactly how we feel
about it and the secondly the interview
I wasn't learning at I and I was just
like oh my word and you know I did
enough he couldn't do the kind of
immediate homework on programs because
there was no internet like there is now
in 98 but you know I subsequently
learned that yeah I mean this guy was a
Cornell philosophy person and he was
income and the other person was you know
so basically another like lit professor
but they are all interested in
communication and I always looked at
about communication it's a meta
discipline every field has its problem
of communication that is how to
symbolically represent its phenomena of
inquiry and then they also have the
problem of how to disseminate that
information or knowledge to outsiders
from that discipline and I've always
been interested in those intersections
how are people using symbols using
language to to study the world to make
sense of it but then also how do they
communicate outside of that in so many
fields are just siloed and super
specialized they're they're caught in
little tiny circles and maybe not the
way that you use the term serve like a
bubble of just a sign of her genetic
circle yeah and not there
something like information tunnel that
prevents them from having a larger
public intellectual discourse there like
the academic specialist mumbling in a
language that only five other people in
their their hallway it right totally so
there's something about when you read an
author right so this is one of the
things I was I was thinking about as in
it in many ways the Google as I was
talking about before the book
exemplifies what it's talking about
right in a certain way like yeah I mean
I to me it was I thought death was about
year at any point before happens Wow
yet I really really had I mean I lived
with absolute sense that really yeah I
thought I because I was such a bad
student I kept just going on and I
thought I'll probably die before I get
my doctor like I'll just die trying
it'll be beautiful
and that's I'll just die every time I
just never happens
person I had friends who died in car
accidents I had friends who you know I
was never around like the hard drugs but
I did have you know friends who
committed suicide and we're just mangled
that's enough right I I just I I can't
believe I'm this old I would never
imagine you would ask me if I was gonna
live to be 35 like every day after 30
have been bitching myself wow that's so
it wasn't even like what I'm hearing is
it is it was it was just simply well I
mean death is zeal is Heidegger tops but
death is the ultimate horizon right the
inauthentic way of looking at it is as a
an event in the future right um but it
didn't call the colleges for me I mean I
think the book that I'm moving in toward
knows when that's what
immature it's moving a lot more
aggressively into what is the fit abuse
raj term what's the fitting response you
know what exactly is the fitting
response to know me that we're gonna die
and that there are gonna be other people
who are gonna live on after us knowing
that we partly are other people so yeah
what I really accept that sociality is a
condition of my existence and not just
others are a feature of my experience or
like items with inside my perceptions
then you start to say bye I really
haven't been who I thought all along I'm
actually again I'm part of the world
world and you want to take care of
others I mean the older I get it's like
all I really care about is the students
all I care about is like the person who
might bump into and have the interaction
you know sometimes I had this is a weird
thing and it comes from Harding and from
Markie uber and people
russer to fluster has some wonderful
essays on celebrating the other as the
only possible Avenue into something like
the face of God and there's a sense it
celebrates its amicus Laura celebrating
others yeah it's like the only possible
face it is like a gateway into the
divine into God people who claim to love
God but they won't take care of their
neighbor I mean it's the only possible
way to love God or love you love life
and you're very grateful to be will then
take care of other people or you're a
hypocrite you're deluded you know who
you really are
yeah and so but anyway I think there are
times when I sometimes I to be very
candid with you I really can't stand on
a trump I mean the guy makes me
absolutely bonkers but I sometimes look
at him and I I sort of say I beg
pleading to myself count me not find
this man repulsive help me help me see
him as also part of the mystery and it's
a struggle you two are the face
so bad to have the compassion to see ya
to struggle it's interesting so this is
so this is um and I was gonna ask you
about this like you know how did you
come to writing a book about
authenticity I know you said that it's
it's um it was your thesis or your
second I think as adopted I've always
been interested in the question of self
you know I have two different color eyes
I was the only kid at my school other
than my brother who's adopted I'm the
only kid I ever knew whose name was
Laurie there was all kinds of ways which
I then and he was just always a major
part of my sense of who I was was always
wrapped up in what is what is a person
anyway and I remember you know some of
my earliest memories as a young person
were kind of asking like if I would have
been adopted by someone else would I
have been the same person and then I'd
be like well I would just be me asking
that question like how could I have been
different and I've been adopted my son
was really easy yeah I was always
interested
I think the authenticity stuff it was
you know like if I meet again Frank
about it
he'll Rollins my advisor at the time he
when we came into my office one day and
he was like hey you know there's
something on so he said well you seen
Charles Taylor's book on ethics won't
that this tea bouncing off of that and
look at some time you build it's going
to work it just it just that was a
really to like when I went to Purdue and
basically was admitted into their
rhetoric program and I was taking out my
courses in philosophy and a from the
rhetoric program but I'm in the bathroom
one day standing around and we're like
washing hands and he's big lanky guy
comes in and he goes hey you're new here
and I go yeah I go yeah I'm just
starting my PhD and I go yeah I I
studied to be there as an undergrad and
he goes
I love leaf there goes you know I do a
lot of work on Gregory Bateson and they
go really he goes oh yeah I do a lot of
stuff on Bateson and next thing you know
I'm in bills office and I converted to
interpersonal when I went and studied in
middle school and I did all like
qualitative interpersonal stuff so I did
a lot of Bateson I did a lot of Bakhtin
are delaying Erving Goffman the sort of
qualitative humanistic approach to
interpersonal kind of stove and I
coupled that with you know Heidegger
ceremonial fog defense knows the actual
PhD was an interpersonal communication
theory in phenomenology any we say is
interesting way that he said that yeah
and after that after talking with him I
converted yeah uber I designed a class
forget to read all of Gospels were in
order was a major major influence on me
in my graduate work so yeah bill was
really great he's retired he's just
retired this year he went to Iowa
he spent my last maybe six or seven
years he was at the stocker
distinguished professor of something
another he's interesting he's a
friendship expert you know his first
book called friendship matters is so
fascinating it's instant friendship
between like males friendship and female
friendships and cross expansions and
friendship throughout the lifecycle it's
really pretty pretty fascinating so very
sophisticated really wow that's
interesting well there's that so one of
the things I actually just hit me a
little bit back when you're talking
about you know having I think it's
sinking in as you're talking about like
having been adopted right and knowing
you were adopted but then you said like
it's not like I remember them telling me
I was adopted I grew up with that notion
right that background notion yeah and so
on some level in some way there's a way
in which
it's it's like a horizon it's a very
deep parole phase because it comes up
but it would be st. Patrick's Day and
people would go are you Irish and I
would go I don't know and I would be
like well you're taking tribe or the
fact that you had nothing you're no
control over this but you're proud of it
you're weird you know alright times
where I don't be in some public place
and so person would be talking about
adoption and they would say something
along the lines of like well I could
never adopt I only want to have one of
my own and I'd be like wow that's really
pretty hurtful I you know there's also I
think me feel very liberated about
laying in the pro-life pro-choice I mean
in some way I feel like this is a
discussion that women if men have babies
then they could be in on it
I think women should be able to decide
what they're gonna do with their bodies
but I think you know my own position is
very much of pro-choice partly because I
feel like people don't it worked out
really well for me and I'm happy that I
am and I'm very grateful for my parents
everything it ain't so great for other
people you know I mean I was basically
put in a basket and pushed up a river
and some people you know they end up in
every foster care doodlee foster care by
for you're done
so I mean your odds of getting out of
foster care if you're not on by age four
is almost nil you kicked around and then
you look at the suicide rates drug
addiction rates the kind of form rates
of people who end up served in that it's
a grim situation right so I've always
heard like everyday things when people
say stuff like you know again whether
it's national pride or any I used her in
Michigan and when the first things I
heard and I was like maybe twenty nine
heroes first got here people say well if
you're not Dutch you're not March and I
thought yeah it is Ryan so it must be
true dumbest thing I've ever heard like
you're gonna take you didn't have any
control over what you were born into
right so why would you
you take pride over what you have
accomplished what you have done what you
have earned with your effort to sit and
take pride will be your ethnicity is
kind of year yeah yeah as an adopted
kids I think anybody else is adopted
they know what I'm talking about
totally and it's it's a so John Parvati
and Christopher who are up in Toronto
they just wrote a paper a paper based on
a lot of our talk well not based on our
dialogues but inspired by our dialogues
and dialo goes and they were talking
about a they had they they prefaced the
paper with the problem being that that
the post-modernism in a certain way has
eliminated the sense of otherness right
so you only have the first position and
the third position
right and because because it's all about
kind of identity and ethnicity and all
these things that basically you you
can't really take credit for you're just
kind of thrown into it that's the
starting point which demarcates your
value and your identity and all that
stuff it totally eliminates the process
of sociality of inner relationship and
it's magnified in how low down the
ladder and ineffective dialogue has
become right is actually made ones up
well my wife and I did a paper that we
published the most probably almost 20
years or so ago now but news on subject
position and I think poor they did yeah
identity politics is just poison so much
debate one of the first studies I did
this was a graduate student handed out
to people but I wrote the statement race
relations have been bad in the past but
I think they're getting a little bit
better that was a statement and then I
handed it out to different people but I
said differently I said this was said by
a 38 year old female this was said by a
17 year old white male you should have
heard the different reactions just by
you just that information when you would
say it was a 38 year old black female
people say something like this oh let's
go here where is it you'd say it was a
17 year old white male they go what's
wrong with this idiot how out of touch
is the person talking there's a full set
and that precipitated my life and I get
to do this paper and a lot of the coming
out of Sarkar's work and there's a
difference between different kinds of
identity so some of it would be like
what did you call a structural identity
to race class sex something that is
maybe visible but it's there if someone
can identify visibly where's adopted
isn't really a it's not a subject
position that other people can see it's
not a noticeable minority group and then
there's also a difference between a self
asserted identity and an other
attributed identity so sometimes
somebody can say something along the
line so well you're just saying this
because you're an X Y or Z whereas other
people say well I can say this as a blah
blah blah X Y or Z and certain things
are I guess more easily attributed or
asserted and I think a lot the identity
politics has really come to this
liquidated discussion of ignoring who
people are and guess it is larger but
it's important though you know I would
say this guy had a great class with a
guy named Arvin rajagopal I think is now
the chair at NYU and he was in Purdue at
the time but he me with a very
interesting book by Ruth Frankenberg
called race matters and it's some title
on the social construction of whiteness
and it was it was a difficult book to
read because I do think there is a sense
in which the classic white position is
color evasion and you sort of say well I
don't pay attention to color at all and
then that's really a you know that's the
move of those in power already we I
think when people talking about having
to check your priveledge I think there's
something important about that I mean
people do need to realize that as like
me as white males we have neither joy do
you start the terms a little bit more of
a sadistic orientation to the world
we've been able to look out and be see
others rather than see ourselves as
things seen and objects of the world
whereas other people minority groups or
women they've tended to take a more
masochistic view of ourselves to be more
object seeing and without the
prerogative to give them look back
there's so much assert their stuff on
the look on the difference between
savers and masochism they do pretty
tightly aligned to not only male-female
differences but to minority-majority
differences that's why you lose forties
put bad faith and anti black racism
so really penetrating there and talking
about you know there's not just the kind
of sadistic racism of like the white
supremacists who thinks he's superior
there's masochistic forms of racism
where some minority person has concluded
that they're worthless because the
majority is told himself it's worth it
son from inside out in the same way that
I grew up knowing I was adopted there's
some person who's thinking to themselves
I'm nothing but up whatever you in the
minority slur and they about themselves
and then that becomes and that becomes
reflected in the social structures and
those actresses and the more that's
assumed it's it gets into the lived so
it's not just top-down oppressive forms
of of racism which is you know troubling
enough but it's this form of socialized
occasion of oneself into a kind of
subjugation and it's you know I think
the solution is along the lines of you
know recognizing that we all are both
you know subjects we're all objects we
need to you know that there needs to be
this in larger recognition of other this
being part of how we've come to
ourselves
totally well this is one of the things
in your work and you're in this book
where you really got this sense cuz I
because I I mean having been you know
basically since my early 20s growing up
here in the Bay Area you know that like
the home of the human potential movement
right and all the stuff about
authenticity right there is this there
is a kind of more strange ideology that
you can kind of see right that people
just kind of partake in these in these
communities right which is something
like what you really did a great job of
revealing is very a very limited
perspective which is that I'm a thing in
a world right and the world is already
there right and other people are already
there and I'm I'm here and like the
world there's kind of presupposition of
the world
gonna be the world I'm gonna be me
you're gonna be you and I may or may not
have any significance or make any
difference here right to this sense
where you in is what I really
appreciated about how deeply this
distinction was throughout the book you
kept like all the different ways that
you said um this is the earth unfolding
basically right that's wrong it's the
way that the world like the world hunts
itself as the other this kind of sense
of compressed like the world is a kind
of a decompression of earth haunting
itself is another I mean parts of you
parts of me they come into being through
other people they are me but it flees
from me like I was a baby and the fact
that I was adopted that's a fact about
me but it's others who tell me that she
might leave you never know if you have a
beautiful ugly face because it reso
who's looking and me I think me in a
sadistic way we don't want to be so
subject to others we don't want to admit
like the oil societies three mirror
societies other people decorate your
face you want to take the prerogative
direct decorate your own face so I mean
I think me we think of ourselves in very
odd D tribal eyes where I mean some way
you have to get at the history of each
organization and illiteracy and
calendars and forms of money radically
you know they broke apart tribal life
and they made possible autonomous
individuals in a you know I guess terms
of anonymity anonymity basically became
possible with literacy and money it
makes the stranger possible but before
that in conserving tribal light
conditions where everyone you know is in
a particular relationship to you whether
they're relatives or neighbors but now I
think that you know identity politics is
so much more part of people's lives
because we're in these
largely anonymous needed to make
ourselves known forms of community
community is normally large assigned our
identity is largely been assigned to us
by the community into which the fates
had befallen our you know or lock now
it's you know the promise of upward
social mobility the promise of making
something of yourself makes a lot of
people gut out you know a family and
community and here we are I mean I think
that was one of the things that really
probably more than anything accelerated
the cultural change in the society was
like right after the Second World War
many people instead of having like two
or three or four generations in a single
family and so creating a cultural drag
in a slowdown in the transmission with
your great-grandparents weighing in on
how things should go on but you know mom
and dad and the two kids and the dog
they packed up bags and moved across the
country and now they tried to raise
their kids on their own realize it was
harder than they thought and
technologies were accelerating the
culture was flattening and it was
changing the culture rapidly just like
overnight right and there's this because
there's this way in which you I was left
with the sense of authenticity as you
were describing it right as one is that
there's not uh it's not like I'm
authentic it's not like it's an
attribute of a good thing I am it's not
something I can even give a list of like
characteristics and I can I can become
that person I got this sense that it's
more like a mode of existing right it's
more like the being mode I'm thinking of
Schrom who doesn't think it's name
strong like the being mowed the having
mode in that that lots of talk about
authenticity I think is more looks at it
is in the having mode right is the sense
of there's me and I'm gonna be Who I am
on the world right in this like a lot of
stuff front radical honesty and these
kinds of things although I think there's
a lot
there that there's a lot of there's a
lot of signal there but a lot of the
noise is really kind of comes from this
sense at which I am somehow like
distinct from the other in the world
right and then I then act upon it right
and and what I really get to sense is
that there's more what the way that
you're revealing authenticity is it's
more like a way that I can be in the
world where I in my concern in the way I
take up my concerns that I find myself
in and address like as an embody being
as others as my projects all those
things is with the kind of do I really
take it up and live as if I am the world
world itself right it's a how and it's a
kind of it's a quality of the concern in
now and it has to do with the kind of
presence of mind and a humility and an
openness that is it's trying to find
that fitting response that's somewhere
between what I uniquely bring and what
others uniquely bring and the particular
unique circumstances in situations
it's a conspiring of many different
elements