howdy this is Jim rut and this is the
Jim rut show
[Music]
today's guest is Pamela microrna an
author of books and articles on the
history and cultural implications of
artificial intelligence she's also a
published novelist hi Jim great to be
here great to hear your voice I hear
your voice again - it's been too long I
read my first book by Pamela BA ie
before Amazon so I don't have the exact
date you know regular listeners of this
show know that I will often have looked
up in my Amazon order history and get
the date of when I read specific books
or at least bought and they're usually
pretty close but I actually bought one
of Pamela's books way back yonder the
fifth wave generation Oh fifth
generation oh you're right if you
brought it when it was published that
would have been 1983 it was probably a
little but in that timeframe that was
when I was in Boston for sure so between
83 and 86 and it was you know basically
talking about mostly a major Japanese
attempt to achieve a great leap forward
and AI using logic programming
particularly the prologue language and
interestingly reading that bill caused
me to go out and learn prologue and I
play with a little bit on and off but
eventually came away with the view which
I've held to this day that logic
programming approaches to you know
high-end AI inevitably run into big
problems what's called the combinatoric
explosion too many ways to parse the
logic and you need to add in heuristics
or something else to prune the tree so I
eventually you know quickly actually
lost interested prologue and made the
assumption probably the Japanese are
gonna fail at this and they did but it
was it was really an interesting book
and it was one of the first things I
read about AI so that was that's very
interesting
today we're mostly going to talk about
Pamela's new book titled this could be
important my life and times with the
artificial intelligence eeeh I describe
it as a blend of personal memoir a rough
history of the earlier days of AI some
amazing profiles of leading
personalities from the period with some
very interesting musings on the
relationship between science technology
and the humanities and it's a love story
you know regular listeners know that I
I talk to authors about the books early
regularly and I usually play it fairly
straight but this time I'm gonna just
say it straight out people you should
buy this book this is an unusually
excellent book it doesn't fit into any
known genre so I'm sure drunk will be
driving her publisher nuts on how to
market it but the writing is truly
beautiful Pamela has exceeded herself
this is the best of her books I've ever
read in terms of words Minh ship the way
she blends the personal the historic the
personalities musings the love story
it's brilliant so not only should you
read this book but if you like it as
much as I do you should tell your
friends that I read it too it's
available on and no money passed hands
between my listeners no I don't usually
say stuff like this right I play it
pretty straight just talking to the
authors about their book but this one
really got me and I gotta say you've
exceeded yourself on this one Pamela
well I can see a huge amount of both
love and work went into creating this
thing this is a unusually excellent book
thank you thank you as my listeners know
I don't normally carry on this way but I
figured I sort of had to to be honest
because the book was so good let's start
off with what I at least took away is
your theme a sort of a recurring theme
it's woven all through the book in fact
you start off with it right from the
beginning I would describe it as an
exploration by U of C peace knows two
cultures and how it relates to the
history of AI now many of our listeners
are probably young enough they have no
idea hoop CP snow was or what the
general outline of his two cultures
argument was so maybe you could start us
with that we happy to see peace no sir
Charles Percy snow was a scientist and
academic in England and in the mid
twentieth century it occurred to him and
he wrote about the fact that the
scientists and the humanists never
talked to each other and he was in a
unique position because not only was he
a scientist but he was also a novelist
he wrote a scene
of novels called strangers and brothers
which are a very interesting read even
today because they talk about how
mathematicians and scientists played an
enormous role in World War two
especially in winning it for the Allies
so he thought this is terrible these
people should be speaking to each other
and furthermore he went on to note that
humanists described culture as what they
were interested in and nothing else
counted which was you know kind of
arrogant of them and he said this can't
go on we've got to come to some
synthesis well in this period it's
really hard to explain what an explosive
idea this was and i sat there as an
undergraduate listening to him give this
lecture and I was almost out of my seat
I was just so excited by this because I
had been interested in science but I was
an English major and I had switched
between the two you know should I be a
science major should I be an English
major and finally decided to stick with
English for because I loved it anyway
this made an explosion around the
cultural world of this especially the
anglo-american world but also the book
was it became a book finally it was
translated into many languages so this
was a chasm that needed to be crossed
and snow put his finger on it boy did he
make the humanities mad get mad
we are torture yeah you tell lots of
stories along the way which we'll get to
about how they tried to wreak their
revenge right switching back to the
memoir the bio your own personal
autobiography suicide you were born in
England and like you said you were born
your mother was giving birth in a tent
while bombs were falling from the Blitz
yes well she was in hospital but there
was a tarpaulin between her and the
night because that wall had been blown
away by a bomb close enough to being
ball
a tenth so then what happened how did
you get across the big ditch uh uh my
father in fact was in the RAF and he was
stationed in Canada so while my mother
and I were in England being bombed on in
the Blitz he was in Canada teaching
Airmen how to navigate he came down to
the United States to visit cousins in
the New York area and he wrote to my
mother and said after the war we're
going to America and that's essentially
what happened was right after the war in
1946 I was I had just turned six and my
twin brother and sister they're twins
not me we're just two that was quite
amazing you landed in New York
originally but then you ended up in
California for work took him to
California and I essentially grew up in
the San Francisco Bay Area it sounds
like that's always been a place that's
had a residence for you always yeah one
passage I saw in the book you mentioned
living in the sky' Londa area well and
our reason that struck me is you know
I've never lived in California but I've
spent a tremendous amount of time
visiting there hitchhiking around in my
younger days hanging out being a
troublemaker and I love that area you
know up down on the Honda Road I love
skyline I've always been curious why
that area was not more popular at least
last time I prowled around there maybe
10 years ago it was still fairly country
and people were more happy living down
cheek-by-jowl and mountain view or
what-have-you but what a wonderful place
that is right
oh it is it was wonderful but you know
there were problems there's no water
supply there was in those days no no gas
supplies so we had to have our gas
bottled well the tank we had a septic
tank we had a water break at least once
a month where I had to crawl
hand-over-hand over the hillside to find
the brake and fix it you know it takes a
lot of time to live in the country oh
yeah I live on a farm so I we have all
those things to do if we have a well we
have a septic tank we have gas and you
know we even have to have a generator
because it's not infrequently the power
goes down
for a day or two exactly right not
everyone's willing to put up with that
of course you can take the backroads
down to the ocean too right yes oh yes
often very very very wonderful so then
how did you happen to make the
connection into the AI world oh that was
easy
that same undergraduate who sat
absolutely breathless listening to CP
snow talk about the two cultures was
approached I let me put it this way I
was working my way through college and I
was a typist I typed for the School of
Business I guess they figured you know
she doesn't know anything about this
true she can type exam she can type
course outlines and so on and so forth
in which I did it was wonderful anyway
two young assistant professors came to
me and they said we know you're gonna
graduate in January which was true 1961
January 61 and you're gonna go to
graduate school the following fall how
about working on our book in the
meanwhile and I said very
enthusiastically yes I will what's it
about
and they said artificial intelligence
now Jim I had heard the term but I did
not know what really what it was and so
I said to one of the guys could you
explain that please
and he said artificial intelligence is a
machine doing things which if a human
did them we say that's intelligent
behavior okay so that's how I got into
AI and listeners that was 1961 right
conversation took place in 1960 so it's
like the dawn of AI I mean the original
dawn of what we call AI was what 1951
was what was the meeting at Dartmouth 55
1956 right so I don't think the term
artificial intelligence even existed
before 1956 so this was at the very very
beginning and who were the two authors
who worked with a man named Julian
Feldman who later went on to UC Irvine
but the other author was
Ã©douard Feigenbaum and that led to what
has been a lifetime friendship I was
just in touch with him two days ago at a
party at his house a week ago we have
been good close friends ever since in
fact we even co-authored a couple of
books together later on yes including
that fifth generation book that I
mentioned when I first came on yeah
another quote I saw in the book that you
talked about word and text understanding
as a particular interest of mine meaning
yours could you tell us more about that
that made us seem kind of natural being
a word person and interested in AI well
that's really all it is I've been
interested in words since I could speak
and later on read so when I came across
scientists who were interested in word
and text understanding they captured me
of course and of course that's still a
very controversial field you know the I
just finished reading the book by Gary
Marcus rebooting AI and he's gonna be on
the show in a few weeks and he
demonstrates at least to his own
satisfaction and it think it satisfied
me as well that the current deep
learning approaches you know use like
for Google for their Translate program
etc and some of these new text writing
programs from open AI are really a very
long way away from really understanding
texts in a way that humans do you know
so much of what we see are especially
from this new big deep learning trend is
essentially very very fancy statistical
pattern matching and it's interesting
that we have not yet really achieved
anything like text understanding to my
mind that's the next frontier it
certainly is and one of the projects I
spend a lot of time writing about in the
book is at MIT a project that it takes a
symbolic view not a statistical view of
what text is but those guys say hey we
are you know a Kitty Hawk here or we're
nowhere near we were but to be yeah it's
indeed and I'm involved with some of
those MIT folks too I'm on the board of
visitors for the brain in cognitive
science department
at MIT you know people that you
mentioned like Tommy Poggio Tenenbaum
some of the others who are working on
these symbolic type problems right you
know they don't get the press that the
West Coast people do but I personally
believe they're more likely to crack the
actual language problem than the deep
learning people are well I think one of
the interesting things a eye has shown
us is that understanding is is a
spectrum and shallow understanding can
work pretty well for most things yeah
that's true but what it doesn't work for
and this is where Marcus is very
interesting it's like really
understanding for instance the Gestalt
of a book right what is this book yes we
extract the theme of a book it's
something that it's hard to see
statistical approaches shallow
approaches doing and yet I just did it
when I introduced your book I may have
been wrong about the theme but at least
I did extract one you did and I agree I
agree with Gary Marcus that we're a long
way from human kinds of understanding of
text and language yeah the other person
who I think is very interesting in this
discussion is George Lakoff oh yeah he
of course makes the argument that
language is way more metaphorical than
we tend to recognize you say I'm moving
ahead with this project well I had is
you know metaphorical from the physical
moving forward right or I'm behind on
this project well you know behind is a
metaphor from something that's behind
you and if you carefully parse your
speech and look for metaphor you go oh
my goodness it's hard to say two
sentences without using metaphor and
again you know metaphor is something
seemingly more subtle than you know the
statistical approaches are likely to get
at and without understanding metaphor
and how it works it may be that we'll
have a hard time getting to real
language understanding I agree the
viewer if you read any lake off oh I
know George yes oh you do that's great I
never have never met him but I have read
a number of his works and you know I
just think he's one of the most
interesting you know people working to
say
that might take you up on that and have
you introduced me to him so I can get
him on my show Oh he'd be a wonderful
interviewee yes I bet he would another
item in the book you talked about
intelligent agents and you quoted a
definition that basically said they have
goals form beliefs and action plans on
how to reach their goals and then
they're adaptive does that feel like to
you what intelligence really is in a
very abstract sense yes and it would
kind of draw a line or I mean you know
weird how far down does intelligence go
I mean some people argue it goes all the
way down to the bacteria yes they do and
they can make that argument pretty well
and until we have we can refine our
notions of intelligence which are not
very fine-tuned right now I have to say
yeah you're probably right
the bacteria have intelligence slime
molds have intelligence yep they have
problems
why don't they actually have goals or
not I don't know but one could say that
their goals are implicitly cooked in by
a evolution right and their goal is to
survive and reproduce essentially right
well that is interesting probably the
person that appears across the book the
most is herb Simon he pops up again and
again from early to later I love the
story when you're reading these business
books it seems like all the business
academic work had been invented by herb
Simon then you go on discover he's also
an economist all right et cetera what
was he like how could a person be a
giant so many fields what does a person
like that like astonishing guy yes at
the store you begin with is so true I
this little typist is a business school
I keep running into this guy herb Simon
at this where it hurts I'm in a
municipal governance herb Simon and I
think this School of Business is so
shallow if this one guy appears in every
field so I blame business not herb and
later on I am better acculturated into
the culture of AI that's with two and a
half years at Stanford and I realized
what a giant he is okay next
I'm married and go with my husband who
is named the chairman of the computer
science department at a Carnegie Mellon
where herb Simon is and they have a big
party you know welcomed by the faculty
to the new head kind of thing and I
stand there in front of herb Simon I'm
so starstruck
I can't even say hello to him I sort of
it was it was funny
anyway we became great friends and one
of the reasons we became great friends
is because he used to walk home every
night after work past our house and I
would just be putting the cover on my
typewriter and I would see his hat a
beret in the summertime
Chuya and one of these Peruvian Chewie
is covering his head in the winter
bopping past my head and I lean out the
door and I'd say hey herb would you like
a sherry and her but almost always like
a sherry so he'd come in and we'd sit
down and we talk over sherry and I
didn't really understand how often we
did this until I reviewed my journals
for writing this book this could be
important holy mackerel with her we were
meeting once a week I would have this
genius and he wasn't in yes and that's
not a word I used lightly
sitting at my coffee table and sharing
sherry with me and we wouldn't have a
high old time just laughing and going
through this and that and the other so
one summer I said to him you know it's
really too bad my students I was
teaching then at the University of
Pittsburgh my students have all the
really interesting discussions you know
what is life what is the meaning of life
how can I live the good life blah blah
and what do my colleagues and I discuss
well should romantic poetry be two
semesters are only one semester how much
can we spend on the Xerox machine it's
that kind of thing and herb laughed and
he said yes I know he said you know you
might think of starting a little salon
or a little discussion group and that
grew too
something that meant once a month and I
called it the squirrel hill sages
because we all lived in Squirrel Hill at
those days and a consistent of herb
Simon and his wife Dorothea Allen Newell
and his wife Noel
the novelist Mark Harris he was best
known then for a book about baseball
called bang the drum slowly his wife a
journalist and Joe and me and we met
monthly to discuss things and so herb
and I really got to know each other even
better than and that's how we became
such good friends what a wonderful
experience in life cuz from me being on
the outside having read a fair amount of
herbs work you know I put him up there
as amongst the greatest polymaths of the
20th century and he was a guy stop it in
your living room having a sherry and
hanging out with the sages of Squirrel
Hill how lucky were you how lucky was I
I actually had a graduate student
stopped me in the hall one said
somewhere in New York and it may have
been Brooklyn poly or someplace he said
is it true that you had sherry with herb
Simon once a week
yeah it's true that's amazing I'm gonna
flip forward here a little bit in my
topics and let's talk about Pittsburgh a
little bit you know one of the reasons
it resonates with me as my daughter
happens to live in Pittsburgh and if
actually lives in Squirrel Hill and but
we've spent more and more time up there
and I I think we overlapped the summer
of 1973 in Pittsburgh I actually worked
for the US government as a summer job
when I was an undergraduate and you know
I have had a pretty good reaction to
Pittsburgh but it didn't sound like you
did yeah I really have to make the
distinction between Pittsburgh as it is
now and Pittsburgh as it was then in the
early 1970s Joe and I arrived there in
1971 the steel industry was just dying
and nobody knew where to go next
and a group of visionaries mostly a
Carnegie Mellon said we can green
Pittsburgh we can make Pittsburgh
something different
and an industrial giant which they saw
was coming to an end I must say most
people in Pittsburgh did not see that
they thought this was just a bump steel
would come back coal would come back
well no it wasn't going to so I was a
Californian as you pointed out and I
rode around the Pittsburgh at the
western Pennsylvania area thinking how
can people let places be so ugly I mean
there were slag heaps that nobody
bothered to remove and downtown
Pittsburgh and and even close to
Squirrel Hill
there were warehouses that were rusted
out steel mills that were rusted out and
nobody thought they should be torn down
or needed to be torn down or could be
bothered with them this was astounding
to me so that was Pittsburgh then that
now is a very different situation yeah
it is quite amazing how they have
recovered reinvented themselves as a
technology and a medical area as we know
Ober has their AI Center there's a lot
of robotics going on of course CMU has
been a big part of that Renaissance
absolutely and Google and lots and lots
of spin-offs in fact one of the patterns
I have noticed you know since we've been
going up there three or four times a
year is that many of the Silicon Valley
companies are opening non-trivial
satellite operations in Pittsburgh and
I've ascertained that the reason why is
that you know if you're living in
Silicon Valley and you're a 32 year old
engineer who married and wants to start
a family it's even if you're making big
Google type bucks you're still not going
to live very well in the Silicon Valley
however if you take those big Google
bucks and move to place like Pittsburgh
you can live like a king and apparently
that's what they're doing is they're
providing opportunities for people who
want to you know have a family have kids
you know have a house in a yard and
those kinds of things and not have a
two-hour commute to be able to do it a
very commodious town of Pittsburgh and
there's literally now thousands of
people from Apple Google and Adobe and
others that have you know moved to
Pittsburgh and operate out of these
satellite offices and
berg itself is it a beautiful natural
setting it's hilly there are three
rivers that meet there as any sports fan
knows it really is gorgeous
it was just badly done too in the 19th
and early 20th century it was certainly
it was the engine of the Industrial Age
and it paid the price on the flip side
today pittsburgh has about half the
population that it had 1955 but those
powerful and rich industrialists
invested heavily in museums in art
galleries in one of the really great
Fontana Kohl gardens of the United
States and parts of beautiful parks and
so essentially it has the infrastructure
for a city twice its size so it's
extremely rich in you know cultural
artifacts and organizations which makes
it kind of really interesting anyway
enough about Pittsburgh no I'm not on
the payroll of the Pittsburgh Chamber of
Commerce but I have got to like the
place hop it back a little bit you know
one of the really interesting things
about your book is some rich and
personal and evocative profiles of some
of the big names of early AI guys like
Allen Newell John McCarthy Marvin Minsky
ed Feigenbaum when I didn't know Raj
Reddy and of course herb I love those
but I would also say maybe that
indicates that you have a perspective of
a great man version of the story of AI
you think that's true are there really
great men who are qualitatively deeper
than most of the other people really
just at the right place at the right
time oh boy
that's a chicken-and-egg problem I was
lucky to know these very great
intellects but would it have happened
anyway yeah it probably would have
happened anyway because when you look
around at papers in the 1940s I'm
talking about academic papers everybody
has this mozzie kind of idea hey I think
this thing is kind of thinking this
computer thing it's just that these guys
took it and made something of it
scientifically yep another one of the
people who in my mind is an absolute
i an't of computer science and AI Alan
Newell yes tell me a little bit about
him what it was he like Oh Alan I I
should have been as in awe of Alan at
that faculty party I mentioned as I was
of her but Alan didn't have quite the
reputation that herb did at least in my
mind I was wrong of course
Alan was an amazing guy he was the son
of a San Francisco physician academic
physician I might say and had been
brought up in very comfortable
circumstances and did not want to be a
doctor like his dad ended up after
college at the RAND Corporation doing
logistics and things like that and then
he met herb Simon and herb and he
discovered that neither of them wanted
to use the computer as a any kind of
numerical calculator they wanted to use
it as a symbolic machine and they were
very much alone in that way I don't mean
totally alone there were of course other
people around the country who felt that
way a handful and so these two together
made a tremendous team Alan himself was
very cordial very lovely full of fun oh
my gosh you know he had a wonderful
sense of humor he was very affectionate
and very very hard-working
oh my you would get email from well
email we didn't call it email in those
days we called it ARPA messages but you
would get messages from him at 3:00 in
the morning because that's when he was
working not that he'd quit he'd been
working since after supper really really
a lovely man and he loved literature so
he and I often had talks about books we
loved and he and his wife Noel would
read aloud to each other at night and a
couple of times I I interrupt with them
for one reason or another and they were
reading aloud okay Pamela what do you
want go away
wow what an amazing another one of the
great brains from that era that you got
to know pretty well
now you also got to know people in a
more professional capacity through a
quite important early book that you
wrote called machines who think and now
one of the interesting things when I see
that title is the word whoo yes tell me
about that a little bit I was writing
the first modern history of artificial
intelligence and you know casting around
for a title as you do with books yeah
what am I going to call this book so it
will leap off the shelf blah blah and it
was Joe trout my husband who said don't
call him machines that thing call it
machines who think because we were both
under the influence of the idea that the
thinking that machines were doing the
thinking that humans were doing were
very very similar and I must confess I
was also under the influence of Marvin
Minsky who called people meat machines
me-80 machines and I thought yeah
machines who think we're all thinking I
thought that was very very clever that
book had a little bit of a difficult
history getting signed if you tell us a
little bit about that oh gosh yes I had
an agent and my agent took the proposal
to various publishers and the replies
were in retrospect absolutely hilarious
it was we've already done a book on
computers or uh gee interesting too bad
it's too late and this is an entry is
she kidding essentially that was is she
kidding and you know you could hardly
blame them artificial intelligence was
in a very nascent State at that point
but still if authors are gonna call
themselves Canaries in the coal mine
they need to pay attention to what's
happening right now and nobody wanted to
do that well yeah it went to 30 some
publishers before it finally got signed
by the publishing arm of Scientific
American and what year would that have
been for our audience it actually came
out in 1979 but it was signed what 70
seven maybe or me 778 something like
that yeah still hard to imagine that you
know 77 you know we had lots of
computers out there that nobody in
publishing was interested in a serious
history of AI or you know you had to go
to 36 of them before you found one to
say yes that's hard to believe even
worse in my view historians of science
weren't interested in the field can you
think can you believe that
that is amazing all right wonder what
things that are happening now
that are gonna be unusually important in
the future that we are mooring like
where them now but I did ask one
historian of science much later where
were you guys and she said you know we
really didn't know if it would be
important another reason I named the
book but it did interesting I like that
another interesting really landmark
historical event that you write about is
don't believe you were there but maybe
you were assignment and Newell's logic
theorists this was the first working
program to do something which of humans
did it we'd say that's intelligent
behavior it was very much in the
symbolic arm of AI it wasn't you know it
didn't look at tons of data
it wasn't machine learning there was no
such thing then this was something
figuring out what to do next by reason
of reason by using reason and was able
actually to improve upon some of the
earlier mathematical proofs by even
quite famous mathematicians as I recall
yeah right and interestingly logicians
professional magicians looked at it and
they said oh well you know this wasn't
so hot we can we can create a machine
that can do logic better than that
completely missing the point that Nuland
cÃ­mon weren't interested in creating a
killer logic machine they were
interested in modeling human behavior
they were both cognitive psychologists
that was their machine a minute so you
know definitely an important milestone
in the in the very earliest history it's
amazing how early it was was it was in
the late 50 some time 56 they came to
the Dartmouth conference with this
working program
amazing back to two cultures again well
one of the little stories that leaped
out to me that I suspect is strongly
interwoven with the CPS knows two
cultures is you were not approved for
tenure when you came up for tenure at
the University of Pittsburgh here you
were a successful author would you had
three books out at that point get a
contract for another perhaps and you
know I'm sure that scene must have
struck you as particularly odd at the
time unless do you think the the two
cultures problem was part of that oh I
think it was very much a two cultures
problem because tenure decisions are
usually they're supposed to be secret
but of course they're quite leaky and I
heard leaks saying she's sold out to the
machines
she thinks machines are going to think
she doesn't belong in an English
department and maybe they were right it
might have been the best thing that ever
happened to you in fact it was because
it sent us to New York City when we
lived in New York just rapturously for
40 years yes and that were Jo travel I
know or knew he's departed now a
wonderful human being and again the
other part of the thing in the book
probably not to talk about too much is
that the book is also a love story about
Pamela and Joe Joe basically was brought
to Columbia to rebuild their computer
science department or to start it from
scratch I don't it started where
Columbia was Ivy League and I the I
beliefs were the last really to do
computer science formally and that got
you out of Pittsburgh and if not back to
California at least into the big time
that was sound like you lived quite the
life in New York also Oh a wonderful
life what were some of the cultural high
points in your mind
well we both adored the Performing Arts
that we were at the Opera and we were at
the theater and so on and so forth and
later Joe thought we we should stop
being such amateurs at this so he signed
us up for courses at Juilliard for music
and courses at the Museum of Modern Art
for art I
think I would have but I was really glad
he did it it was just wonderful just
wonderful and of course our friendships
went across all kinds of disciplines
because of that and I of course was in
various literary circles because I was a
officer of Penn the author's
organization that the freedom to write
freedom of expression and ran into most
of the Great and the near-great there
and as far as authors were concerned and
believe me I was considered really weird
writing about this thing called
artificial intelligence oh very very
interesting but weird interesting and
there were some other kinds of pushback
which I found interesting from your book
the one I found most startling was Arno
Penzias I got his name right the Nobel
Prize winner from Bell Labs who detected
the radio signal remnant from the Big
Bang the famous three degree Kelvin
microwave background well you know one
of the great experimental discoveries of
the 20th century and yet he seemed to be
foaming on the topic that computers
can't think tell us about that
it's just the word I guess I can tell
this on the air you can scratch it out
nice I say absolutely anything you know
me he said yeah he called me one morning
before I was even up Joe got me up and
said oh phone for you it's our no we
knew our know socially and there is Arno
Penzias on the phone camera I just read
this book of yours and he went on for
half an hour telling me why machines
could never ever ever think and how I
had wasted three or four years of my
life writing this book and blah blah and
on and on and finally after a half an
hour where I couldn't get a word in
edgewise I finally said to him I know I
know I know you're a married man
you got me out of bed I haven't even
been to the bathroom yet
oh my goodness I mean and here's a
here's a gym and here's a giant of
science right and you would think that
this would not
you know he would not react this way but
but if there does seem to be and you're
you bring these stories up again and
again where people almost feel
personally affronted by the idea you've
got it it they really took it personally
for better or worse yeah that is
interesting and you know ours this is a
legacy of the old chain of being you
know that goes back to the Middle Ages
with humans near the top right below the
Angels right because that's one of the
things I've always you know frankly
loved about AI I'd love to have some
other intelligent entity to talk to
besides just people right it's not funny
you and I feel the same I would love
another mind around I'm smarter than me
find hey I had friendships with Newell
and Simon I had friendships with
McCarthy and Feigenbaum and Minsky I
know that smarter human beings that may
exist and it was always wonderful to be
around them a smarter machines fine
let's talk the things that would be cool
would be the alienness of their minds
most likely right well we really were to
achieve artificial general intelligence
I suspect it relatively unlikely to be a
mind very much like a human mind and
that would be interesting yeah and and I
don't even know if that's true it may be
that we don't recognize anything that
isn't quite like in our minds I don't
know I don't know will be interesting to
find out here over the next somewhere
between 10 and 200 years it is
interesting how actually I have talked
to one of the world's leading experts on
artificial general intelligence just
this week he actually stopped by and we
chatted for a few hours guy named Ben
girsl in fact he's going the expression
artificial general intelligence and he
was saying that the open AI guys who
recently got a billion-dollar investment
from Microsoft are now claiming that
artificial general intelligence ie a
human style of intelligence is less than
five years away oh my he personally
didn't believe it and he is the leading
thinker in my opinion on artificial
general intelligence but these are
non-trivial people and they talked
Microsoft out of a billion dollars and
Microsoft is not
shabby bunch of thinkers or their
famously hard-ass when it comes to
business right so I don't know maybe
it's quicker it maybe he's even shorter
than ten years it certainly will be an
interesting very interesting time it's
an area I follow quite closely and you
know some think but frankly as we were
just saying part of it is just this
libido to talk to somebody else you know
it's one of the themes here on the show
probably half of our shows at least one
of the topics I talk with the guests on
is the Fermi paradox which is hey where
are the aliens right out in space and I
think it comes from the same motivation
many of us hope we can find aliens just
so we could talk to them see what they
know mm-hmm and we don't feel
particularly threatened by them you know
hey let's sit down and have a beer
together though maybe we should in fact
one of the arguments right now is the
discussion around Medi there SETI which
is a search for extraterrestrial
intelligence which has been going on for
60 years in fact one of our recent
guests on the show was Jill tarter the
world's historical we leading
researchers search for terrestrial
television she's now retired but we had
a wonderful wonderful talk about the
search and then there's many the
messaging to extraterrestrial
intelligence which is hugely
controversial you know people like okay
you know he says you know this is the
stupidest thing we could possibly do
which is to yell to the universe we're
here come eatest time will tell right
well he felt the same way about AEI so
what can you say yeah well we'll revisit
that one this this idea of summoning the
demon before we do that one more reach
out into this two cultures theme another
book you wrote which I did not know you
heard wrote but I'm gonna go back to get
it read it is Aaron's code yeah which
you know in short isn't the story about
an artist who used computers to generate
our tell us about that well not
computers so much because there's a lot
of computer generated arts these days
and there was even as he well not so
much as he began but there certainly it
existed anything that could be scanned
and printed on a plotter was counted as
art
those days and Harold Cohen the artist
were talking about wanted to know what
the decision process of an artist was
and since he knew about these cognitive
scientists who were thinking about
modeling human thought could he model
the thought of an artist with thinking
processes and so that was really his
reason for doing it he didn't
particularly want to make art that way
he wanted to model the process that an
artist go through when he makes an image
well that's putting it you know in a
capsule form but that was what he did
and I look now at tons of
computer-generated are and I celebrate
it I think it's wonderful the computer
has really become a wonderful medium for
art but nobody as far as I can see has
done what Harold did which is to say let
me sit down and model my own artistic
making be art making behavior and that's
what he did it sound like it'd be a
great project for a CMU graduate student
to go find a really good and thoughtful
artist and essentially be a domain
expert and create an expert system for
art and using today's modern tools I'm
sure they could accomplish a heck of a
lot more they might be able to for all I
know someone's doing it so anyway back
to the second two cultures theme I
imagine there must have been some kick
back from the artistic community about
both Harold and you writing about it uh
strangely enough no interesting the
reason why is nobody paid any attention
to it okay they had more artists talking
about it just fell into the void
interesting so the humanities the
writing people they took offense and
affront but the artists were so far out
in their own world they just took no
notice of it yes exactly right and you
know partly it was my fault because I
didn't have the vocabulary for
explaining what Harold was doing until I
got to the Santa Fe Institute and there
was this wonderful vocabulary all laid
out for me well I just published the
book I couldn't
the book too bad if I don't yeah it
would have been a different book
actually I have to go back and read it
just sounds like an interesting topic
you know next topic which you alluded to
a little bit earlier which is concerns
about artificial intelligence you know
an interesting book I read I don't know
when it came out was take Marc's life
3.0 yeah we talked biological evolution
cultural evolution technological
evolution and talks about the
singularity and you know the risks that
go with it course there are people more
extreme than tegmark he's pretty
thoughtful and balanced but you have
people like bostrÃ¶m and Elon Musk and
others who are absolutely convinced or
at least they say that they're
absolutely convinced that hey we got to
slow down we got to stop we're summoning
the demon you talked a little bit about
this in the book what do you think about
this ah let me say my own views first my
own view is that AI is probably one of
the most powerful Sciences slash
technologies to come along in human
history a powerful science / technology
has the potential to do great good and
it has the potential to do great harm so
you can swing on one side or the other
and say nah it'll be great or you can
take the Elon Musk etc view it's
terrible and we've got to stop I don't
take well no I hold both views actually
contradictory though they may be and
this is what human intelligence is about
is being able to hold contradictory and
ideas in your head it could be horrible
it could be fabulous and unless we're
careful it could be very destructive it
certainly seems it will be disruptive
whether it'll be destructive I think I'm
with you is an open question and perhaps
a lot of its gonna be based on the
choices that we make in the short term
there's two roads which are interesting
one good and one not so good
one is where if indeed many jobs are
filled by robots and a is if we're wise
this could be a new era of leisure right
we could not be working 1555 hour weeks
we could actually be working on things
that are really meaningful
self-actualization working on art
working on our hobbies working on our
relationships working in our communities
and that would be a wonderful outcome
from the replacement of a fair amount of
work but it would require some new
institutional arrangements like this
universal basic income ideas that are
being talked about right now I think
it's quite interesting that Andrew yang
is talking about it at the level of the
presidential primaries not getting left
off the stage and last night not at all
the other people were talking about it
for the first time and saying hmm this
might be a good idea and whether that's
exactly the right form at least that's
the idea now the other side the bad side
what I'd call the Neo feudalist side is
if it turns out these AIS most of the
values captured by a small number of
plutocrats and are used to just make
ever wider the gap between the working
people the world and the capitalists
then this will be a very bad thing
people will be forced down to very
marginal jobs mostly personal service
cleaning toilets giving massages
whatever to make a living while a tiny
percentage you know the 0.01% are
basically reaping all the benefits of
this amazing increase in productivity
fortunately or unfortunately depending
how you think about it it's up to us the
people to insist that our democratic
processes make this short term
productivity gain and replacement at
work work for everybody
but if we don't it won't I think so
people need to be very take this very
seriously when they think about their
political decisions going forward let me
doesn't make a lot of sense it makes
perfect sense to me I like to divide up
into work and tasks the world has lots
and lots of tasks that go undone because
people are busy making a living
and a lot of that making of the living
is busy work it's chapped dancing as a
friend of mine calls it and it's really
not very gratifying as for human beings
if we let human beings loose on the
tasks that needed to be done and
compensate them for those very important
tasks like looking after children
looking after the elderly so on and so
forth
wow what a world this could be yep but
Andrew yang made that point he gave the
example of his wife who stays home to
take care of their two children one of
whom is autistic
right and that number that real work
does not appear in our GDP and yet it's
real work that adds tremendous value to
the lives of real people yes exactly
right and you can multiply what many
times yeah and we'll see if we are wise
enough to steer our economy and our
politics in that direction we shall see
as this next election will be quite
interesting to the next you know level
of risk that people talk about you know
one that's gotten a lot of attention I
started laughingly call the Emperor
paper clips for the example that
somebody accidentally tells the world's
first artificial general intelligence to
maximize the output of a paper clip
factory and this AI takes it literally
and decides to kill all the people and
convert their material into material to
make paper clips eventually turn the
earth into paper clips invent
interstellar Rockets so it can go and
turn all the stars into paperclips you
know this is the cartoon version of the
artificial general intelligence run amok
and you know there is some risk in that
area though I suspect it may be less
than people think because they
anthropomorphize ai's all the way back
to Eliza Wright they think that they're
more human than they are and no reason
unless it's built in that a computer
ought to have a will for power for
instance you know or the equivalent even
of an ego but one could accidentally
make it happen but before the Emperor
paperclips becomes a problem I'm much
more concerned about bad people armed
with powerful but sub a GI artificial
general intelligence a eyes and ones
that come to mind very strikingly is
China you know it strikes me that if we
continue on the road we're on the
Chinese are gonna be inventing something
new very substantially based on AI which
is a dictatorship of the pervasiveness
and power that George Orwell even with
his amazing imagination could never have
conceived and this is gonna be a very
scary thing it is indeed and I think
you're quite right I would like to say
we've had a literary warning it was
called The Sorcerer's Apprentice
remember that story where the source
leaves somebody to get I think water
from the well it wasn't anyway we know
this can happen we can't let it happen
we must have let it happen and the fact
that a very different culture with very
different ideals is coming up fast in
the a I feel it should give us pause
yeah I was very pleased to see that you
came down on the side of course people
in the United States need to be working
on AI for national defense if I read you
correctly you did because you know this
is a current big Bugaboo out in Silicon
Valley on people at Google's and we
don't want to work on defense right and
they've actually chosen not to compete
for some contracts and not renew to
others while other players Microsoft and
Amazon in particular have been quite
straightforward at making their
expertise available to our military and
in you know particularly with China and
to a lesser degree Russia you know
potentially in a position to try to
achieve a dominant position through
their work at AI it strikes me is
exceedingly foolish for us to
unilaterally disarm the gym I am NOT a
pacifist I am here on this earth because
people I will never know their lives for
me that's the story of my mother with a
tarpaulin between her and the night
giving birth to me people were up in the
sky trying to protect her it would be
immensely hypocritical of me to say oh
that's okay let's be best of us
I can't and this is this is not a world
where we can be at the same time I
really understand how Grievous it feels
that something you do I might be used in
a way that you so disagree with I
understand that I sympathize with it but
for in my view I want the smartest
people and the smartest machines on my
side please I'm a hundred percent with
you and I think our opinion is perhaps a
minority opinion amongst the Silicon
Valley i'ts but hey most of my life is
OK
I hear that and I want to pivot it a
little bit something else another theme
that was woven through your book which
is feminism there's quite a lot about
feminism here and there throughout the
book and you know I've said more than
once that it's my personal view that
when the historians look back from 2000
years in the future and look at the 20th
century they're not gonna say that World
War 2 was the most significant thing nor
the atomic weapon or landing a man on
the moon or the internet but rather the
beginnings of the overthrow of the
patriarchy and which I put approximately
at 1975 where it finally started to get
momentum but you've lived that life I
mean you're a bit older than I am we're
both old goddammit but do you go back a
few more years to where there was just
the most blatant kinds of grotesque
sexism
you know remember reading the memoir of
one of my heroes Sandra Day O'Connor
here she was a top graduate of the
Stanford Law School who had to take a
job as a secretary because no one would
hire her as a lawyer I mean what the
hell right that sort of thing was gone
by time I graduate from college than 75
not to say that there still wasn't a
vast amount of sexism and the patriarchy
but at least that kind of the most
grotesque in-your-face unapologetic sort
was over tell me a little bit about your
journeys with feminism where it's at it
where are we uh well good question
yeah you know when you're in the middle
of the revolution it's really hard to
tell where things are going yes I got
out of
with a degree from a decent university
the University of California at Berkeley
and nobody wanted to know that they
wanted to know how fast I could type so
any job I went for was always based on
how fast I could type and I tried and
tried to get out of that mindset and I
couldn't until finally I went to work at
Stanford for ED flaggin BAM and what do
you know yeah he wanted me to type I was
his assistant somebody had quite the
letters but he also was really eager for
me to know what was going on and sent me
around from place to place on the campus
so I would learn about computing in
general artificial intelligence in
particular and it was from that that I I
left that job and went to graduate
school once in graduate school and out
of graduate school I entered a slightly
different world that had changed
socially and it had changed for me
because I had now two degrees no those
were very bad days and they were days of
long standing
I can't imagine when it was different I
look back in history and you just see
the patriarchy is in full swing and
nobody even questions that are very few
people question it so I realized no I
mean that's just giving me too much
credit somewhere along the way very late
in my romance with artificial
intelligence I realized that one of the
things that made me so fascinated by it
was that it would be a kind of
intelligence that wasn't a white male
suffice that it would be different now
that was a very naive view of how AI is
created but that was what I hoped for is
that this intelligence would step away
from the patriarchy and say you're going
about it all wrong
this is a better way I didn't know that
consciously until ah twenty thirty years
into into my romance with AI but there
it is and what do you know
it may happen meanwhile it has taken
some
very brave women to stand up and say
this is wrong you can't treat me this
way you mustn't treat me this way and
I'm not going to be quiet about it
cats weren't one of the greatest things
that happened particularly in the West
in the last quarter of the 20th century
was finally women stood up and said
we're not taking it anymore and at least
some men supported that and it took both
right I was married to a man who was
absolutely feminist and that's one of
the reasons the marriage lasted as long
as it did we were married for almost
half a century and he was so supportive
of everything I did if anything more
than supportive I used to laugh what
you're like my stage mother come on give
me a break no he was so eager for me to
have the kind of recognition he thought
I deserved it was wonderful and he had
his own very important career in science
and academic administration so it wasn't
that he was making a substitute of me he
just didn't think it was fair now it's
great yeah I was fortunate especially in
having grown up in the 50s and early 60s
that my parents despite being uneducated
working-class type folks had a
remarkably egalitarian marriage you know
if I suppose you woke my father up at 3
o'clock in the morning and said hey
Herbie are you head of the household he
might have said yes but they never acted
that way every decision they made was
collective my mother was always in
charge of Finance doing the taxes
dealing with bankers etc because why
because she was a shitload smarter on
things quantitative than he was and he
was absolutely happy to have her do it
and as I said never saw them make any
decision of any sort
other than jointly and that was actually
a very good influence on my own life so
I think I came to appreciate the fact
that the patriarchy was an idiotic idea
earlier than some perhaps so I can't say
I was raised in such a family in fact my
father was an old-fashioned European
patriarch and as a consequence he raised
two warrior daughters I mean we're both
warriors yeah he was very proud of us
very happy with us so there you go
that's interesting and of course you
know the world has made a fair amount of
progress since you want to you know some
of the things that are very encouraging
is that almost 60% of college graduates
are now women even at the most elite
professional programs Harvard Law the
leading medical schools almost exactly
50/50 membership in these prestigious
graduate programs and professional
programs which tend to be gateways to
the professions and into elite positions
in our society but interestingly one
area where this is not true is in AI or
computer science in general computer
science in general I would say yes it's
NYU that a study and has the numbers
perhaps 15% of papers written and so on
and so forth talks given are written by
women in AI and it shouldn't be 15 it
should be 50 you think it really should
be 50 why not
I wonder it's interesting that Harvard
Law and Harvard Business School and
Johns Hopkins you know they're 5050
these days well but maybe there are
enough differences between men and women
that when given full freedom and no
longer constrained by the patriarchy for
whatever reason they make different
career choices and you know the example
that's thrown out to I'm not sure it's
quite compelling but it's certainly
indicative is that in Sweden which is
probably the most gender egalitarian
society that's ever existed on earth the
percentage of men and engineering is
actually higher than it is in the United
States and the percentage of women in
nursing is actually higher than it is in
the United States so even once the the
bridal of the patriarchy is thrown off
it may well be possible that the genders
have different things that they're
interested in or maybe that they're good
at it's at least possible but we won't
know for 100 years not long to just get
rid of all the excess nonsense that has
pervaded for millennia it was there any
reason one would think there would be
more nonsense
in computer science then say in law or
medicine
I did a study on that actually on
Silicon Valley a preliminary study for
the National Science Foundation a few
years ago with MIT's a friend and a
partner and what we discovered was that
men really made it hard for women to be
in that field just ask them in every way
possible in every unpleasant way
possible I don't mean sexual harassment
I mean you know diminishing them
denigrating them in every way possible
and I know women of my generation who
said who needs this you know I'll go do
something else there's a woman in my
life I'd been middle-aged woman now who
got a SES degree from one of the top
universities came out was doing great
until she ran up against this social
stuff in computing and she was gradually
funneled into human resources and things
like that and she looked at me one day
and she said didn't I fight hard enough
and I said it has nothing to do with you
personally it's systemic you need
millions to fight hard enough not just
you know we shall see certainly one
could hope to get rid of anything like
that where there is opposition to
talented women coming into a field you
know it won't happen overnight as you
said it I don't will be a hundred years
but I hope it's order than that but it
it's every year hopefully getting a
little better and then we'll see are
there you know just sort of built-in
differences between men and women and
what they're interested in or has it
been something else
well continuum there are people who are
really good at raising kids and they are
mostly maybe well I don't know mostly
women you know I liked it not to have
children I just decided I'd rather be a
full-time writer and the number of women
who came to me and said you know I love
my kids but if I added to do over again
I'd have done what you did
well that was surprising I really
thought I was a little island all by
myself
uh-uh but you know it's so ingrained in
us that the women will raise have and
raise the children that maybe we need to
think about that a little more
yeah well particularly on that one it's
going to take more time and I do think
the most important first step in which
we've now mostly taken is that either
gender should be able to do whatever
they want even if it's extremely low
probability historically for instance
you know probably the last legal sexism
that was finally repealed in the United
States in the last couple of years which
is that women are now able to be
infantry officers in the Marine Corps
right that's a brutal job that requires
great physical strength a murderous
intent and a bunch of other things which
at least historically and culturally
haven't been highly associated with what
women like to do but nonetheless as soon
as they open the doors a bunch of women
raise their hand said yeah I'd like to
bring a Marine Corps infantry officer
and they've gone through you know the
schools and a fair percentage of them
have succeeded and qualified and they're
now you know officers in the Marine
Corps leading men and women in the mud
killing people when necessary etc and
even if it turns out that it's never
more than three or four percent strikes
me is morally absolutely essential that
anyone who wants to do something like
that be able to do so couldn't agree
more
but on the other hand it wouldn't bother
me or surprise me frankly if only a very
small percentage of women actually want
to do it so anyway you know you live
through the kind of the big piece of
this story which is by no means ended
yet it'd be very interesting to see how
it plays out over the next couple of
generations I think with young girls I
see you know they have no idea what I'm
talking about
and for that I say thank God you should
not know what this was like it was awful
you know classified ads jobs for women
jobs for men all that stuff and I would
like to say that the last legal barrier
has
not been breached and we have an Equal
Rights Amendment that is annoying that's
at least a negative and whole it needs
to be fixed it amazes me that that has
not been reintroduced you know that
would be relatively well I don't know
but I absolutely agree with you that the
Equal Rights Amendment needs to be
enacted as a catch-all for non
necessarily legislative discrimination
you know the Marine Corps ban on women
officers was a positive block on women
but the Equal Rights Amendment will
provide a mechanism to get rid of a
bunch of less codified but still real
impediments on women's ability to move
forward in the world you know perhaps
most famously on equal pay for equal
work for example yes there's still a lot
of work to be done and I you know I hope
we as a society continue to do that work
well Pamela this has been great it's
been everything I was hoping it would be
and I'd like to repeat again to the
audience you should read this book
Pamela's new book this could be
important my life with the artificial
intelligence eeeh you'll enjoy it if you
like a good read you'll learn something
and it will by no means be a waste of
time thanks very much Jim production
services and audio editing by Jared
Jane's consulting music by Tom Muller at
modern space music com
[Music]