right welcome to the first idea cafe in
a while I was on vacation today we are
talking about how are you coping with
Cove in 19 who would like to start I'll
go I know for me actually finally my
life doesn't really change very much the
two things that it cat food is a
difficult thing for me to sort out for
myself
right so cat food I rely on the external
world well the other thing is my mother
is very violent and I'm unable to get
back to the UK to visit which would be
no I mean she's not a death store you
know what I mean if she was actually at
death's door than I dare say I might
figure out a way but so that that's
that's about it other than that give
with supermarkets open and you know able
to get things like gas bottles and stuff
like that I live pretty isolated life
anyway so quarantine II makes very very
little difference to me but yeah I mean
I'm I guess for me this is an awful
thing to say in a way but I guess for me
I am above all excitedly curious about
the whole thing to see how it all plays
out I'm very interested in the sort of 6
to 18 months from now kind of period and
what's gonna what's going to unfold
because there's going to be consequences
of consequences of consequences of
consequences but that's not really what
this is about so I'll shut up there it's
for all of it how are you coping this is
a rather broad broad category do you
wanna go care sure so for me in some
ways my life isn't very different
because I you know I I do a lot of I
don't didn't go out a lot before but
there are a few things that are
different like my husband is home all
the time now which it you know for the
last five or six years we have lived
except like he he goes he goes somewhere
during the week for work and he's home
on the weekends and so now we've bent
now had this is the most amount of time
we've spent together and several years
so we get a long okay
but there are some other ramifications
about about there's some stuff about him
being around all the time that's
bringing a lot of difficult emotions for
me to the surface and so getting to work
through that and the way we do it is we
do lap we once we have worked through
something we do something called laptop
couples therapy and we've been doing
that on Facebook live where we just get
a you know we talked about how we
process things because we know that you
know not everybody talks about that
stuff but also my mom is in my mom's up
in Seattle she has underlying health
conditions that make her really
susceptible and so there's that been
that confirmed and she's been in this
really weird position where she actually
works for like the biggest hospital in
downtown Seattle and um and she works in
a like close you know close part of the
hospital and she was set to retire May
1st and so there was this cascade of
things that all of a sudden she thought
she had two months to get a bunch of
things sorted out and then we had to do
a she had to do a bunch of things that
had her out in the public because she
had to go to Social Security office and
all these things and we're like me and
my husband are like what are you doing
leaving the house and she's like well I
have to make sure these things are in
place before I retire and so you know
there's been the concern about that and
then getting to watch myself wanting to
do hoarding I I would like to say that
that that I'm not but you know my
scarcity mindset coming to the surface
and you know that getting to watch my
mind go into the places of a lot of fear
and yeah and one of the ways that I am
coping with kovat 19 is with food I can
live not gonna yeah and eating more more
sugar than usual just probably not good
for my immune system but
it's been one of the ways that I've been
coping and but overall doing pretty well
but I kind of lost it over the weekend
something about way too many dishes I
wasn't used to that having that because
my husband's not usually home during the
week there was it seemed to be an
exorbitant amount of dishes that I was
doing and it's the little things that
are you know bring up the stress and so
it's a lot of just little things and
yeah so there's there's just a lot so
right thank you and see I was talking to
my my dad well you were you were talking
to beginning but I think I got the gist
I really like I've watched it I watched
the one life you did a bit of it which
are awesome I'm so glad I think the
world really needs that especially
couples like I mean I'm my life hasn't
actually changed that much this is kind
of my normal except that when I go to
the grocery store I can't be in and out
in an hour and it's my one instead of it
being the biggest chore that I hate a
little bit do I look forward to going I
guess and like oh I get to get out and
see other human beings but I felt this
really weird because when its first
started people were first starting to be
at home I was flying to about political
visit my family and it's my extended
family I haven't been there five years
but we didn't get of course get to see
any of my extended family I just hung
out with my mom and stepped out in their
apartment for like two weeks and they my
mom went grocery shopping and my dad who
I live with his immune compromised and
has lung issues and is 65 so he was back
here still I stocked up on stuff but he
still has to go to medical appointments
so he goes there and it takes the bus
back and he's very independent and I'm
like you can't take the bus like you can
and so I I have to like find a way to
cope with it's his life and he gets to
make his choices but I'm also making a
lot of choices of like we're not going
out as much we're not doing other things
so that we're keeping him safe because
he keeping himself safe and it's so it's
it's frustrating but I find like well I
was in elbert all I was like I want to
get back to Vancouver I want to get to
my normal life so I can start to a
meeting so I can start like doing more
of the stuff that I want to be doing
during this time and I got back and I
just crashed I was I went live I was
going live every night at 6:00
um I did two of them and then I just
haven't for the last two nights because
I'm too tired the I know smoking pot
during the day to cope and I'm doing
other things that aren't aren't my
Highness self but at the same time it's
like and it's not I think what everyone
else is experiencing I'm back in I know
how to save the world and why the
can't I why aren't I doing the things
that I need to be doing which is I know
the worst stress for me because I can't
put it all on me and at the same time
there is that okay well I dunno so why
are why aren't I sharing it to the best
of my ability why aren't my can I go
live for that 40 minutes a night it's
not that big of a deal except that the
Internet's not working and all these
other these other things are like my
daughters on the iPad all day every day
I'm like that's kind of not all we're
doing one one sheet of work I mean she
only just got back from Spring Break
yesterday so we were on vacation
vacation and there's no need to do
schoolwork and I don't really find
there's that big of a need to do school
work right now anyway but it's like
dealing with and then just the stress
that like now everyone's home and so
there's like good neighbors upstairs or
in construction two doors down which I'm
like why are you tearing down a house
right now like I get the construction is
supposed to be a essential service but I
feel like when the house isn't yet torn
down it is not an essential service stop
for the next three months but that's
just my own little I don't like noise
and they're in they can't socially
distance on a construction site but I'm
also curious I mean I feel like this is
a big opportunity this is everyone at
home starting to wake up to the fact
that our governments both are the best
solution we have right now and in no way
adequate to deal with not just this but
all of the ramifications that happen
they're not big picture thinkers they
don't have access to the data and
information they would need and we don't
trust them so they can have access to
the data information and working through
doing the solution raising and I see
them as such a benefit to what we could
be debating co-creating but not like not
being able to close the gap of getting
people to have those conversations and I
have a conversation I set up with Jordan
Hall on Thursday to kind of just chat
about the solution raisings
I don't know why
we showed to him it was like well I just
want to talk to you about this he was
like he'll make time for you and which
feels great but also like wait what are
we talking about it like I don't even
can't really help me problem-solve the
thing that I'm here to do you on the
planet but anyway so like I'm both I'm
coping good compared to what like and
that was what when this first hit and
everyone else was like they don't
understand how hard it is to stay at
home for weeks and weeks on how like you
get on each other's nerves how all of
this stuff happens and there's all of
these memes of like you know your
grandparents had a fight at war and you
know all you have to do is sit at home
watch Netflix and although to some
degree that's absolutely true it's also
not giving the severity of a don't mean
the severity of the virus the severity
of the mental and spiritual and
relational impact that this is going to
have on society the people who whole
sense of self is wrapped up in their job
can't go to their drug can't make a
living or if they do you have to do it
with like it's just this is gonna have a
lot of repercussions and those are the
things we all see to preparing for is
like the mental the mental part and the
emotional part and that this isn't
nothing and yes you're allowed to binge
like you're allowed to just do the
Netflix you're allowed to not work out
and do the things take a few weeks and
you know like get back in touch with
yourself this is a hard thing to do I
don't know that's that's a bit of how
how I'm I'm coping at the moment I could
so relate to Jubilee I could still
relate to what you said about the that
like why can't I just go on to this
thing and do this thing that I know that
can be helpful and I saw a series of
tweets the other day that somebody had
posted on Facebook the other day that
was you know right now what we're you
know the reason we're so tired is that
there's trauma response so it's
happening because we can't do this is a
situation where fight-or-flight doesn't
work and what you know what's the option
freeze and your system like our systems
are for a lot of people shutting down
because that's the way it knows how to
cope with an enemy that you can't you
know and
me that you can't see or hear or you
know touch you know your your systems
like what do i do how do I cope with
this and you know one of the ways it
does that is shutting down
so I can because I have that same thing
like I know that I'm capable of more and
my energy level and my ability to focus
and all of those things are just not up
there and so how do I be gentle with
myself and do the things that I know
that I need to do like as far as because
I totally agree with the mental health
aspect of it that's it that's that's
what I'm kind of like emotionally
preparing for is you know the how how
how people are going to cope mentally
and emotionally it's like exercise more
exercise what is one thing I can't not
do because if I don't got that's what
will cause my mood to just absolutely
and you know being mindful of my food
yes I might have might have eaten she
knows for dinner for a couple of nights
which I never do but you know but being
mindful of okay that I've done that for
like a couple of days and that's good
and and getting back to the things that
are what I know will help me stay
healthy so yeah I can absolutely relate
to all of that and I absolutely agree
that that the mental and emotional
aspect is a huge part and as you were
saying that it occurred to me that if
you decide to do like a solution raising
on that piece of it I'd love to
participate in that because yeah on
mental health emotional health that that
piece of you know how do we do how do we
cope with this in you know it in the
kovat 19 reality not just the you know
we want to switch to game game be the
we're gonna have a lot of people who
are gonna not be able to afford their
medication we're gonna have a we're
gonna have just not have it available I
change that may get interrupted and not
be able to get people their medication
what do you do when people are choosing
well I'm just not going to take my
antidepressants because I can't because
if I have to choose between that and
food I'm gonna choose food yeah and
people come on in like
sorry go Eric I I was just saying I
think here is on to something with the
freezing thing you know as you quite
rightly say fight-or-flight is not an
option here and so you know the only
response to the traumatic event Mr
Freeze however what I would say is that
freezing that the freeze response
doesn't last terribly long right and so
people will emerge from that and so well
it's going to be very very interesting
to see where their energies end up
becoming directed after that period of
being of being frozen and I think that
could possibly be one of the generator
functions if you like that will decide
the direction that you know we go from
here kind of thing is how people respond
to all of that time to themselves will
they use it as an opportunity for
self-reflection and broader reflection
and and the building of relationships
with those in close proximity because
they're forced into close proximity with
them right or will it be isolation and
blaming and telling on your neighbors
because they walk the dog for 12 minutes
instead of 10 minutes and and you know
this this kind of thing suspicion and
accusation I I think it's really I mean
I don't have a prediction I have no idea
but I and obviously it's going to be
some mixture of these two things where
it's not going to be all one or other
but but you know whatever the trend is I
think is is gonna be a really defining a
really defining thing yeah and I think
it is even now we're seeing both right
and in the same human being like I would
care said about hoarding right like I'm
like I also have like I know what humans
are like and I know I honestly don't
want to live through
not you don't want to feed ourselves and
having to steal from your neighbors and
having to defend your food I'm like I
don't know what I'm gonna do if it ever
gets to that point but so I'm also I'm
not like massively stockpiling but you
know a couple extra packages of pasta
like quite frankly I only go shopping
every two to three weeks because of my
anxiety so now needing to do that when
there's limits on stuff you can buy
because it's not the normal it's not the
normal that most people go everyw they
go every like twice a week and that the
I saw the mean that you were talking
about you're the one about the trauma
response and when I saw it there was
part of it it's like that's my life like
that is I can't do fight or flight so I
do freeze and that is my nervous system
it shuts down under stress which means
I've developed this height all uhrin
spur stress that other people can't deal
with but it also doesn't go away like
it's not something that's temporary
because the world is still stressful and
I can deal with my personal stress like
what people think about me don't give a
 anymore because that's stress I can
let go of but I can't really let go of
the stress of like what's happening in
India and what's happening around the
world like I can just not look at it but
it's not the same it's like and part of
me I know before this before like I cram
in all the that's wrong in the
planet and wrong with humanity because
it's something that I did as like I need
to learn more and I'm doing that with
coping where it's like I have the stats
up and I look at them and refresh them
every you know like five or six times a
day probably more than that and it's
like what is that gonna do it's not
gonna do anything I'm not gonna solve
Kovan 19 but I have figured out kind of
how to solve the economy and how to
solve human nature and how did you in my
way and so yes I can't solve this thing
but it did work for all of those things
but it's like how to let go of something
that served me because it's not serving
me right now knowing what's happening
everywhere in the world and the famines
and the mists and then that isn't going
to because it puts me into freeze
instead of into actually taking action
how do I do the solution raising how do
I get people to come and be part of a
revolution they can have from their
living rooms right to be like take the
time grieve do what you need to do but
there are so much hope and opera
here we don't need to be out in the
street marching that was never gonna
really do that much we can be on our
computers doing much more effective
things which are having conversations
and creating the tools we need to make
sure even if this was a hoax even if
this was something our governments all
got got in on and dealt with it in the
competent way they do just to show like
because that would be a higher level of
perfect right like confidence that was
involved is like a whole other level of
planning if they if they planned that
into it but even if that was true how do
we take them back how do we like after
six months 18 months saying no this
isn't happening anymore how do we hold
how do we witness for each other so that
there isn't the the opportunity for for
corruption that there has always been
what how do we make it less so now what
came up for me as you were talking about
that I'm I'm participating in a group
that's watching the John for baekje
awakening from the meeting crisis series
and one of the things that we we were
talking about last night was one one of
the people asked early on in the series
he's like well so what sort of practical
things is that you know when is he gonna
get into the sort of practical advice of
or the pragmatic things that I can use
and what we slowly come to the
realization of is that it's he's not
giving practical advice but what he is
giving is he's giving a language and a
realization of like okay this and this
is no longer about collecting
information and collecting knowledge
it's about developing wisdom and how do
you do that and that's through you know
collectively we're going at somebody hit
the nail on the head collectively we are
in an altered state of consciousness
because life as we know it is not normal
right now and so collectively we are
altered and there is insight and wisdom
that's going to come from this that is
not going to
that no it's like there might be
individuals who have a really good sense
of how to fix things like you Jubilee
but collect them but that that doesn't
do us a whole hell of a lot of good
until collectively there is a a critical
mass that understands it in their body
in a way that you know you know a few
people do and so you know it's in
through these I I agree through these
conversations that we are like figuring
out okay what what is it that we need to
be doing and right now like my husband
gets to do you know he's working on
building things me I'm working on
building relationships and communication
and because that's the part that I can
do and and getting to deal and and going
back to Eric what you said about that
freeze thing but there's the freeze
thing is temporary but part of it is
there's this thing that it gets
exacerbated especially for people who
are not familiar with mindfulness and
with being able to be aware of what
their thought process is is I'm frozen
I'm like you said Jubilee fully
identified with my career which I can no
longer do so now I'm a failure as a
human you know I'm frozen in place and
because I can't work and all of my
identity was wrapped up in what I did
for work I am a complete failure as a
human being and that loop yeah there we
go
I kid I can't tell where the camera is
that loop getting sucked into it that
get that cut will drag you down you know
faster than anything I think that's also
one of the things that's different
between fight flight and freeze is like
fighting flying are the two that were
there for a really long time freeze was
- it just wasn't really your adrenaline
kicks in and you either fight on the
lion the stress your boss goes away or
you don't I mean like the adrenaline
Peaks and then it goes down and same
with flight you run away and then the
thing is no longer chasing you
and your adrenaline can come down
whereas with fries nothing changed like
and so even though you're kind of coming
out of it there isn't that spike and
then coming down so it's like like you
need to truly change in order for the
situation to change it's like you have
to come back from fries and if you don't
know how to do that because you don't
have mindfulness or whatever option you
have it's like the things still there
you're still not employed the world
still have you're still locked inside
and like any of the coping mechanisms
you had probably aren't applicable you
can't even really go up for a run in a
lot of places right you can't how do you
exercise at home it's just not the same
to stand in place and run right in or do
jumping jacks when like what you needed
was to get away from your family what
you needed was to like go for a walk and
and and gather your thoughts and like I
feel I did that a couple times a week
and I feel like we're doing it now like
it's like can I even go to the same
place it's kind of a skinny path so I
people walk both way it's like if anyway
it's like is it important enough to do
it and yes it probably is for your
mental and physical health that is
important enough and at the same time
then we have this sense of well because
if everyone went out and did that a few
times a day then we wouldn't be doing
social distancing so it's like how much
are we allowed and then if you someone's
using more than that I want to call the
cops I want to like you know like
they're using more than my a lot in time
when in reality some people just like
every facet of our economy and human
nature are going to need more and some
people are gonna need less and they
actually don't want to leave their
houses they're like there would be
enough no we can't go to the beaches no
we can't do things that you concentrate
people but there's enough outside in our
places that we can do that it's okay if
someone needs to be outside eighty
percent of their day as long as there
aren't six feet away from other people I
don't know what it's gonna be like for
them to be cooped inside but can you
figure it out because there probably
doesn't seem fair but like both of those
things at the same time we're unique and
different we have different needs and
also we need to work on this together
and everyone needs to change a little
bit like
my kids an extrovert and I'm an
introvert so because she goes to school
because I have things like cohousing I
can't I figured out how to get her
social needs met without me necessarily
meeting them that's not happening for
the next five to six months which means
I have to put more in than I was that
I'm actually capable of and forgive
myself for that I'm not capable of it
right like both at the same time find a
way to do it without it being stressful
because then I go into freeze I'm
sleeping for a couple days well it's
funny Orlan you were talking about like
you know people using it more I for like
the last four years I have um at least
three times a week if not closer to six
times a week do the stairs at because I
live right at the beach like I live
across the street from the beach and so
I'll do the stairs that are like two
blocks away and I've seen an up to like
an uptick in the number of people who
are coming and using the stairs and it's
like there's this part of me that's
going wait a minute stop this is my
equipment so getting to see that it's
like oh yeah like I kidding to see you
like that you know that part of me again
I I'm I'm very aware of my scarcity like
but you know resource even though
there's not enough resources and the
same things and you know I've gotten to
joke with people about it you know
because it's like people come you know
people congregate a couple of feet feet
away from each other at the top of the
stairs and I'm like you know I was like
I knew that there was going to be a more
of a competition for the equipment the
set of stairs down to the beach yeah
it's like because this is because this
is my normal right now there's less
traffic and there's less people outside
and so right now I'm like can we go to
the beach because I cannot go on a
normal day like can I take advantage of
this for because this is you guys are
all like once this gets normal again can
go out and exist in life whereas then I
can't so it's like now that there's less
sensory there's
less people there's less I'm like
actually could let's go hang out at the
beach like it's the irony that like now
that it's quiet people who can't
normally get out could get out but then
yeah people who really need to get out
because they're used to getting out and
they're extroverts and they're they need
it even more right now but they normally
get it anyway just that like do I get
more right now is it okay if I go to the
beach other people I don't know well and
it's been interesting to to watch you
know I've talked before about 12-step
being an important part of my life and
all of a sudden like within like four
days all of the meetings got cancelled
you know within it within four to seven
days all of me but I was because I'm so
comfortable with zoom I was bringing
meetings on you know I I'm now hosting
several meetings a week on you know my
zoom account because I had one I was
comfortable with it and so I'm helping
people get you know it was like how can
I help and watching that come online and
but then you know people they're getting
you know they're they're being people
who have who are extroverts who are not
handling hi Keaney like a compulsion I
have to say hi to kitties there's you
know when people people who are
extroverts who are not handling this
well it's like how do you process this
and it's yeah it's quite yeah we don't
have the solutions in our in our society
I'm liking your idea of having a
solution raising on mental health and
emotions is like how did how did we do
it before this how are we currently
doing it now during this and what could
it look like in an ideal world it's
gonna be eaten right well and you know I
mean in that case you know the 12-step
community is a great example of how
that's you know it's like getting you
know it's like I see people on Facebook
who are who I know aren't part of those
groups and then show it you know and
then people then I go into these
meetings and people are handling it
really well they have these tools they
have these psycho technologies for
dealing with it and so it's yeah
something that I find fascinating but
it's yeah an Eric yeah it's interesting
because you're pretty quiet on this one
and I'm you see you having some strong
opinions about stuff and you you're
pretty bright I can also sit and listen
and ya know I mean if something
important feels like it needs to be said
then I'll say
so you smoking I was gonna go smoke and
I'm like right I can cuz I have to make
sure I can drive my dad somewhere and
drive back in the car and I stocked up
on tobacco the other day I went out of
Thursday it's the first time I've been
out since the lockdown and I mean I
bought what for me will be sufficient
food I mean I've always got four or five
six weeks of stuff in stock anyway so
what was my point there was oh yeah yeah
so I stocked up with tobacco I reckon
I'm good for six weeks on tobacco now as
well because that would be one of the
first things to go right I mean that's a
luxury item and quite right too I mean
supply chains are restricted right the
first things they stopped transporting
them fair enough I'm stocking up on
marijuana so I'll have some I don't use
as much as I need to treat it for food I
should be okay well it's interesting
because here in California the the
marijuana dispensaries are considered
essential services you know there's been
a lot of there's been a lot of
interesting stuff about how in
California liquor stores and pot and
marijuana dispensaries are considered
essential services well course they are
Jesus Christ for all the reasons you've
just been talking about for the last
absolutely they're essential yeah I
can't like right now I feel like I
should be coming back on marijuana for
the all the reasons that I like I'm like
I need to step up during this time
period while everyone else doesn't you
need to step back but just that
need to do that is enough of a stress -
I can't do it but so it's like I need to
not be smoking pot while everyone else
is like increasing their intake I need
to like be lowering mine but I can't
imagine being forced to go off it
because it's not available like that's a
completely different yeah volunteering
to stop and having it taken away from
you it's actually looking different
things what's happening in downtown in
our inner mind a little bit something
you were talking about earlier there's
something we were talking about earlier
there's what Kyra was talking about the
you know like the freezing being
essentially permanent right because you
get into this I see no way out of being
frozen therefore I remain frozen kind of
thing right I'm there that that's you
know different through a different lens
that's kind of what I was talking about
earlier right that in that situation
people either find something in
themselves or they will not right and
then which of these two states is the
predominant and I think is going to be a
defining because if people do spiral
down into depression you know avoidance
of life generally
toxifying of relationships blaming other
people for everything that's going on
blah blah blah blah if they do descend
into that on mass I mean if that's the
default position and it might be because
as you said people just don't have the
tools right it's not in our culture
we're just not not given those tools in
our in our culture in our education our
upbringing so yet that could very well
be that could very well be for most
people or for lots and lots and lots of
people now this plays out come off
that's a frightening thought isn't it
well and it's interesting because as
someone who because of my experience
with 12-step I kind of I'm seeing people
you know up their intake of whatever it
is that they're taking and it'll be
interesting to see it's like they're you
know if it if it's pot or alcohol or
whatever
you know upping their intake to deal you
know deal with this and if you're not
aware that that's what you know that
that's what you're doing getting stuck
in that it's getting stuck in that
pattern it's John Verbeck he calls it
like this the reciprocal narrowing where
you get into that addictive behavior and
once the threat is you know gone a good
example is is Vietnam almost all of the
a huge portion of the vets in Vietnam
were doing heroin 15 percent of them
when they got back couldn't stop you
know most of the 85% got black they
could just stop because they were no
longer in the life-threatening situation
they were no longer seeing those things
and they could just stop but some
percentage of them you know 15% couldn't
they just couldn't stop and so how you
know not only dealing with the immediate
crisis you know mental health crisis in
the moment but this is going to be a
prolonged thing what we saw I think what
we saw in 2008 was it was just a start
of what this was you know I and I
actually think we're in I feel hopeful
that maybe and this is only because in
2008 I had no sense of any of this stuff
and I was dealing I was using all kinds
of things to deal with the you know the
anxiety and everything else now it seems
like there is more conversation around
mental health around how you know why
you the eye is important because you
know people need to you know what do you
do when you have a whole group of people
who have no sense of purpose all those
things so I think is like for me I
definitely know that my addiction has
had like the more anxious I am the more
stress I'm under it's harder don't smoke
pot it's harder not to consume media at
the same time it's also the time I need
it so it's finding the balance between
allowing the self medication we
found it getting worse and worse and
worse and not let me make it worse like
a like accepting the substance use and
the media addiction for what it is has
helped me go through this like ascending
spiral where it's like I'll have like a
bad a bad period and then also go off of
it for a while I with only positive
office media but I get bored with it and
then I end up doing something more
productive on board but like this every
time I go through a cycle it has less
and less grip on my life but it
absolutely can go the other way where
you're off of works you're smoking pot
and it's like oh I'm smoking pot I'm
like I am a STONER I am the person just
sitting around playing video games all
day and then you use more of it and then
you know like it's this downward spiral
versus my acceptance has been an upward
spiral of like okay yeah you're you know
if you need to do this to get through
life for two weeks that's it just feel
your feeling and then when I get to the
place rub numbs and I feel gross about
the numbing that I can I can generally
go off of it for a period of time feel
the intense emotion get to the point
where then like I can start using it
again and then it's like goes through a
cycle because abstinence both because
both of them are things that I do need
for not me and medication and just in
their world of boredom and yet I I have
to find that balance there abstinence
isn't isn't an option for me Erik I want
to circle back to something you said
when you shared because we've been
talking about kind of like the the
problems but there but I do agree with
you that there is there is a also an
excitement about the opportunities
granted the United States I think is
probably gonna be a bigger show
than in other countries and I don't you
know I don't know what's going to happen
if this you know $1,200 is not going to
be enough to help people deal with their
expenses and you know there there's
there's so many things but there is also
these opportunities like there
is this potential for like collect our
collective in you know consciousness
evolving through this and what does that
you know what does that look like and
there's also like the framing of it
because yeah we can one way of looking
at this is we're going through trauma
another way of looking at it is that's
an officer's metamorphosis is you know
the the caterpillar and again this is a
conversation I was having last night as
like caterpillars before they cocoon
consume something like 300 times body
weight and food what are people doing
right now they are there's a lot of
people who are you know going back to
comfort food to the things that are and
it's part of that you know storing up
energy through I like it it's a it's a
really beautiful frame in which to put
our behavior right but it also in a way
absorbs as a responsibility right go
ahead go ahead that's what you're
supposed to do consume consume consume
you know what I mean and say there there
is there is that danger to it I think
but it also is it's an addiction that we
need to be able to process and go
through like we feel that excess anxiety
and excess and so like if we're needing
comfort food and we're needing to do
that I think that if again in six months
or a year we're still eating at that
same level no probably not healthy for
your body but like right now to give
people a little more permission to fall
apart without society falling apart like
societies where you've got to do what
it's doing you know the notion of it you
know that's what caterpillars are
supposed to do is consume everything in
their path with no regard for the
consequences to the things that they're
consuming right all they do is consume
at bats they're going to metamorphose
into this thing and so the the notion is
that all of that was worth it right
because it was
in the service of the becoming of a
beautiful thing but my point is that if
you accept that analogy then it takes
any restriction off of you right now
it's good right greed is good again
right you're taking as much as you can
consuming as much as you can as good
because you're working towards being a
butterfly do you see what I mean did you
see the danger in that but I think we're
so the other way that it's like we've
already been like that for everything
else right like oh you want 15 yachts
and 30 cars there's a beautiful
butterfly but if you want you know I
mean eat a kind of ice cream for dinner
you're a glutton Lee lazy sloth and so
allowing people the freedom to be like
again comfort food is comfort food your
we might not be getting through this
with with um you know not everyone's
gonna be eating organic Whole Foods I
know I haven't been for the last few
years because I did give myself
permission not to be gluttonous but just
like if I had such a low appetite that I
wouldn't eat for days or I'd eat a tiny
bit I was like eat what you want I don't
care if it's it's like orange Cheetos
eat calories and it helped me in a much
better way than like this obsession with
eating everything to be organic and
everything to be whole foods I shouldn't
want to eat it it's like Oh
solid I just bought salad for the first
time in a very long time let's see we'll
see if it goes out in the box like it
usually does the Eric I totally hear
what you're saying and I think there's a
difference between someone being in the
position of mindfully doing it and work
I think there's a difference between
justifying and not fueling the shame
spiral
hmm no no I agree I agree I'm just
saying if there's a line there is a line
and you know they're you know they're
they're you know there's a there's a
line between I'm being gentle with
myself and I am giving myself permission
to behave in a way that I know is not
right yeah yeah you know like this
weekend I you know
I needed to cocoon a little bit and I
ended up spending all day Saturday
watching Picard and all they Sunday
watching Tiger King are all they send
entire King and like it was a train
wreck and it was terrible and yet there
was something emotionally satisfying
about doing that
and like I need it and like my husband I
don't I have a really hard time giving
myself permission to do things that
allow me to relax like I don't do that
and so my husband was like can you
dressed there you know there's there's
physical reasons of why I needed to
relax he's like can you just like accept
that that that right now the way that
you need to deal with it is by eating
some Oreos and watching junk television
he's like no you're not going to do that
every day can you just give yourself
permission to do that for today and I
did and that a you know like figuring
out that balance it's it's not a simple
you know in I love the you know I love
the analogy of it's like you know
figuring out how to walk the beam how to
walk on a balance beam and find that you
know don't don't tip one too far one way
or the or the other my personality is
one where I somebody told me this once
it's like moderation is that place that
I fly by from one extreme and but the
more mindfulness I practice the more I
become aware of behaviors the more it
becomes a balance and so but yes I agree
with you Eric that there's that there is
a balance and it's funny I almost see
what you just said the other way that
the
how can I put this right so the flying
from extremes to express extreme is
actually what you want to be doing
however you want to be doing it in such
a way that you're benefiting from it
right not being thrown about in the wind
but actually experiencing the ya know
the intensity of life in its full but
yeah so there's what I was trying to
articulate is that some kind of
relationship it feels like the some kind
of relationship between the ability to
moderate yourself and then thus gaining
the freedom to go to the extremes or
something like that does that make any
sense it does the language that John
rebecky uses is he talks about she talks
about having an optimal grip on life and
yeah yeah and you know and Jubilee I
appreciated what you talked about about
the you know with your smoking pot and
it like there's he also talks about this
this concept of a reciprocal narrowing
and a reciprocal opening and the
reciprocal narrowing being like you know
this is the only thing that I can you
know that this is the only thing I can
do to deal with this particular whatever
it is like it's a fear and so I'm taking
this medication or I'm taking this drug
or whatever and a the the reciprocal
opening of okay there is more ways to
look at this than just this one way and
again it getting more expansive and
finding out and and that not just being
an individual journey but a collective
journey as well you know I going from
like okay this is the only way we know
how you know our dependence on on fossil
fuels you know that it being this
reciprocal narrowing we're okay we've
been dependent on this how do we do that
opening up where we're not going to get
it right the first time and I think
that's one of the things that actually
keeps us stuck in our
that's one of the things that keeps you
stuck in an addiction is I have to do it
perfectly the first time
nothing I think downfalls of the 12-step
like a a model is there's this concept
of absent you know like abstinent it's
only like you have to do it perfectly
yeah and rewarding the week and the
month and the six months in the year and
whatever they you know sometimes there
are things that where it's like okay I
might need something for a temporary
period of time so that I don't like go
on going off myself like I'm gonna do
something so that I I'm gonna take
something so that I don't go and off
myself be or yeah so it's like yeah I
think that that might be the thing the
one criticism I have of the game be
conversation is you know don't let
perfection be the enemy of the good or
so there's a phrase and I don't remember
exactly what it is was like don't let
perfection be the enemy of good enough
yeah don't let it don't let it start
stopped you from starting down the road
kind yeah don't let perfection be the
enemy of good like it's like you know
yeah I like that I like that okay what
are we gonna you know we're gonna we're
gonna let ourselves fall apart here for
a little for a period of time and then
pick ourselves back up and we don't have
to do it perfectly that is one of them
right I mean Jordan Jordan I'm pretty
sure that you know it a little bit more
of that and a little bit less of that
you know what I mean and then as long as
you can consistently not every day not
all the time you know I mean you're
gonna up from time to time but
again broadly speaking so long as you
can broadly speaking you're doing a bit
more of that a bit less of that and then
that's that's good stuff and I think but
I think that collectively there is that
black and white thinking I think that's
again a John burr of a key term of the
the society this the cultural grammar of
you know all or nothing you know like
it's it has to be all or not
and how do we collectively loosen our
grip on if it's not perfect that you
know it's not all our fault I was just
thinking as you were saying that you
know this happens in films all the time
right where one incident or one
conversation or one whatever all of a
sudden it changes their lives forever
right they're a completely different
person from that moment on and I think
we sort of at some levels expect that of
ourselves right and we're waiting for
that pivotal moment to come along that's
going to transform us into the thing
that we want to become not like you have
this six minute montage yeah for years
that like and then you come out the
other side and everything like yeah
there are times my husband and I'll make
the joke of like what where's my montage
why isn't my - well I find it I had this
falling out with my sister over here a
year ago and I just refrained in for on
Facebook during the scope it 19 thing it
was like all right I can handle being
Facebook friends but part of it is her
personality is very much that very much
movie montage everything is life
changing everything is epic every like
every cleanse every everything he does
is huge and I'll do the same thing and
be like yeah that was kind of neat like
that like it's not life changing and so
once I let go that my life had to look
anything like hers and it can I have a
chronic illness I have a very different
lifestyle but once I got that that was
never supposed to be how I changed I was
always supposed to do incremental it was
supposed to be like you know celebrate
that you did laundry but if your house
is a mess celebrate that you didn't
smoke pot until 10:00 a.m. the more I've
done that I look back on what I've
accomplished in the last two three four
years and I am light years ahead of
where I was not externally other people
can't see it but it's like the internal
part and the whereas people I said this
might just be my version of what she
does to me but it's like you don't look
like you're any further on yes
everything's life-changing you know
meditation like saved your life and all
this stuff but
has it because you don't you fall apart
more than anybody else I know like you
have these big ups and these big downs
and things are catastrophic she's having
to declare bankruptcy now for her
business it was gonna be sold for thirty
million dollars it was in the you know
what I mean like he's weird weird things
and it's like yeah cuz that's your
lifestyle like your type a you seek out
risk and then risk is high and risk is
low whereas I don't I need my life to be
much more calm and yet because I just do
like I accept where I am I've gotten so
much further than I ever I would have
done following it her way and she
probably would be miserable doing it my
way
like the incremental change like it's
not far enough I need the up-and-down so
that's who I was I was the you know
massive up and down and I still like am
getting you know it's like it was this
and now it's like you know not quite as
much but it's yeah I have had to get to
that place of the accepting where I am
and I stand and my thinking can still
get wrapped up block into like no
because sometimes like I it's
interesting because I've heard you say
like once I figured out how to like not
care about other people at what other
people think I was good and like
intellectually I know that I don't that
I don't need to care about what other
people think but it's a it's a struggle
every day like oh it's still a struggle
I'm like 95 percent don't care the five
percent is still there yeah I remember
tonight cover something new up like
almost of a to give awesome and see
I would say I'm still at a 60-40 like
sixty percent don't care forty percent
do care and so that that's where I you
know that's where I'm at and maybe some
days that's flopped you know that that
60 percent of me does care and forty
percent doesn't it depends on who you
know depends on who and all of those
things and the but yeah so it's well in
its
I was talking to somebody the other day
and it's like it it's like talking about
the transparency of it it's like be like
right now you know like intellectually I
don't care what you like emotionally or
like in my head don't necessarily care
what people think but unconsciously
they're still part of me that does you
can't you can't ever get past them yeah
there's a thing a comment where I read
this but there's the notion of you can
only fully know yourself through the
eyes of the other right and so you know
that that that the feedback that we get
from others is a really really really
important part of how we you know shape
ourselves and develop ourselves and move
forward in life right whether we
consciously process that or not and so
this idea of I don't give a what
other people think that's I think it's a
fantasy jeannot I mean I think to some
degree yeah this variation sure but
that's the that's the it's not possible
there's there's the extremes
cuz there's the I didn't know who I was
without other people's opinions and then
moving towards the okay you know the
sovereign but the the sovereignty like
okay I'm I'm a little bit more sovereign
now than I was before because before I
had no sense of who I was other than
what other you know what other people
thought of me yeah so there's that
balance and I am what came to mind
Ericka's you were saying that was Jordan
Peterson talking about how we or
outsource our sanity to other people
that's one of the things that's scary
about this situation
right is that you're you know what if
the person that you're quarantined with
they're just their their image of you is
incredibly distorted and you you don't
the person that you're outsourcing your
sanity to is like
emotionally unstable like how does that
you know you're gonna end up with people
you know in even more emotionally
fragile situations yeah no I mean I know
for me I have given less of a than
I ever did because I had social anxiety
and so all I would do after I went to a
party was sit for weeks and yeah believe
I said that I can't believe it means you
don't go out and do things right and so
I have 99% dismantled that because I
realized that like what you think about
me has he is not at my business and what
I think about you is my business that is
where I have is like when somebody hurts
me when I'm annoyed by somebody else if
I am ever like I can't believe they said
that about someone else which is also I
realized that I very rarely do that I
don't obsess what someone else said for
a week I only obsess about what I said
for a week but I just heard someone I
remember who it was say that there's
gonna butcher this but there's like who
I think I am there's who you think like
the world thinks I am and there's who I
actually am and the closer those three
things are the happier you are like the
more you're like I don't need to be
something else for you which is the
piece that I've worked on more or less
is like I was free I was masking and
pretending to be something else and I
thought everyone was and I think
everyone is but to a different extent so
it's like if we're all pretending to be
someone instead of actually being
someone I don't have the energy to
pretend to be anyone but who I am and so
putting those three things more in
alignment of like I am what you get when
you you like you so what do you see is
what you get I the more I Know Who I am
the more I can act like that and who I
actually am I mean we kind of are all
are actually the same it's like all this
stuff on top of it that we've put on top
and so and I know that the less of a
 I give about the individuals in the
world the more I can work towards
creating a world that works for everyone
because most of what doesn't work for
the world right now is that we need
people to see us in a certain way
and we need other people to need to be
seen in a certain way like it's not even
just about I need to be this person that
you all can look up to it's like I need
you to be trying to be someone I can
look up to otherwise why the am I
wasting all that energy you've gotta
waste that energy too and so it's like
needing everyone to show up like you are
even though you're not showing up like
you are and it's like all of this wasted
wasted genius and energy that could be
going into doing what you're actually
here to do which rarely looks like
society's version of success in my
experience it's interesting because the
one of the things that I one of the
things I've had to come one of the
conclusions I had to come to is there's
no such thing as wasted energy the
reason that there's no such thing as
wasted energy is because for me there is
because I had to go through that to
learn what I needed to learn yeah and
you know it that was one of those things
like and I still and I still struggle
with that sometimes is like that there's
this voice that says you're wasting time
you're not getting this done and
it's like no I am learning I am
constantly learning
I am constantly and a lot of it is the
the minutia of my thinking of how am I
go you know going into comparison how am
I going into judgment how am I going
into you know comparison and judgment of
myself are the two biggest ones like the
I spend like the number of times I catch
myself throughout the day being in
comparison to other people it's
significantly less but it's still like
that's one of those things that I so
much energy is spent and it's like okay
I'm not wasting it because there's an
opportunity there there is an
opportunity there and it's it's such an
interesting like I love the looking I
love getting to talk to people about
their different perspectives because
it's you know like there's ways that you
talk about things and then I'm like oh I
understand
where he's coming from and I have a
completely different way of looking at
it and so yeah I don't do you have a
spoon disability what an energy chef
health challenge like we have to
moderate your energy
I have depends on how you look at it I
was I did not nothing that I have been
diagnosed with I'll say that much but
it's I don't care my diagnosis right I
mean I I have to I have to be careful
about how I you know about how I can
serve my energy because I can get
exhausted pretty easily and I I've dealt
with I'll say mental health yeah and
they are so intertwined you don't know
what's what what's right being diagnosed
with all of them and I'm like I don't
know is it mental health is it my brain
damage isn't my chronic fatigue is it my
autism I don't know right now is yeah am
I have I ever been diagnosed with autism
no do I think I'm on the spectrum there
are way at times when I'm like yeah I
don't do I don't think about the world
the way most people do
so that's right I love because the waste
there isn't a waste and energy of like
what are your difference and I'm like
and you're right like there because it's
always a learning I mean I looked at it
slightly differently where if I have to
make a choice and society says pick path
a and I want to pick path B even if path
B is the wrong one it's the right one
because I'm picking it and so whatever
there is to learn I will learn the
lesson where's my pick path a just
because Society says to take bath a I'm
not learning anything besides don't pick
the one everyone else picks like then
it's kind of the same it's like there is
no wasted energy because it's a learning
experience but if I pick my own path I'm
learning in a much more rapid pace than
picking anybody else's path because it's
what I'm supposed to do and so there was
something there and then but that but
there is love the idea between
comparison and scarcity like that that
is a big thing I've I think what the
world is about to go through is because
comparison is the thief of joy you
cannot be happy comparing yourself to
other people because you're never unless
you'd like there's one best at
everything in the world and everyone
else is second third to 7.5 billion
right so it's like it's the thief of joy
but scarcity is very much that it's not
just do I have enough food it's do I
have enough food if my neighbours are
also eating or starving right like it's
like do ya there's just so much in there
that I want to I want to tease apart but
not now yeah I could totally talk about
that particular topic for a very
extended period of time because you know
like yeah I I have lots of scarcity
issues and yet part of where I'm at is
like okay well I have enough for now and
when I need it in the future and it
because maybe in the future what I need
is to be helping my neighbors yeah yeah
yeah there's a lentil Hut you wanna wrap
up Eric not really other than live in a
couple of moments well you guys have
been talking this or I've just felt
particularly grateful for the life that
I have here you know because I can sit
and watch Netflix for three days and if
that's what I wish to do but there's
always plenty of stuff for me to be
cracking on with right and so the law
out of depression is a really simple one
right it's not like I have to think of
something to do there's a million jobs
always need doing around here and I can
crack on with any one of them at any
time and that's that's a pathway out of
any any any any gloom and doom here one
of the things I realized staying with my
mom for two weeks was that when she gets
stressed she cleans and organizes and
I'm like oh can I trade houses with one
of those people who's my place like like
six weeks he'll clean yours for two
weeks come to mind it's like but it is
our diversity like that is going to help
us through this cope in nineteen if the
cleaners need everyone to clean it's not
gonna work if they'd like freezers need
everyone to freeze in place and have
nobody moving or nobody doing anything
for a few weeks it's not going to work
it's allowing each individual to figure
out how they're gonna respond to stress
and act from their best place because we
can't really gauge each other's right I
can't assign someone to be a stress
cleaner or not be a stress cleaner it's
just what you are fully right now final
thoughts here well and the question that
the thing that would come from me with
that and the thing that I focus on is
when there when you are encountering
somebody who has a different way of
coping how do you work to get you know
how do you work together because and how
do you how do you have the conversation
of you know I think we I think that
moving forward collectively we should be
doing this and you think moving forward
collectively we should be doing why my
husband and I are going through that in
terms of where we think the isolation
ends and we have slightly different
views and like and so just getting to
talk through that and like okay I care
about how you feel about this thing and
here's where my fears are and you know
it's and how do you how do you navigate
those conversations yeah yeah that is
huge it was a lot of that in worried
before this ever in workplace right but
it's personality types and you all bring
something different to the table but if
you all need everyone to act like you
nobody that's to bring themselves to the
table but it's stressful to have people
not acting like you when you think they
should be acting another way like I
really think my dad should know he has a
lung disorder and stays home because
every time he goes out he's kind of
committing suicide and it's like but
from this point of view it's like what's
the point in life if you're only just
staying at home
like we're all staying home for people
like you but it is it's like we opted
differently right yeah it's it's
different and it's his life that's to do
with it what he wants all right should
we talk about to youtube sure how that
we have been now I get to go in