screen big so that the four windows fill
the hole fill the whole window I don't
know a different section but no okay no
because I have to be able to allow
people to go up and down since I oppose
me dad it's one of the drawbacks that
isn't that unzoom you kind of have the
one person talking and you gotta see oh
this one's missing list for recording
and having people come on without
needing to download anything
so the done part number who started it
was Hyatt Kylie did you start this but
it was me yeah how did you envision this
going what is the process I mean I think
the thing I'm interested in first didn't
like leave work from into Landry's talk
on ethics that I think didn't that
original game game be so yeah yeah I
don't know if I was it a reading or a
video um it was I think it was linked to
it's more of an audio so it's like a
podcast rather than that rather than a
video it was really long it was like in
three hours
I mean listen to it so
how many conversation I might not be
participated in as I could read your
post if you want
Kylene Oh before it goes right yes
over the past few days since I joined
this group and listen to Forrest
laundry's first public podcast on ethics
I've been playing with the idea of
Dunbar's number as pointing not only to
our capacity for meaningful
relationships but rather to a more core
capacity of human cognitive function
which is the net number of 7 + -2
indicates the capacity of our short-term
memory function which I'd love for you
to elaborate it elaborate on we scale
the utility of our short-term memory
function by chunking information on our
long-term memory and manipulate
those chunks instead of raw data the
idea I'm playing with us that we use the
same scaling technique in dealing with
complexity ie V chunk as aspects of
complexity included including but not
restricted to human relationship to
expectation models that we can retrieve
and use for in the moment since making
and choice making and then I think
that's pretty much it that so yeah very
interesting
well so one short-term memory number
this is one that I learned like years
and years ago and I think it's still
pretty accurate which is they found it
it's like most people can manage between
five and nine pieces of information and
hold them in short-term memory and
manipulate them so like we used to have
seven digit phone numbers here in
Australia and it's like everyone could
remember each other's phone numbers so
this was before um before Mobile's all
before they're in wide use and and then
they added an extra digit and all of a
sudden people couldn't remember phone
numbers anymore so this was the example
that was used in the in the in the
lecture that I was in and what sort of
struck me about it was that it's not
just the phone numbers but it's actually
chunks of information so we could
remember like seven years for instance
you know I with the four digits because
we've chunk it into a into a year in our
minds or lumbers or words or phrases or
you know whatever the case may be so
long as we'd actually learned whatever
that was we could manipulate the
information you know as well as long as
it was store would be in the long term
memory so but it was still you know a
seven plus or minus two chunks and
people have different ranges of what
they can actually deal with so when I
was listening to forest talking about
how we have these two different ways of
deciding whether something is right or
wrong making making sense of the world
if you like which was the asymmetry
which is kind of like this
same thing in different contexts so same
content different contexts an example if
that is like the golden rule or the you
know the the even the non Ten
Commandments or something like that
where it's like you go okay this is this
is the rule that we're going to apply
now this behavior fit that rule or not
like so fairly straightforward so same
content different contexts and then the
other one was this continuity tracking
which is the kind of thing that we do
when we're in really watch them change
sort of at a steady kind of continuous
rate over time so most of our laws and
so on seem to be set up on this symmetry
principle of saying you know this is
this is what you shall do this is what
you can't do and check instead of
applying like more of a principle kind
of way of looking at things something
that's sort of more suitable to as I see
it to complexity so in a complex system
you know everything is changing all the
time but we kind of develop we can
develop over time like an expectation
according to the patterns of rates of
changing one thing compared to rates of
change another thing so as I was
listening to this you know I've
certainly seen that we have you know
problems with law where you know as a
situation changes slightly and you're
still trying to apply the same hard rule
to it you know you end up with all kinds
of perverse effects no way and then
trying to apply the principle to the to
the new situation so it's more like a
continuity sort of thing anyway it says
struck me that by the time we put these
two things together so that's the
continuity and symmetry ways of
processing on the one hand and Dunbar's
number which is about managing
relationships on the other hand the wall
relationships are pretty complex so
we're probably using continuity tracking
to to manage relationships in much the
same
way as we do that sort of long-term
doping one clam in our memory to
manipulate for that short-term memory
thing so I thought well you know let's
say that we've got an overall capacity
the same as we do for short-term to
long-term memory well I've got a very
complex well and what happens if you
know like in the course of dealing with
a complex world
we're basically keep freezing for
everyone else yeah Shelley you might
have to go closer to your router I'm in
science her I've talked to her before
Simon Stern hold internet goes down he's
just gotta come back on so we'll see if
that is the case anybody else want to
share their thoughts on the Dunbar
number or are there involved in the
conversation well we get Kylie figured
out by which I mean Kylie figures
herself oh because I have no idea that
well I think that she's onto something
and I've been questioning like I've been
listening to the Harvard series on
ethics and morals and kind of comparing
it to different models the model of the
model of like this sense making so the
sovereignty the intelligence in the
agency that Danielle schmecker burger
brings forth similar to the model that
Forrest launcher brings forth regarding
principles and so it's it's this
question of you know this coming into
space of liminality
I think has a lot to do with where our
stances on morals and what kind of
principles we've developed for ourselves
to guide our actions with other people
in that sense so the more a space there
is for the complexity
the less right and wrongs there are and
so the more we can come into coherence
your back yeah
internet from your router maybe there's
a possibility I don't know if you're far
from your router then that could be a
problem
[Music]
[Music]
Carly it's not working you sound like a
a broken robot I think I'll just um so
you didn't get dizzy I'll stop the
camera say started that and soon as that
knew you were gonna go do something else
it was like no work good times good
times
I do like yeah I know that idea of
complexity like the more complex the
world is we have other slots to hold
information and yeah it affects our
Dunbar number how many people we can
have actual connection with when we're
dealing with the complexity of the world
and the world is just gonna get more and
more complex and complicated at the same
time and so how do we deal with both of
those things there was something when
Kiley well she's getting situated said
about the phone numbers right that seven
digits is most people can remember
between five and nine right and so seven
digits won't be added one won't
everything blow up partly because there
wasn't a threshold of people that could
remember them but seven never worked for
the people who could only remember five
and the new eight digits definitely
worked for people who remember nine
right if it became a law instead where
you're not allowed to be part of society
unless you can remember at least six
digits right like that is kind of what
happens and it's like well you have to
be able to react to anger in this way if
you're gonna be part of civil society
and the outliers are you know maybe more
not we don't give you any tools to deal
with that we're just like you're broken
you can't remember that many that many
digits and as our world gets more and
more complex I find that all of the
things happen right like you might be
really good at numbers but you don't
know
you know the interpersonal skills so you
don't know and so the more we have a bar
that everybody has to get perfect right
everyone has to be good enough at math
and science and this and that the more
complicated we're making it instead of
like wait what are you good at and how
do we fit you into the whole so that you
can feel like you're contributing and
the whole gets your contribution without
requiring anyone do what they can't do
right making it a law that you have to
remember seven numbers isn't gonna help
people who can't remember seven numbers
and that same like I feel like that is
what's happening with complexity is that
so many people are having breakdowns
because our world's gotten so complex so
like I can't hold all that information
right you can't
and the more smart you are the more you
know that but also the more you want to
hold information and so I don't know
like there's something tied to like a
disability inability movement and the
Dunbar number with complexity of like
right I already know I can't handle the
basic crap that society throws at us so
I'm good like I know I can't you know
keep my house clean get food on the
table and so I already know I have to
let go of a lot of the complexity and it
but in doing so taught me that like okay
I have something new to give it's the in
that space that um I'm still figuring
out how to give because it needs to be
done in a way that society likes which
doesn't seem to go together was that you
raising your hand or Landis yes I have a
response to what you just shared yes it
seems like maybe you've like adjourned
to concepts that I think it's valuable
to even separate them to you're one of
the examples you gave is like a demand
to kind of to meet a certain standard to
kind of hop as high as like everybody
else right like a you know you're
required and then if not and you will be
excluded or even maybe punished you know
put into jail for not being good enough
but then this so this is kind of a
addressing maybe the the negative rights
like or negative freedoms you're not
you're not even free to be yourself even
if you're not harming anybody
but then there's another part where you
might not be coerced to be better you
know to force to to address certain
requirements but you're still kind of
neglected and that's what you're giving
with those other examples where you're
just not cared for if you're not meeting
those standards is like yeah you may
maybe it's not correct to call it like
you have a right for education or or or
health or whatever because it sounds
then as if it's not like somebody else
that's forced to give those things to
you but more like you need health you
need education you need caretaking and
all those are like called positive
rights or positive freedoms and that
distinction is is is important because
in some ideological positions they say
I'm coming from a libertarian position
mostly so in that sense there's a lot of
you know don't infringe on me don't
don't force me to do certain things but
and and a lot of ideas about how the
economics should run so that there
wouldn't be a coercion that it would be
interaction in the free market but then
the ideas from the well this is the
libertarian right but then there's a
libertarian left we're saying that well
that's not enough we also have many
people who cannot take care of
themselves and and then we need this
kind of a more involved more collective
solution maybe and so I think this
distinction is a lot about what we're
having that of all those political
debates where it's more like those
negative freedoms like don't infringe on
me I am free to choose what I do and and
then how do we care about about
everybody else so this actually comes
back to the game the issue that we have
that some people they don't want that
much responsibility to take care of
others but they are okay with not
enforcing others and others are well
okay we still want to care for everyone
not everyone is collaborating well we
have to force a little bit or find
somehow like to restrict those people
like not allow money to be used or
whatever so this is actually a very
essential point I think
and and it just is reiterated in various
cases so maybe that's just a bottom to
chat here yeah it's very complex
I like forests
I think the podcast started off with
love is that which enables choice and
building our own set of principles also
enables choice so the idea of
sovereignty is the idea of self-love
it's it's like allowing ourselves to
make the decisions the best decisions
for ourselves that keep us in in in
wholeness
so integrity and that enable the best
choice for the self and the other so I
keep on coming back to this idea that if
we are if we are continuously you know
in forming this space within ourselves
and developing this process for
ourselves then we are always open to
making the best choices for ourselves
and the people around us and it's just
being able to stay in that space long
enough for a synthesis to occur whereas
right now I think because of the morals
and the values and the rigid ideas and
ideologies we don't stay in that space
long enough and then that's when the
conflict just doesn't budge and there's
no movement forward so you know I'm
really you know but obviously people
have to they have to agree to the
process of you know building sovereignty
for themselves and creating their own
principles and then updating them
regularly and staying in that space
because if the other person isn't doing
that it's kind of hard to work with them
and that's where I think the biggest
challenge is coming into coherence with
other people if they're working from a
completely different model and they
don't want to work on themselves they're
not interested in meeting their own
basic needs on the hierarchy of you know
muscle therapy of needs then it's very
difficult to make the decisions that
support the self and that nourish
yourself enough to be able to include
the other eye I just want a
clarification are you talking
essentially about responsibility taking
responsibility for yourself for your
games yeah it's part of it that's
definitely I think a really important
part like for the base because if you're
not taking care of your needs then it's
very difficult to take care of someone
else's needs or to even be in a space
where you're open to being able to hear
the needs of the other person um I'd
actually known as well it's um
being in touch I think with your own
needs and continually meeting them
that's a complex endeavor all by itself
I think so I'm not sure where I got cut
off before I just wanted to know it so
to wrap up the last little bit of it in
the sense that so I'm not sure if you
know the difference between complicated
and complex system as some days Snowden
talks about it so when we've got all of
these laws set up like the ones that
some you know we're just talking about
there then what you end up with is a
very complicated and brittle kind of
system right as opposed to complex but
as it breaks down everything is complex
like trying to find all the workarounds
and trying to deal with the things that
break and so on and then on an ongoing
basis you know we you go into a
bureaucracy or something like that you
try to fill out the administration
paperwork and it doesn't quite fit so
then you've got all the complexity that
comes up with it not having worked in
that place so you end up using I think a
lot of you know if we do actually have a
limited amount of ability to to deal
with complexity and to use that
continuity tracking then I think we
might use it all up during the day
dealing with with that kind of thing and
then not end up with a huge amount left
for our relationships so I think that
our relationships then we often end up
using roles so you know that we relate
to each other in terms of like a job
title or something like that instead of
as the complex people that we are
because we just don't have anything left
to be able to have
you know the deep conversations and the
deep relationships with each other that
that we might otherwise have so the the
thesis that I had with the with Dunbar's
number was kind of going well you know
he started as as far as I know from the
assumption that this was about just
human relationships I'm thinking if it
was about complexity in general our
ability to actually deal with complexity
then maybe what that
Dunbar's number represents is what's
left to us to deal with relationships
after we've already dealt with all the
other complexity in the world so the
more the more systems are breaking down
and the more complexity is kind of
popping up as a result of those systems
breaking down the less we have available
for for relationships so anyway that was
spot-on yeah I just want to maybe
introduce Jordan Peterson here into that
because it kind of relates to the order
and chaos thing I am developing a model
of my own and a part of that is is the
kind of this balance between boundaries
and channels or open open spaces where
we we kind of have to balance out which
things we're trying to protect and which
we are staying open to and connecting to
people obviously involves channels
otherwise we cannot maintain those
relations but with open channels we get
new information and the more information
we get the more that represents change
and when we have a lot of changes like a
tornado so it becomes chaotic right so
if we have chaos in other areas of our
lives obviously we will have to manage
we will have to create more order and
that can be just a regular change I
don't know
just Facebook notifications lots of new
things coming in it's not even important
but we notice that we get triggered to
pay attention and constant rate of
change that in terms of continuity then
maybe those changes are small but
they're rather fast and we're starting
to notice that
well it's creating a different
environment so it taxes us and then we
want to try to shut off some of those
channels and then disengage from some
people or some media in order to still
cope with that information that we've
already accumulated so the the chaos and
order kind of gets represented in this
as well watching um future thinkers did
a YouTube a new video they're doing a
series this one was called what we get
why we get defensive and what you can do
about it and Mike talks about how
basically that hundred they like I am
[Music]
Canadian is very identity driven so I'm
gonna have an in-group with Canadians in
an oak group of Americans than anybody
else whereas if I'm like I live within
Canada uh that's not quite the same
thing right it doesn't put that identity
on me it's just something that I I come
with and I'm sitting with this thing
because in the disability movement
there's a lot of people with
disabilities who were like no I am like
I am autistic not I have autism and
people who are like no I am blind not I
have blindness and then other people who
are like no I have blindness it's not a
piece of my identity and it's very
individual centric and at the same time
I'm like I have identities that I do
definitely identify with and they are
part of my like identity Who I am and
I'm not comfortable letting them be
things that I have instead of things
that I am like my autism and at the same
time then it like becomes this Venn
diagram I'm like wait if I'm queer and
I'm autistic and I have I'm single-sided
deaf and I have am I the little spot in
the center of the Venn diagram or I the
huge diagram right am i all the spaces
or just this one and the reason this of
like affects the Dunbar summer is like
the complexity of like not having that
circle like not identifying with the
circle at all but then that's kind of
like how you find your tribe and this
piece of the vulnerability that exists
when a tribe has a monopoly on your life
the Dunbar number
was a tribe right it was 150 people that
you can connect with that generally I
think meet all of your needs right
you're working with them you're playing
with them you're eating with them
they're like a community a tribe whereas
because of the complexity my version of
Dunbar number now is this Venn diagram
right I am autistic that's part of my
like so maybe I have 30 people that I
connect with in that community and 30
people I connect with in the disability
community and and my Dunbar number is a
combination of all these communities so
I'm a piece of all them and on the time
they know that ties them together yet
because of the complexity in the world
our numbers shrinking and so there's
just like I'm still playing it out my
hub but like the idea that we don't
identify with the group's were part of
but identifying with them because
they're how we find our tribe making a
system that allows anyone to leave their
tribe and find a new ones they don't
have that rigidity within one or one
becomes a monopoly on your life I know
for me that's a lot of the energy that
exists around the game bSpace is this
idea of show like I don't think I would
ever get kicked out of it I don't think
there is a space here but like there's
that worry there's that underlining fear
of like but then what like where do I
find other game changers did have
conversations with right if that did
happen and so I show up a little less
myself than I would if that wasn't the
case right and so having that be the
case when you're an Asha white
nationalist right think about leaving
that movement and you have to leave all
of your friends and all of your family
and all you can see is an abyss of empty
emptiness if it was easy to find a new
tribe if the tools existed where you
could come on and have a conversation
with anyone whether game be exists or
not I don't like the monopolies that
tribes have on your life is the amount
of power they have over you and however
however many of your needs are met by
that single group lessens the complexity
right I actually kind of want to live in
a tribe where I eat play and do
everything together Swiper so I don't
need to know thirty people here are 30
people here everyone knows everyone
great that's a lot less complexity but
there's a complex like there's a thing
that's added with the complexity that
like I said like
a part of all these groups and so on the
connecting node that brings down the
complexity if I'm allowed to be that
node and I'm not expected to be the
epitome and of an autistic person in all
of my groups including the autistic one
the epitome of a queer person in all of
my groups you know I mean like there's
the essence of the thing what makes me
queer what makes me autistic once I'm
that I get to choose which things I am
if I can choose them right like Thursday
I don't know it's just all of it playing
together yeah that was kind of linking
back to me to what Sandra Landis was
saying but the the order and chaos as
well so I think probably the more that
you have in common with the people
around me the more ordered it feels and
the idea of lately of being kicked out
of that tribe as you know sort of
fleetingly referred to there yeah is
there any bigger form of chaos for most
of us then than that
so yeah it's I mean the the order chaos
when it's an interesting sort of binary
that you know I think you know maybe the
line between the two of them and and
trying to sort of keep you know enough
relationship with the people in your
groups you know like you're talking
about legibly but without getting
completely drawn into it to the point
where you've got like really strong
barriers that go up around it and it
becomes too watered and it becomes too
constrictive go for anyway it was really
interesting thank you and actually that
relates to this concept of symmetry that
was referred to as if we are in the
tribe yeah we're continuing there we
wanting things to be the same and then
there's this huge shift when we're
kicked out and it's unilaterally I want
to also introduce that term because this
revolves around consent like if both
parties are consenting they will be able
to figure out that continuty thing and
how how to continue if
unilateral if somebody says you know you
either it's course if abusive or or it's
just like abandonment in any case its
unilateral and that's what we are
fearing because that breaks that
continuity and that's yeah also
introducing chaos but also depriving us
from what we had but what was stable for
us it's like a it's like a fact we are
being robbed of those things not just
because we got used to them but because
we get we essentially need to be
attached and it is natural and there's
stuff from conformity there's stuff from
boredom are filled about attachment that
is relating to that many other authors
that is natural for us humans to get
bonded to people who rely on both on the
protection and on this mutual exchange
of resources to meet the needs so that's
why we need that continuity and not just
symmetry because that's our biology that
to be dependent and the sovereignty
continuously takes us back into that
place like this is that model is just so
great you know sovereignty intelligence
and agency it's constantly being in a
space where we're taking care of
ourselves enough to be able to identify
to bring our best forward and then to
also have the other person bringing
their best word and then you know
constantly coming to that space of
coherence with each other but again
everybody has to be adopting that model
and then and then the symmetry is there
right whatever they like about being me
is that you know it proposes a way of
being in the world so I don't see it as
so much as a tribe as I do a mindset and
there's a lot of freedom it's you know
it's a lot about being curious
discovering you know you know
discovering what's emerging be present
with that whereas you know for using
WebEx I li was singing about the
expectation models and the relationships
finance takes me out of that space where
things are so rigid and and I'm not
expecting anything from any of you I'm
I'm you know because game be I'm in a
game be space right now it's
representing skiing with what is arising
and so a lot of the projections so I've
had from negative experiences are less
likely to be projected onto anybody and
labels as well right so that's what I
like about the game be it's like it's
not so much about the labels it's not so
much about who identify with or what
certain ideologies or religion and their
politics it's really about just being in
the present like in presence with what
is rising and moving into this game so
it feels really to see in yeah and just
very see don't see and yes I love that
I'm just going to go ditto and also look
at in that um I find you're not real a
maker and allow for and generally what
some you know what you might think of is
almost like the guiding sort of
principles or framework of of game be to
be very much the continuity way of
little things rather than symmetry so I
think that that that they look blue in
there you know is it seems to enable us
in these kinds of conversations and I've
been involved in it in a few now to
relate to each other on the basis of a
particular topic and there's all of the
the moving and dancing around it that
you expect to see from a from dealing
with complexity you know whereas say
within a within a hierarchical
organization or something like that
there isn't anywhere near as many
degrees of freedom because you're
restricted according to what the
you know the rights and responsibilities
are that are associated with a
particular role and actually this was so
a bit of a sidetrack yeah but this was
one of the main things that I took out
of listening to Forrest Landry's you
know three-hour conversation on ethics
because I've discovered one of the
biggest issue that I've had in the last
place that I worked was when I went into
a went into a role for a couple of weeks
that was actually my boss's role and so
I was sort of managing the team if you
like and then mine sort of temporary
boss asked me to do something that was
sort of well within my skill set and
within our previous sort of relationship
so continuous if you like as far as that
goes but was very different from the way
that the team had experienced that role
before so I went ahead and did it
without sort of thinking too much about
it and they all felt completely betrayed
because they had that they had that
expectation of symmetry or continuity
with the role like as opposed to
continuity with me which that make sense
they expected the role to sort of keep
their relationship with the role to keep
being the same and it completely changed
so I thought that was some like
absolutely fascinating insight and I
picked up some more stuff there because
there was the chaos and in that chaos
they saw where their expectation models
were and they had to expand outside but
then what's opening up then that's when
the order the new order or whatever is
arising can be accepted and yeah I'm
just practicing practicing what I've
learned from you know Jordan all daniel
trachtenberg err on sovereignty
sense-making intelligence and
agency has tricked myself out of those
expectation models within myself within
my own personal processes tricked me out
of it to allow me to see where where I
was sort of stuck in ideology or suck in
different models that weren't serving
and weren't serving the people that I
was there that I was you know exchanging
relationship with yeah it's been a
really interesting process of ordering
chaos and honor would you give them
sovereignty as to some extent having
enough of the clear sense of your
identity in terms of current context and
as of and what's happening so that that
kind of that continuous rate of change
again of yourself and being able to
carry that through into difference in
two different places I mean I always
thought of the sovereign thing myself
it's sort of like surfing but enough to
be in a place where we can use evil
choice on the wind choices for everybody
and for the self is I can post an
article that Daniel Michael burger wrote
on it that really goes into the details
of it that I find explains it well but
it's getting rid of all this stuff keeps
us locked in rolls in in the labels of
the rules so that we're still ourselves
and what we're allowing to emerge is
just that that pure essence of self in
that moment so the responsibility is is
solely to that for that space within you
know because the rules are so rigid and
are the titles but where were poor
beings right we're so much more than
that that encompasses all of this
complexity so to move forward with the
complexity you need to acknowledge the
complexity and so I find that's it just
yeah it takes me in that space and
removes all of the the titles I don't
know if that answers your question um
well it does that it also brings up
something else that I'm wondering about
so do you think it is possible that's
just the derma kind of question out
there do you think it is possible to
change a lot of things know the rules
the roles the Lords the the ideologies
unite so these these tight boundaries
that we've put on to order things from
the symmetry base to a continuity base
so to actually take it away from the
match from one thing to another so that
thou shalt not and instead moving to
something more like what we have in game
B which is a Triton sort of generally
move in this direction now try to bear
this principle in mind yeah I think it's
it's it's very forgiving you know and
because we're holding with holding
responsibility for ourselves in that
space here at the scene when we're
falling out of that you know when we're
in the rigidity of it
and if everybody's holding that space
then the mirror is very clear so I find
it's easier to self-correct because it
is a Phoebe as a self-correcting model
right everybody's held responsible for
themselves and to continuously self
practice as things come up things will
come up and then you know
you notice it easier to notice any beam
being space because it's safer to feel
into the parts that are you know not
feeling worthy or not feeling loved or
you know feeling competent or you know
identifying too much with the role and
then to self-correct that and move again
into that little space yeah I would like
to add to that in kind of referring to
you Elaine becoming enlightened in a way
it's like when you get there once even
if you're kind of getting in and out
rubbed out of that consciousness where
you're realizing that more like a deeper
sense of existence you might not be
performing it as well but after you've
gone there at least once or like with
psychedelics or anything it becomes much
easier to keep coming back to those
principles so in terms of how possible
it is I think it's very possible and
probably the issue is not not exactly
where we're looking that the biggest
problem may be is that mostly it's the
first step that is difficult that many
people just haven't experienced that
even once and they they have no
imagination of it being possible they
just have no conception of that it's
like if you have never seen a bicycle
you would not even think that it's
possible to ride it and then we're not
even talking about the skill of writing
it's it's like not even in your mind so
I think the the reason why we can't have
good things is because we're not having
that experience that it is possible
because many people that most of their
time is spent in a different experience
and and when some people get there over
that threshold then it becomes much
easier and obviously certain agreements
and rules like rule make or whatever
they help to maintain that consciousness
but I think even without those somehow
the own intuition is already there
there's more trust and somehow people
you know no matter how many made
mistakes you make you still are on that
different page already so my concern is
I guess that probably we're missing how
to involve everybody else because we're
still a very small group and if agreeing
with Nass know that you know most people
are down at the lowest level just taking
care of their survival and then only a
few people are self actualizing maybe
that is the biggest issue not how to
maintain and maintain it is obviously it
is difficult the resources are limited
in a sense we have to keep communicating
and figuring it out but more like how to
first get everybody on the same page
because not everybody wants to go to an
ashram and just meditate first for some
time to just become enlightened right
and everybody is busy running around
doing their stuff so how to get people
into the tribe or whatever because you
can't force them you know you can break
the the horse to the water but you
cannot make him drink so I was thinking
of all the things that are going on in
the group and it seems like there's many
people sharing many things many insights
happening but I'm not sure how quickly
that will trickle down to to everybody
else or will we just stay a small group
just very aware of what to do but still
not connected to all the rest of the
world even if we are being observed on
YouTube not us necessarily but let's say
and the the most known people in the in
the group is that enough for people to
then join in because IDW Facebook groups
are not that small and and there's a
Petersons groups and but do people get
eventually here as well and do they
continue the conversation or they did
drift off so that and maybe that's
actually about the dumpers number maybe
there's a limit of how many people can
keep these interactions in the group
we need a different solution how to
propagate it further so these are the
things that come up for me for me it's
like my mind wants to go to the tool I
want a tool that helps us deal with the
Dunbar number I don't like I've had so
many amazing conversations in game B and
I'm very happy to be here that like
having conversations is the tool and yet
every time it has to be like who wants
to talk about this thing who like when
are we available
let's where we gonna talk where we gonna
like that piece can be solved one time
and then not only we solved it for the
game B space we've solved it for
everyone or it's like okay if people
want to come together and have a
conversation around something that's
meaningful to them how do we make that
tool and then how do we make it so that
that conversation is inclusive in the
game B space right so that people can
come on board without maybe knowing what
Omni win and hope of the little lingo is
I do feel like this is a very forgiving
space it doesn't feel like PC culture
but it's like you make a mistake and
you're done at the same time there's
still a bar there's still a like okay
you have to be willing to practice thing
I'll make a rule no problem
I like that bar I like being in this
space or that is part of the bar but if
you're not capable of practicing it and
worse than that you're not capable of
getting the feedback yourself um you
know something's going wrong that's what
it is to be autistic is like you know
something's going wrong you know people
don't like you but you don't know why
right you don't have that self
reflection say I have a bad in tongues
but like there's Peter what I'm like
wait why aren't people coming on board
with my project right why aren't because
we're expected to just get it right
we're expected to just like understand
when we're not practicing the Omega rule
and then self-correct
there's a group piece there that we're
not fulfilling as a group because of
them we assume the other person's gonna
get it right we assume if this person
was part of a conversation they're never
welcome back they know why they're never
welcome back and so even if I'm not in
that space I've never been not welcome
back the assumption it could happen is
still like well wait these people like
if the three of you go off tour and have
a car
and don't invite me that feels like I
was kicked out right even if it had
nothing no we were just available we
wanted to have this conversation right
like there's I don't know there's
certain things we have to deal with on a
group level that are about wait how do
we get everyone to conversations how do
we make sure there's a space for
everyone and then even if you're not
able to practice a mega role maybe
there's a like video maker role space
for you to learn the practices I wanna
clarification here are you implying that
like you would like somebody to take the
responsibility for that then somebody
would ensure that those people who are
maybe not realizing that there's you
know there's something missing in their
communication that they would be
informed more proactively and and then
in inclusivity and all those things is
that about that yes no I don't think
that that is like yes you're now
responsible for that so you're not okay
but like as a group or responsible for
that right if people come here and they
don't feel included they're gonna leave
without ever telling us why right
you're not gonna we're not gonna have an
exit interview like it was too complex
of language and I felt like everyone
knew each other and I wasn't included
that's gonna be a real thing it probably
already is a real thing right it's like
well I'm not invited to the
conversations because there's like this
top tier of like you know Jordan Hall
Daniel they like that like we all want
listen to them we want to watch them we
want to like so those are the ones we
watched and there's the the next tier
it's not like ferns but like people who
I know show up to all of these
conversations and there's a ton of
people who don't feel comfortable being
on camera don't even know if they're
included on it don't you donate mean
like don't even know if they'd be
welcome in this space you're welcome
you're welcome to this space you're
welcome to participate on camera that's
there's internal work they have to need
to be comfortable with that but like
that you're welcome here yes and if
you're not is there a process for why
right like to be told listen you do this
too much and I don't want to be in a
group with you because of it is somewhat
safer it's hugely safer than all of the
stuff in your head that you assume is
the reason right like well here's the 12
things
it could have been the reason and no
we're not really responsible to each
other but if our group wants to be
cohesive and move forward we kind of
need to like have that exit interview
portion like why are people leaving and
also like be able to have metrics of
like do I feel included and if I don't
why not and if someone isn't how do we
include I don't know like it's it's
there's a group piece and an individual
piece and we kind of need to figure out
both of them but it won't be on one
person I have a bunch of questions that
are coming up my expectation model your
expectation of well there's the I mean I
love that there's a space to come to
with other people who want to create a
better world and having the
conversations and the the population of
people who's interested in that is game
B is but I have a particular game B
project that filters everything through
it because I'm like why are we doing
this thing and so like that is is my
thing to to deal with I don't think
that's game be necessary that isn't it's
how I think we get to game B or I
wouldn't be doing it but there's this
because I have this project that I'm
like everyone's a bit anyone can come
and do this right anyone there is no bar
there is no anyone who wants to can come
participate in it I don't feel like any
of the other projects are like that and
therefore I'm not included in any of the
other projects if that makes it a game B
yeah the conversation the like let's
that is is inclusive but like oh we're
creating this technology we're doing
this for doing that isn't and there's a
truth to that that like we can't have a
thousand people on this conversation we
can only have four we have six if it is
the actual factory with stream yard but
anyone can have this conversation right
Anu six people to have a new
conversation and so for me finding
solutions that are
omni wind that are like hot i like
taking a step back and saying hey
creating this tool one time would be
really powerful so that we can just come
on have a conversation with anyone at
any point in time i want a system to be
able to contribute my gifts to and
everyone can contribute their gifts to
without needing to change and i feel
like i didn't answer the question
i find it well how I see it how I
interpret game B's on part of a lot of
different groups so I have a lot of
comparisons sort of like you were
mentioning earlier to you know the way
that I compared game B to other groups
and what I've learned over time is that
there is no final moment right and we're
all in a work-in-progress and you come
to these different groups and then we
get inspired with me I think it's more
about the inspiration that we can draw
from it so I'm feeling like you're very
inspired by creating this technology
right and if you look at everybody else
I don't see any hierarchy so for me
Jordan Hall is the same as Jubilee like
it's the same thing and he developed his
ideas in his interest and where he's
going and you are now talking about
where your interest where you're gonna
where you're developing your interests
and what your point if it's found on
they almost feel like you're looking for
players to play in developing this
technology and you haven't found them
yet correct me if I'm wrong that is
absolutely I have a like I have a player
but like it's it's a yeah I want a tiny
group of people to play at how do we
create something that anyone can play at
and my communication of it isn't there
like it's like it's not and I get that
but the question is why why are the
players not coming what meaning is it is
it you know I mean is it my first thing
is whenever I'm in that feeling space
it's because I haven't cultivated enough
with that project on my own so I go back
to the drawing board and then work
internally on what it is so you see you
know different people kind of like
bringing forth their own material that
they've worked on individually and
and then it starts to flourish from
there so I think there's a certain
amount of work the hard work that we
have to do on our own before people
start becoming attracted to it so it's
like we have to sort of propose a model
like no one's gonna propose that model
for us because you need the inspiration
is coming from self so it's like you
know thinking our hands in getting them
dirty and sort of creating something the
best we can that we can then bring forth
and that will attract other people so I
find there's a lot of like people
creating on that level and it's not
every idea is going to attract you know
but then a few of them will and then
that's when the collaboratory
collaborators come in and the
co-creators because those are the best
ones of the group so it's not even a
personal thing it's like collectively
what's emerging what is the what are we
prioritizing collectively so that's sort
of how I see it but I understand that
frustration and so for me I always just
go back and hope in my own personal work
when I feel like I'm not having
magnetizing that you know the
co-creators that I want to do the
project with and then going into that
space it's like you know the inner
reflex on the outer and then I just work
with that sort of symmetry yeah that is
that is I mean it's it's very
intertwined it's like this big idea my
interpersonal work and all of it and
it's like allowing it to progress and
come through is is it but what I feel I
have or don't have that everyone else
does and everyone else seems to have a
thing they can present that is hey
here's the 10 page document here is I
can't do that like every time I sit down
to do that my nervous system shuts down
and and like even before I had my brain
injury there was a lot of like um like I
could create a world but I couldn't
write the story and I feel like that is
the position I'm in on this planet is
that I have 60% of the way there but not
the hundred percent right and like you
can't present somebody with a storyline
and expect them to write the book you
can't expect so you don't I mean and
that's the issue it's like I don't want
to create something which is what I keep
doing and I love it but then I have to
explain it to someone and I can't
explain it to someone so we need to
create it so that I don't need to
explain it to you so we created it
like getting a group of people together
to say how do we create a communication
tool that works for us right how do we
create something that is going to power
not my game B project but our game B
project and projects right like what is
the thing that you can bring it to and
so I get it
yes it's like the thing isn't ready for
people to see the vision and come on
board but it's never gonna get there
without the people on board to create
the vision and so it's this constant
chicken and egg thing of me you try to
be like what can I offer that people
will get on board and I'm doing the best
I can I'm putting videos out there I'm
happy a part of conversations but there
just feels like there's this piece of me
that's off and I don't even look I'm not
even looking to fix it but like what's
off and that people are like that if
they just told me that thing I could fix
it but nobody even wants to tell me the
thing because I don't know like it's
just this constant feeling behind it I
you know I have similar I don't know if
everybody here has similar I can
resonate a lot with what you're saying
and so for me I'm more like the Esper's
Asperger's side of things so I see in
patterns so you know finding cope
readers isn't so easy
but what I've understood is that it's
not it's about also honing in like the
sovereignty is understanding what our
role is and where what we're meant to do
and sometimes it's not about creating
that project and when there's too much
resistance it's like being able to let
it go and saying okay where where are my
gifts and talents calling me and it
might not be where you thought it was
right and and and then but being okay
with that in an opening in that space to
what is emerging and then moving towards
that and you know obviously I mean
either way you can of course other
people to to co-create with something
you know that they're not being called
to so it's so it's like yeah the
recognition of that but then it's also
the gift of like okay well that's
because something else is more deserving
of my time something else though I'm
gonna benefit another aspect of this
project more you know and it's just open
to that that's
that's sort of how I see it yeah and
I've had to let go of a lot of amazing
ideas you know killing your darlings
killing your darlings saying no too many
things that are yeah
it's actually very funny for me because
I've been already listening to many
things that you've said and then it's
like clicking and I'm enjoying to see
how my model applies it makes sense and
I'm just getting more confirmations and
now you're talking about something and
Thank You Jessica for that kind of new
insight for me here cuz like two hours
ago I was solving the same issue of some
people I was talking about yeah you know
I want to attract people but also
respect their boundaries and make it
easy enough for them to join in and not
be coercive in any kind of way or even
imply that there's a kind of a demand
but at the same time I want them to take
responsibility to be partners in that so
it's like the same things it's so lovely
to get that perspective of yeah it's not
fully ready I still need to figure out
how to present it and that's what I've
been working on for some years almost
still working on it but I'm getting
closer to sharing it so completely off
the Dunbar tract but you know I think
this is an interesting conversation
because part of my issue is this and if
someone can help me figure it out
in any way is that there's so many
people have their own idea right their
own idea for a platform their own idea
for new currency any white like none of
us seem to want to like let it go and
start from ground zero right which is
what I'm I'm like finally ready to do
but then no one else it's like right but
even that clearly I'm not at Ground Zero
it's like how cuz then I know I'm not
supposed to just create it and give it
to people that it is what I'm giving is
this process is like showing the
you have to go through to create
something in the world is partly the
thing that I'm giving so that we can
create the thing other people don't have
to go through that in the future right
you don't need to find your community
your community's easy to find you don't
need to do your marketing your marketing
sort here but the question is like that
to grow as individuals we have to be I
think
it's its group learning right like for
me I've kind of done all the growing I
can do as an individual I can't sit and
meditate any longer it might not look
that way but like I've been doing it for
years and years and years and it has to
be in community with other people where
like emotions are brought up because
someone else says okay that wouldn't
have come up otherwise in order for a
group to do something I think it's more
effective if you have a project if you
have something to like focus on that
also brings out the emotion and also
does all those things what I want is a
group of people to figure it to have
conversations and pick a project that's
gonna help can be you right but the
issue it's like I'm not even asking the
question um the people have their own
project
how do and I'm like right okay I get
that now I get that people have their
own project how do we facilitate
everyone's project how do we facilitate
your life your project it's like in
community in conversation I don't even
know what I'm asking but like how do we
create something when we all have our
own baby and we're not willing to let it
go or start raising a new one together
well we're looking after our own well um
it's not fully set up yet but I'm going
to say in terms of a base technology and
in terms of that idea of um you know how
do you bring people together who are
thinking about the same kinds of things
and working on multiple projects and I
set up something called um practice
Orion and the idea with this thing is to
actually have people who want to look at
like wicked problems in the world and
that can include individual as well as
you know as well as group or anything
else to come together share stories talk
things through share research join
projects do all of that kind of stuff so
I think that a lot of it is about
actually attracting enough people in and
having it you know in an organized
enough fashion that people can sort of
filter through everything that's there
and find the things that they're
actually interested in um having having
input - so Jubilee I mean I'm listening
to you and I'm kind of going oh I could
help a bit with that and it's like no no
actually I can't do that because I just
don't have an
but you know a lot of it is about you're
not putting something together in a
frame that that people can understand
well enough to know whether they're
attracted to it or not yeah I mean and
so we just started talking at the really
you know before everyone came on in this
conversation about the about the the
technology for communication so I'm
still not clear yet on on what that's
about and you know we'd only just
started talking about it but if there is
something sort of small that's that's
kind of that's written up or is an
attractor if you like the people then I
think that people actually will become
will become attracted to it now I
started talking I think one of our
previous conversations about something
I'm working on which is a proposal for a
global Commons trust and stewardship
system and I'm basically at the moment
working with one other person to pull
together a proposal for you know the
funding to you know and this is gonna
sound weird pulling together a proposal
for a smallish amount of funding to put
together a multimedia proposal to get a
large amount of funding and this first
sort of you know we're kind of crafting
the seed at the moment you know and then
we want to put the seed into it you can
plug into an environment where it can
actually be a seedling and then you know
from there to have it grow into
something that's this big and I think
that that seems to be the usual kind of
processes pulling whatever that
individual ideas and giving it just
enough just enough juice just enough
shape that people can kind of come and
tend it or you know find it you know to
actually grow it from that point to say
the question for everyone in that like
sometimes this is like wait does not not
everyone feel this way like if you are
putting your time into practice is that
what the Maori Factory I mean like
Janelle has has her version and I
there's a few people who have their
version of like a platform right that
they want to want to do if you put all
of your time and energy into that and
then we never use it we use Janelle's or
we never use Janelle's I may use yours
what does that feel like to you because
that's my issue my
like the the inefficiency of that like
why can't we get together and decide on
one thing and then support it right and
like what are all the features but maybe
I'm the only one who feels that maybe
that's why that's my role maybe other
people are like no I'm good I really
enjoy making this even if nothing ever
happens which is how I feel but
creatively global cooperative without
feeling that completely because I really
wanted because I can see the vision but
even if it doesn't become something I
enjoy creating it mm-hmm
is it like that for you um yes and no I
actually set the set the technology out
and then I edited a really long book so
I basically did nothing on it myself for
for a very long time but I think you
know the different ones the difference
I've had a look at Janelle's for
instance and hers seems to be a lot more
about about the conversation about
sharing and you know serve around gain
be in particular when I look at France
or am I kind of go I would like to see
your project on there and I'd like to
see Janelle's project on there and I'd
like to see you know whatever you guys
are doing on there so you know it's more
one of those things that sort of meant
to be a hub for people to work on their
own projects it's just a space yeah yeah
it's just a space it's just an ecosystem
that you know eventually I would hope
that it could also attract you know you
know philanthropists into and so on to
actually focus on you know whatever
wicked problems people are interested in
looking at so yeah it's it's only meant
to be a you know a way of pulling things
together quite literally that's that's
all I have a question like it's just
more like a joint could it be that the
only people who would actually grab the
game be who would would be those people
who already have their own idea and
their own drive to come and then just
like hey who wants to join me like
nobody in the general populace is
interested but you are you talk about
the same things and join me and they are
it yeah yeah join us I want to be able
to get together and have the
conversation
if we have our own projects which we do
and we're passionate about them what
kind of project could benefit those
projects right like what kind of
platform isn't Kiley's or Janelle's is
like what brings all of that together
that isn't general owns it or Kiley owns
it or it does 60 percent here in 60
percent there that's what already exists
right at Google - this app - this thing
and you have the system but you have to
pay for some of them and they don't
interconnect and they don't like how do
we come together and create the thing
when partly we don't want to we want to
have our project right like we want to
have like you want yours to look your
way and then other people that come on
board and use it when truthfully we
would be if you brought that to the
table and whatever new entity we had was
created that had you know 90% of your
tool and 90% of genell's that made made
the more important piece which is it
meant 90 percent of my needs right 90%
of Rolanda says needs 90 percent of
Jessica's needs on their individual
projects like that is the piece to me
that comes from bringing something
together and creating something from the
ground up that isn't the individual
pieces well we're all using Facebook for
example right so somebody just created
and many people just joined eventually
so in principle it is possible to join
something right so maybe because it just
was easy enough to join so maybe part of
the question is that yeah it's it's kind
of hard enough to join in everywhere and
you need to still make a decision and
you're just gravitating towards where
the most people are already where the
the resources are and the kind of a
Perito effects that just the one who is
most popular at that moment kind of
dominates and and and and this is more
much more not just people but just
existence in general that there's these
things that we just need to acknowledge
that there will be a lot of small
attempts many people trying out and then
somebody wins out and
just part of the deal of being alive
could that be but I think like for me
Facebook exists it exists because it was
new to the market it was something that
nothing else now there's Instagram
Twitter nothing is gonna be Facebook
they come in and out compete Facebook is
next to zero so like Kylie is project
Pinellas project isn't like I'd only
think that's in your goal to out-compete
Facebook coming together and creating
something that was for a million of us
what Facebook is would out-compete
Facebook at least for that million
people and if you have that threshold
that's easy to bring in other people
there's that a tractor that naturally
emerges that when there's already
something in the marketplace it's not
going to bring people in in the same way
that like Facebook did like I don't see
one of our individual projects out
competing facebooking game a in the same
way our project could write like there's
a difference where it's like how do we
meet 90% of 90% of the people's needs
instead of a tiny group of people it may
be 90% of their needs right those like
otherwise I'm okay with waiting for the
gem to start and then we can all get on
board but it doesn't like that's not
what's happening it seems to be just
dissipating all of the energy that like
there's all of these places to put your
project and all these places to find
people that even the game B space is
kind of dissipated between like Twitter
and discord and the Facebook like I
don't care about Twitter even though on
it I don't get game B on Twitter I get
game B on Facebook so there's well game
B is a lot about decentralization right
and the way that if I see it is
collective intelligence emerging through
what looks like very you know it's
emerging and from all of these
individual projects and individual
spaces so I see it as very decentralized
you know the stuff that I'm learning
like I don't want to centralize it you
know it for me if they don't go together
so a lot of the stuff that I'm learning
and bringing home I'm implementing in my
community here and that's where you know
I'm encountering the real challenges
that come with co-creating like
physically and I'm more attracted to
that and there's a lot of work there
there's like a lot of work to just on
that level
and then that's when I see you know the
things that aren't working and what you
know and it's a very slow process like
just coming into like the talking about
the Dunbar number trying to come into
coherency with the people in my
immediate community it's very
challenging right and and so I'm just
freeing these tools slowly back in
enhancing my own personal life and
Michael here and see with the people
around me and then trying to do little
projects with the people around me as I
work on my own individual projects you
know that I'm building on and and then
seeing what comes up and I've you know
I've done a whole bunch of amazing
things there's a lot of gratification
and supplement that comes from building
you know an ecological village like I
went through that whole thing with
someone ten years ago or a little bit
longer doc and and there's so much
gratification in that but you know you
have to it's like where is the energy in
motion right now for me you know because
a lot of it is out of our control and so
it's what comes to us is the
opportunities and what's presenting and
then that's the next step so I see your
vision and then it's to see where the
energy is gonna go with it and you know
but for me personally it's a lot about
just implementing into my very immediate
life and the immediate community needs
be game be models and teachings which i
think is great when you're able to find
those physical projects and people in
the real world to do those things with
but it's not that easy for many people
it's easier for me than it is for a lot
of people but like I can't leave my
house most of the time so like online is
my community which is fine but there's
not very many physical projects I can be
part of but I can be part of it online
one right like I can um and for me the
reason I want not centralization but
like collectivism of like like that when
you learn what went wrong in your eco
village that the rest of us can learn
from that as well
that you know and I mean that there's
like one pool of knowledge you can
choose whether you contribute to it you
can choose whether or not you learn from
it but like for all of us to have these
individual experiments which I have to
learn everything on my own
really bad at learning things for my own
like I want that centralized or whatever
it's called foundation of knowledge
where I can be like oh who else has
started eco-village jessica cool i want
to talk to her right so I can learn the
pitfalls or watch your video diary which
is ten minutes at the end of you being
like this is why I didn't work out right
like whatever makes it simple to be able
to grow and to decentralize something
just so that we can say it's
decentralized as opposed to wait what is
the good part of centralization without
giving up our sovereign power and what
are the pit like creating something
that's a solution instead of needing it
to be decentralized if that makes sense
like what would get us all into
ecovillages faster or would get us all
into our projects right so that if one
falls apart we can find the other one
even if we don't have the personal
skills and perhaps Gabey isn't the place
like perhaps that because I do you know
online you have an irate like there's
just so much online right so if you need
something and it's there like to me
that's the global village so maybe you
know he and he isn't this space or what
you're looking for like you know and
just as like it that could be a
possibility yeah there is another space
that is that would there's people
looking to work on that you know I'm
just not sure I'm just not sure where
where it's gonna fit in its for you did
it like does are you what's the word
okay with it's the wrong word but like
when I said like for you to be able to
teach like there's a collective pool of
information that you when you start an
eco village you can go through what
other people have gone through and
learned you know Naveen is that is that
not appeal to people like there's that
piece of like maybe I'm trying to
organize something that doesn't need to
be organized because they chaoticness
that we're hoping something emerges from
for me as too chaotic like I'm like I
just want to organize it I want to like
learn from what came before and find
little I don't know like data points and
such and look Jim exactly that was
exactly what I was thinking when I set
up for iam what what you're talking
about
absolutely exactly
I think that there is a need for it of
you know I've had feedback from quite a
few people that there is a name for it
unfortunately the people that I choose
the ones that are you know or they're
seem to be attracted to the ones that
you know like end up having a newborn
baby or just like that so yeah so it's
it's not there at the moment but I do
actually very much think that there's a
need for what you're what you're talking
about and that in some ways the model is
like Wikipedia but its Wikipedia that's
got more of a focus on things that are
happening rather than on history so you
know like yeah pulling you know like
past information in to be able to use it
but but not so much just focused on
being encyclopedia rather you know
directory and a filter for people so
yeah yeah like I guess what gave me back
to the actual conversation we were happy
like that idea that complexity stops the
Dunbar number right that like we only
have so much complexity in our head and
what's left is what we're able to fill
with relationships it's like to me we
can deal with complexity like we can
make knowledge more accessible in a way
right where you don't need to start from
Ground Zero when you start an eco
village that there's like the
propositional and participatory knowing
the propositional knowing we can do for
each other and with each other the
participatory no II know I can't sit
meditate for you I can't actually give
you the skills of you what worker I can
teach you but you've the 30 years of
experience I've had I can't pass on
right like there's tools we can use that
makes sense to be centralized and tools
that like are like wait you need a
personal if you're not gonna meditate
what are you gonna do if you're how do
you deal with your anger here's 15 tools
that you can choose one of instead of
just need to find what exists out there
which always feels a little too chaotic
for me like I want to know who found
what helpful and want the Yelp review
for everything that's actually
trustworthy and not yell bones it and
it's one two five star instead of like
no does it work for my learning style
doesn't work with the problem I have
right like I just wanted to be more
organized yes so
efficiency and effectiveness in a sense
part of that because you see the
potential anyone to texturized I guess
if it would be like 200 years ago you
wouldn't even have the expectation that
it is possible but now it seems like it
is within reach and therefore the the
enthusiasm and then also the desperation
when there's not not not happening sorry
I was what is the world has gotten so
complex for me and after my brain damage
I can see how complex it is and how much
I want to have access to the same
information I used to be able to put in
my head and I want it and it's an
external source so that I have the
energy left over to have actual
relationships to have the Dunbar number
to have that right like like I don't
have to him think about all that
 right like who cares about the
economics and politics and stuff that
I'm constantly focused on because I'm
world's collapsing my personal one and
you know what I mean like what I want is
the actual connection and community but
I like how do you do that when world
doesn't work right like when I can't
figure out what to eat because the
executive function doesn't work because
I'm expected to you know answer emails
in 30 seconds like all of it is too
complex that like if we can solve some
of that complexity and end for each
other then there's more room left for
what is meaningful which is like the
relationships and the and the personal
work maybe it would be still important
to recognize why it is so complex and my
guess is that well as referring before
well complexity involving many
interacting parts right and each of them
generating information and that
information coming in through the
channels and when there's too much we
get into the chaos because it's no
longer feasible to deal with it so why
is there more change well partially
because the world is more global that
means more connected right if when we
were living locally then there was
little change even if there was a
technological advancement somewhere most
of the world did not know about it now
when there's a
biological with chemical technology
change social change some kind of new
sing or whatever it gets propagated
faster so we have more inputs so the
more we get connected naturally the more
complexity we'll get so we're kind of
wanting to connect more and we're
getting into this and kind of inevitable
that we will get to hear about new
businesses new inventions new
opportunities we want to participate
more on Facebook there are 10 things to
do on that same day and you've already
are too tired even from just reading all
those options and considering them and
you just like yeah 10 years ago I would
have participated in each day in
something now three weeks past and I
still don't want to go it's like if we
were not involved we did not evolve to
deal with that kind of amount of
information and yet we're still trying
to connect so maybe we've done enough
connecting now it's not just you need to
start setting the boundaries and be very
selective maybe that would also split
down some of the things going on at
least I would like to have fewer people
read watching TV reading useless stuff
on online and like those things are
there and they're taking a lot of energy
and attention including the kitten
videos which are always so attractive so
somehow learning to say a lot of no no
no no maybe we'll get back to the place
where they it's best complex obviously
we will get less of information but
maybe those who are still trying to get
to us advertising other active people
everything maybe they will develop new
strategies how to reach us while we're
very kind of you know well we went out
of Facebook so maybe we need to start
going away rather than seeking all of
that you know I need to be connected on
Facebook on Twitter on YouTube or
whatever just start saying no maybe
that's the solution for for you know for
kind of giving a spur for the system
to improve and and rather than just
using our kind of a more base psychology
and using sex and colorful things and
quickly changing things in the clips to
attract our attention we'll have to come
up with something more genuine more
meaningful and only then we will pay
attention so we need to be like maybe
more disgusted by oh it this ad is
trying to take away my attention from
something important I will not buy that
I will just block it or whatever maybe
that's part of the solution thank you I
went through that and that's actually
how I found it always going going
through the wringer with the algorithms
and with my intention being hijacked on
all sorts of things and it takes away
from presents being present in the
moment and that's where things are
created from right as that that embodied
presents and then just having our
attention all over the place
so going back to Daniel schnecken
burgers the way he describes the
sovereignty and agency and now how they
come into being in symmetry with forests
on trees idea of principles and and how
how they're developed and it's kind of
this dance with self and it's
understanding the boundaries to increase
the sovereignty to increase the
well-being like to meet all of your
needs and sometimes you have to retract
and really come back into the space of
here and now and do these minute little
things to increase that sovereignty to
increase your well-being to honor what's
happening internally within the body and
to you know be in that space and then
slowly that increases the agency it
reflects the agent you know in the
agency in the outside world so it's like
this dance and sort of that's how
projects are created and come into being
is honoring what is honoring like where
your energy needs to be and then it will
slowly increase your agency increase
your ability
to birth for these projects so I'm just
sort of playing with that and sometimes
I have to go all the way back it's like
well I haven't been sleeping well for
the last week so I just need to focus
friend eat sleep like the base you know
the base stuff and I start going online
or distracting myself with other things
and you know I'm not able to come into
that the sovereignty and well-being so
that I can bring forth my best suit and
actually cook you something so I think
this is the dance we're all doing and
thank um sorry say that piece for me and
my sovereignty is there's a piece that
you can't hold on to that is group owned
and not individually owned like the
phone numbers the beginning right that
if I can only hold five numbers in my
head but society says I need to hold
seven we saw backs no phones no sister
all of them but if we're still in that
position it doesn't matter how much
sovereign do you have if my brain can
only get to five at society says I have
to get to seven there's no amount that's
gonna get me there and it's not I'm
gonna constantly feel it faults for it
um there is a piece of like right I'm
not like to go back and the food and
shelter piece right like if literally
there isn't food and shelter that's
available to me at my level there you
can't even solve that for yourself right
you kind of need to solve it as a
societal level of like we need UVI or we
need something that's more gonna help
people fundamentally solve it things
that hurt my body are like the Wi-Fi
that all of my neighbors have I can't
get them all to turn it off and I can't
really move out of the city it's like
there's things that are reflective from
the group or from society that I don't
have control over to be able to go back
and get that same does that make sense
like that same because it's very
important like you be like oh I'm not
getting enough sleep to be able to go
back and do it but if it's still not
available to you how do you move forward
when there is no foundation for you to
go back to and get to you know it's not
awesome
right if sleep if you have insomnia if
you can't get to sleep no matter how
many times you go to doctors and tried
everything I think this is actually
where we can get to a lot of sadness
stuff because there will be some moments
where we'll realize that some some needs
not necessarily ours cannot be met it at
that moment and it might be even
difficult to go to that topic but I
still I think it's very important to
name it because just like with let's say
if there's a disease that there's no
cure for and yet we might say oh
everybody needs to pull in their
resources and look for it but there
might not be enough time and we might
not find out that or if there's a
hurricane or an earthquake and lots of
people die in the same sense we could
say that other people are this force
majeure sometimes to us either through
war or through you know regular crime
like and and then and then even shelter
and other things it's just a lot of
people saying no we will not give this
to you because there's no like there's
not enough resources to do that from
their perspective they're focusing their
attention and other resources elsewhere
and so somebody dies out of starvation
some places right eventually so we have
this happening both on the kind of a
level off of humans of animals and I any
material material what's the right word
like just nature general nature just
killing us right and it is very sad but
sometimes that happens that the only
answer that I'm getting is that no you
will not receive this and some people
will not get what they want and I'm not
saying that just like well let's let's
not take responsibility for that but I'm
saying that I think it's still part of
the real I'll the reality that it
happens sometimes and I think it's
important to identify when it when that
is the case maybe it's temporary but
right now maybe there's nobody around
who cares enough to you know know good
Nathan's around to pick me up and bring
me to that place and and yes maybe the
society even saying is no no we will not
invest - you know saving these people
who have like these ten people in the
whole country who have this rare disease
we are not considering that important
enough I think that's also part of life
recognizing that maybe this is the case
so it's only like where do we draw the
line are these still relevant and we're
going to invest and I don't have a
solution what to deal with what to do
with that but I'm just realizing that
that's part of the game part of the
situation that we are in and maybe maybe
only after we are real we realized okay
actually if we are not doing anything
these people will die
you know be it a war conflict only after
we acknowledge it right now the
situation is like these things will
happen these people the refugees gonna
drown the you know in Holocaust these
you know Jewish people and gypsy people
and and you know anybody else they will
get exterminated this will happen
because right now the system says now we
don't have enough resources only when we
become so aware that maybe then we'll
start shifting somewhere in looking for
those resources we like if there's a
meteor coming at us all right and we
realize we don't have the technology to
deal with it we're gonna get
extinguished like this yeah gone and it
would take like a decade to get enough
of stuff so it might be very scary but I
think there's there's part of that I
think to recognize that maybe you know
somebody not getting enough of something
is actually actually we are observing
then getting dying you know something
like that I don't know where to go
without but just that came out for me
we just can't we can't change the group
even if we reliance on the group or the
circumstance I think that's a pull thank
you where do I have sovereignty where
are my choices in this moment where do I
wear of my possibilities and always
working from there because we're
limited so many ways on so many levels
so it's like that's Jordan Peterson's
teach anything where can I take
responsibility right now where do I have
power right now
I also have a tendency to think that we
do have a lot more power socially than
we think that we do you know what we
think inside the box you know in terms
of some of the politics it's like well
you know we think politics is only being
selection of a particular politician you
know it's like we start taking an
interest in civics to the point of doing
okay well what is the kind of
organizational structure that we should
be using for achieving this particular
goal you know should it be private
should it be you know it's not it should
it be managed by local or state or you
know or federal should it something that
is just you know like and opting you
know community-led kind of thing that
you don't need to think about we you
know we don't we don't think about those
things very much anymore and that's
that's one of my one of my interests
there I guess which is that yes like the
personal sovereignty is important but I
think that we've also lost a lot of
error a sovereignty in the greater world
because we'll just defer that or
delegated if you like to institutions
that are no longer appropriate or only
century and the technology that we're
living in yeah I think that's when you
build it for sovereignty enough you have
the enou safely I mean okay yes and no I
think that is about so you know like
building up your personal sovereignty
but then there's also the kind of what's
good
Julie was referring to before whether
there are limitations that are placed on
what we can do or actually not placed
because it makes it sound like it is
someone else is doing it but there are
things that we actually have to do as
groups you know that we've got to one
that we have to start from the group
point you know you can't start
everything as an individual you know
some things
there's too much impact on the
individual for the individuals that have
any power over it there's some things
that we need to get together and deal
with there's a you know whether it's as
a family you know or as a local
community or as a you know as a like a
professional group for instance you know
it's like if some change needs to be
made to the way that the medicine is
done then one would hope that you know
doctors and other health practitioners
could find a way to get together and and
make those changes they're not going to
be able to do it just individual in
their own practices you know I mean it's
like yes the only Lincoln was there but
they also need to coordinate in order to
create you know a large enough force for
change to move the ball along that's why
I appreciate you believe your energy is
because there we need that push great
got energy action and chaos in a group
to stir that because usually in society
we think things happen do for me think
changes before it's the sister make
those changes we rarely do it through
foresight we get pushed into it
but slightly I'm saying both a and C it
said yes we need to do individual and we
need to group and we mean - if you
always anything like because like this
is nothing it is
I just realized kind of a part of the
problem maybe also is that it's not just
that we don't feel like joining in and
creating some new tools I think there's
also a lot of resistance and it's not
clear why to use the already existing
one good enough once that you know you
could take any kind of psychology book
and many people would benefit from it if
they would just read it but they don't
write and and there's a reason for that
an important one and there are you know
there are like the same with rule Omega
right many people would benefit but it
didn't propagate yet for the whole world
although everybody could just say - you
know - people that they know hey this is
a wonderful thing here I'm explaining it
to you and then you please pass it on
and then it would grow exponentially and
that we would have it written but that's
not happening I've made that post about
nonviolent communication there's also
other tools like internal family systems
there's you know these are maybe not
perfect but they're good enough to be
used in those kind of things and I
noticed that when I try to share those
things it's difficult for people to get
into it and there are important reasons
for that so even if it's already created
a tool you know there might be some
tools online that are you know good
enough for us to use right now we
reluctant to join them partially because
it's like more channels more chaos and
you know more complexity at least but or
more people to interact with so our
Dunbar's number is already to do too but
I think that just brings back just to to
our own limitation like even if
everything is you know almost ready for
you you know a free event there's even
snacks and
you might still not come you might still
not come because you know something some
part of you inside says no you know yeah
I see that the direction you want to go
I'm just gonna tell you there go go
there you know back to bed
and it's not even because you know
you're not really capable if you would
just you know persist you have you would
have probably enough perseverance and
patience to go through it and then yeah
it's a bit tiring but I did it yes I
participated yeah I got something from
it I was in it but many times I think we
just we follow what's inside that the
voice inside the autonomous automatic
parts that were developed many years ago
which are still responsible for our
automatically for our needs and and
they'd get to choose so the monkey brain
the monkey mind the the lizard brain and
everybody has that and and so if that's
the biggest part of the problem then I'm
saying it I'm just assuming that if if
that is big one of the biggest parts or
the biggest then we still have like a
very long history that is just dragging
along so it will be difficult I'm not
saying it's impossible to summon it
gonna be damn hard to deal with it every
day just like with meditation and you
know you're yeah you try to be very
aware of God what's going on and still
you're most of the time you're not there
I agree that that's a huge part and
something came up while you were
speaking and I guess the opposite side I
see creation so intimately intertwined
with our own personal progress and our
own personal evolution that is partly
why I think we have trouble you know
connecting with other people's works or
projects because it's such a personal
process of personal development so as
we're creating it's helping us to evolve
I think that's also part of it and why
it's necessary to do a certain amount of
work yeah thank you just a short note
you reminded me a conversation that
Jabbar Matea was having where
there's a video online out with DJ
Qualls sack of virtues again practice
and I don't know if you know Miam and
but what he said there DJ Qualls say
that whatever he is there to say to
others he's actually saying to himself
and even though he's made in many places
and repeating that thing he's he's
owning it as if he's not telling that to
others it's just for some reason he
needs to keep telling it to hear himself
say it somehow like it's it's not even
for others it's just like I'm here
talking to you not because you need to
hear it because I need to say it and to
hear myself saying it and it just points
me to my own value my own need that is
not met I'm still trying to communicate
with myself that hey you keep on working
this is not done you need to keep
looking for people to to just be there
to listen to you talk to yourself
essentially so that's what came up
coherent CEO is I think coming into this
space that we're trying to come into you
requires us to already be individuated
authority have gone through that process
of creating or the personal development
to be able to sacrifice in a way and not
need to build that to fill that for
ourselves for that greater purpose of
personal development and then we can
really come into okay how can I help how
could I be in service like a blank slate
almost like it open open and empty to
receive one of the UM posts I posted if
I think a week or so ago of like when do
we when are we enough and when do we
know enough to start taking action and I
answered an own question of like well
you never know enough and you never are
have arrived at enlightenment really so
like the only option is to take the
action while you're doing it and that's
where I feel like like this waking up
process like once you get to same with
like learning like you get to the point
where you're in learning where you
realize everything you cannot know and
so there's this like okay like I don't
I don't know what else there is to
discover about me but having been on
this path for 40 years I know that
there's something and it's gonna be like
earth shaking when it happens because
there's things that I found out about
myself they're like really oh I didn't
know that all along and I make so many
things click into place they're like
does anyone feel like they've arrived at
they they know they know themselves now
does anyone feel like they arrived at
like now I can work with other people
fully like it feels like it is an
intertwined process but you have to be
at a point well if it isn't quite the
starting point in order to be part of
game B or in order to be ready for the
group to be able to be ready for that
the next piece I think sort of like
being able to pay 80% attention to
what's out there rather than what's
going on in here you know it's like it's
never going to be perfect you know I
think you're always going to have like
intrusive thoughts the intrusive
feelings or something like that
sometimes you know like you can't get to
your 80% sometimes it's like you're so
caught up in you know whatever's going
on for you right now that I don't think
that you can participate that you can't
have sovereignty in that moment I don't
think that you know certainly don't
think it's a destination that's more of
it's a state and continuous sort of a
continuous balancing if you like so it
can be in one minute and not in the next
it's like during this conversation even
it's like I've had a few moments where
it's like all I'm thinking about is like
I've done home losing my internet
connection and now the cow is running
out in the computer and in those moments
I can't focus properly on or pay proper
attention to what sort of to what's
being said and other times you know it's
like comfortable and I completely forget
about myself and my surroundings and all
I'm seeing or hearing is what you guys
are saying so I don't know and I do
think it's continuous I think it's
sometimes better sometimes worse it
doesn't doesn't take much to knock it
into my group off course either if that
makes sense so if you've got you know if
you if you have a
I'm my background as a business analyst
and project manager so you know you can
have a team that's functioning
absolutely brilliantly when they're so
working together in sort of like a flow
state is just amazingly productive but
it only takes one thing to knock
everybody off course and all times four
days is so yeah that's how I think it
probably is sort of each of us
individually and how it's going to be in
any kind of change where cancer this
sort of increasing that probability of
getting to the point of being able to
Tokyo that's great sorry I feel like
there's so much more that we could talk
about this has been a really great group
I don't know if we do be scheduled for
an hour and a half or two hours now I
don't think we scheduled for any of
specific amount of time but in that
conversation seems to go two hours at
least
all right thanks for hanging out with us
Jessica it was great chatting with you
[Music]
lovely to meet you in person - yeah you
know one of the ideas that I was
thinking about after watching watching
you do believe kind of go off and like
you know really craved for this
connection was to have in-person meet up
somewhere for game be people really not
just talk and person-to-person and see
what arises from that so I kind of put
that up there on my
my wish list hopefully I'll be able to
meet everybody person yeah I'd love to
have a directory and know where people
basically are as well sorry is there
anyone else in Australia that you did
anyone knows on Richards Australia
I can connect you on Twitter
I don't think he's on the Facebook group
oh okay my channel in point I'm I'm in
Vancouver Canada Christian and Heather
are both in Vancouver as well yes
Heather a bunch of times online never in
real life and Christians I've seen him a
few times online but yeah no no God
really for both Heather and me this
works better we have that introvert
extrovert conversation are a good group
I prefer online interaction because I
can control the environment more and
focus on what's being said as opposed to
all of the extra where is the extroverts
or the opposite they're like where's the
extra information it comes from being in
person Heather and I ever like this is
perfect
mm-hmm yeah I find it strange true
through the screen I'm getting used to
it but it still feels awkward and
there's something missing are you an
extrovert I know I'm an inch at what
interpret extrovert it was just the
weird thing that came up in our space
the five of us and one of us was and the
firt and the other two were into for an
extrovert it felt very long as I'm in
Lithuanian Vilnius so not not anywhere
near yeah yes and you I'm in Montreal
I see me to buy you good
yes I did have a question and yeah we
should probably keep this to two hours a
this if they're so sane that's like what
would you what would you try a few no
you couldn't fail and bringing that into
the Dunbar number and community this
idea that if your community has monopoly
over you they have monopoly over you and
it's really hard to grow and change but
if it becomes that that that essence is
actually brought into it where it
doesn't matter how much you fail you
can't be kicked out of humanity there'll
be a space for you somewhere does that
make us show up better or worse does
that turn us all into trolls because
it's like well I can just find the next
person no problem or is it like we can
try right we can show up as ourselves
feel more authentic and if this group
doesn't like us we'll find another group
who does I'm not sure I follow the
question exactly what are the options
two options that your change what's
right there's there's a sane that isn't
about relationships that is like what
would you try if you knew you couldn't
fail right like if you knew if you
jumped off a building you would fly you
would jump off a building if you knew
you could start a business you knew is
gonna be successful you would probably
start the business right it's the idea
of failure and I just had it I remember
what who was talking when I was like oh
that's the same like that is the piece
I'm trying to solve is that one group of
people having monopoly over you right
saying that if you're not part of this
group you lose something that is
effectively only part of this group
they're your you know family there's
your religion they're your like whatever
it happens to be it stops us from
evolving so if people can easily find a
new group of people they're more likely
to be able to leave their older group
right they're more likely to be able to
evolve and grow if there's a possibility
they're right where it's not just a good
dressed chance for us to turn us that
message it oh you're welcome here and
you're gonna be just as good here know
that there's like meetup there's faith
like there's some where you can actually
go to find new people that's easy right
like you've experienced it's been
easy does it make you show up better or
worse in your community because that is
to me the two places I found it more
recent more happened to me in my life
recently where my my actual physical
community that I eat with it is like oh
well if I got kicked out of here I'm
missing I can't just I could get a new
community there's more cohousing going
on but I'm it's not gonna be people who
know my kid it's not going to be people
who I've seen their kids grow up right
like there's something there that
honestly I think stops the community
from dealing with a lot of their
because what if we stirred it all up and
then we have to live together right
something that happens like it's similar
to me like in a relationship when you
break up and you both have this
evolution former that doesn't happen
when you're in a relationship for a
really really really long time you don't
go hey I should go start going to the
gym or you're like those things that end
up being a catapult forward the same
thing kind of happens in community for
you're like okay well yeah we're good
enough so we're not gonna stir the boat
and so it's a part of your identity
right like you're not as genuine not as
authentic yeah or someone seen you for
who you are and then you not being part
of it which comes at a cost and a
benefit right like the communities
cohesive enough that it's gonna stay
together if you stir the pot it might
not but if you don't stir the pot you're
not gonna get to the level you could
have been at right where it's like wait
why aren't we dealing with this
like this thing that came up that
brought that up and me was this woman
yelling at me and I was like what if I
get kicked out of the project I was like
I'm not I'm not the one who did the bad
thing and also yet um I could see cuz
she had done the same thing to other
people and they'd all letting her get
away with it I'm like Oh cuz I don't
live there this both costs me more and
costs me less I can see the dysfunction
and like I'm not gonna be willing to
deal with this dysfunction when I'm at a
different hire like I don't live there
and she owns her own house it does look
there and so it was it different like I
can see the the underlining tension that
isn't talked about because they don't
want to stir the pot right they don't
want to have they don't want to be in
negative relationship with their
neighbors totally understandable and at
the same time you're not going to have
that as deep of a connection if you
don't deal with that stuff
you know it's like it's an interpersonal
risk risk and opportunity so I mean I
think you see the same sort of thing and
I'm going back to organizations again
just because it's it's easy to
illustrate but you you know an
organization will often get a consultant
in to deal with the kind of you know a
cultural problem or something like that
that that they can't deal with
themselves because the risk of you know
like social ostracism or job loss
whatever is too great for the people
inside that organization you can also
use him as a scapegoat yeah he did that
all those changes we didn't really want
them like yeah yeah but it's also that
people can actually accept it and work
yeah of course yeah you know which they
can't do if it if it comes from inside
another lesson I learned the hard way
because I tend to do very odd risk math
it's kind of like okay if it's true it's
true and and so I have you know sort of
throughout you know throughout my career
before I stepped away from it
I very much was one of those people who
took the bull by the horns you don't
mean is like if there was something
there that needed to be said or if
someone needed to look like an idiot or
something like that I would always take
on that role I'm down with that too I
think it's a very needed part of society
but it's also very vilified part of
society we this is lowering right no
okay so I'm gonna pay because it's just
my purse I'm like how could you know
that this needs to be said it not say it
I don't understand and yet there's tons
of people who knew it needed to be said
and knew not to say it but someone has
to say it would you stop with this woman
I was like oh so I wasn't the only one I
guess it wasn't me then I was like wait
a minute what do you mean I wasn't the
only one she's been freaking out on all
of you and you just been letting her do
this this is not acceptable community
behavior and like yeah I don't know I
don't want to sound like criticizing but
whenever you're saying I don't
understand essentially you're saying
you're still well first of all lacking
the information about their motives and
you're not you're saying I'm not still
able to empathize
why you made those decisions so this is
kind of a maybe a good signal for
yourself to realize that you you could
actually understand and see the way they
see probably you you would choose the
same things if you were in their place
because they have reasons so it's it's a
it's a warning sign that something new
has happened essentially that you were
not expecting that happy you had a
different impression of the system that
you were expecting that they will be
more forthright more honest about it or
whatever and you suddenly realize that
this is a kind of a crucial point it
could be even like a you know some some
warning about a collapse a possible
chaotic you know thing coming your way
yes III I noticed quite a lot of people
saying that yeah I don't even know why
would you do that but thinking that
there's a problem with them that they're
choosing they might be choosing the
wrong things but if you don't see why
they do that so you still then you still
don't see the system yeah the all the
reasons that arose in that sense to that
occasion yeah and that is how I get
there it's like first F in that like
wait why no and I understand and then
understanding like right because they
live there and they don't want to stir
the pot and like I understand why she
did what she did even though it was in
no way okay like it is but my issue is I
don't know and I don't understand are
two of the major thoughts that go
through my head that I have over done in
my life like so I've learned everything
to co-op coat whatever the I don't know
and I don't understand so like I got an
opinion everything so because it
happened so often for me I don't open be
that easy for it to be a trigger but I
will try to keep it when about other
people at least I don't know can't be
because it's so often it's just like my
constant thought but I don't understand
maybe when it's about somebody else and
I think it's still okay to have those
but maybe you can include I'm curious
you know showing the do towards miss
like I don't know yet and I want to know
or I don't
understand yet and I want rather than
more like this almost being dismayed at
least there was a kind of a tension of
that like why would you do like what
what's wrong with you rather than
implying the wrong is the curiosity path
like oh I didn't know this see that I
wasn't right but I'm really what I know
why tell me more I think that because
people help people appreciate it yeah
okay yeah you did over to the Semyon but
you want to I'm gonna tell you now I'm
gonna make it all clear also the
possibly just asking instead of assuming
I don't understand why would they
possibly you that's ridiculous who's
what Bentley the other person are a
project it was much easier when he was
like well then ask them why they why it
doesn't appeal to them I'm like ask them
what's this I didn't want to make all
the assumptions in my head ask them and
get an actual answer why don't you guys
confront her why is this okay unity is
more yeah would be more helpful than me
and and then even going one one more
step back appreciating yourself being
with with the way you are in that like
why would you even that is meeting your
knees right now so it's there's nothing
wrong with it might not help you
sometimes to meet other needs but it's
still I don't think like everybody else
I don't want to get all that in my head
I want life to be easier that everybody
would just be more responsible like I am
like why would I need to keep thing like
so there's also value in that as well is
just like it maybe it's difficult for
people to understand it before you
communicate why you don't want to take
that responsibility and yeah so there's
multiple options I guess the only
problem is that if people will
misunderstand your intention then then
there's a conflict arising so yeah which
is yeah letting go conflict I think of
anyone needing to understand me is it's
the only step I can control and it's a
hard step it's hard step to be like
right you might come off stupid and lazy
and X&Y and okay okay it's a hard step
to get to but it's furniture personal
development that
an important step yeah yeah I would say
within reason like having sort of done
that so frequently myself it's it burns
you up you know what I mean it's like
because we are actually social creatures
the which burns you out sorry to be the
the stepping back and kind of going
who cares if they see me as this that
that's the thing because we are actually
social creatures you can only or at
least as I've done anyway can only push
it so far and you know where I ended up
finding out that I pushed it too far as
my body told me you know it just tasted
capsized
pretty much so you know even if it seems
like the right thing to do even if you
know it doesn't seem to make sense to
just sort of go along with groupthink
you know and and so on it's like there's
there are limits to how much you can
push it I think I mean in terms of yeah
there's a risk involved yeah yeah and
these are make the most that you can
expect of yourself I think it's just
sort of understanding that we are that
we are social creatures saying anyway
yes it's true right should we wrap this
up or at least say goodbye to YouTube so
you can stop Yeah right you buy YouTube
nearby