I ended on while my between other things
that's not what this videos about I came
across a YouTube channel few months ago
called special books for special kids
and it's amazing is a guy named Chris
who interviews all of these amazing
humans not all kids and introduces you
to the diversity of challenges on this
planet and that we're all human and Rob
lovable and we all have a voice and that
is very much in alignment with my
mission and what I am currently doing
and I just loved who I could sit there
for the day and fall in love with all of
these human beings who I might never get
to meet real person and some of them
have passed and I got to introduce my
kid to them and even seeing her her good
reactions and even her bad ones where we
can at least have that conversation in
front of like with me in my heart
instead of in front of someone I making
it hurt their feelings and like everyone
is deserving of love and connection and
the fact that their comments have been
disabled so that these kids cannot get
that that community support that they
were instilling and developing is
ridiculous and I would really like it to
be reinstated and they have a
professional YouTube channel that
actually has millions of viewers also
they do editing who do the thumbnail
thing which I clearly don't do but I
well I'm gonna do a second one of these
because this is just does it work at my
internet connection no all right I don't
know how that will look good thing
people don't actually attend my YouTube
my live ones I don't have a platform of
people they have a lot of people so I
can't offer that but what I can offer is
my idea and which is not at all related
to this which is why we this this exact
thing is why we need to be in control of
the media of the of the social media and
the technology that influences our daily
lives
we need to own it so like this
doesn't happen where when even if it's a
blanket thing to keep people safe when
you need to break the rules to make life
better for people you break the rules
and that is not done by a corporation
it's not but I've even done by the
government because they need bureaucracy
and all the way across the line if we
owned YouTube we could vote on and I'm
not saying we're not going to own
YouTube YouTube's owned by corporations
but we can create the technology that we
own together and monetize it and invite
people like chris over and invite so
that if youtube itself existed in a
different space where we collectively
owned it and when that we don't make
decisions that hurt the entire all of
the people who make the content the
content providers and we don't hurt the
viewers we ask ok here that here are the
things that are happening we need rules
to support it so that kids aren't being
hurt and then when those very rules are
in fact hurting kids we need to fix
those rules whether across the board or
in particular situations and so I don't
even know you to reinstate their frickin
comments because it is ablest and
 that they don't get their
comments on there and those kids need
community and we need to have those kids
in our community and to be able to see
them and celebrate and the adults and be
able to hear people's stories and hear
their voices and chris is such a
beautiful person and i like he just has
a heart and a genuine soul that like
when you see the world through his eyes
you fall in love with each of those
people who clearly were always there and
they just didn't have a camera pointed
at them and it didn't have their voices
heard and he's doing it in a way that at
least to me doesn't feel like the ablest
propaganda that's often out there of
like this person was in a wheelchair and
now they've pushed through and they walk
now we can celebrate them it does it
from where they're at and it doesn't
from like exactly as you are you are
worthy of love and connection and we
want to hear your story and what an
amazing impact every human be has on
someone's life and everyone is worthy of
love and connection and I'm gonna do
another video because I'm gonna do it
directly to Chris because