the crash of September 2008 brought the
largest bankruptcies in world history
pushed over 30 million people into
unemployment brought many countries to
the edge of insolvency Wall Street
turned back the clock to 1929
to the greatest attraction
after the Wall Street Crash of 29 that's
led to the Great Depression the US
Congress launched an official
investigation panic REO bank
investigation at JP Morgan arrives to
testify JP Morgan was among the business
Titans to be called to account by the
Pecora Commission lapse photography was
introduced to heighten the spectacle
in 2010 the same model is followed for a
new investigation of a new financial
collapse
panel ladies photographers move aside
former California treasurer Phil
angelitos is chairman of the Financial
Crisis Inquiry Commission I'm honored to
welcome you as we start this series of
public hearings into the cause of
financial and economic crisis he has
taken sworn testimony from a parade of
government and bank official
trying to get to the bottom of what
really caused the 2008 meltdown
the consequences of this financial
crisis have been grim also 27 million
Americans who are either out of work
can't find full-time work or stop
looking for work millions who have lost
their homes and millions more who are in
the foreclosure process trillions of
dollars of wealth loss I think one of
our jobs is to try to rationally explain
to people what the heck happened people
want to know how did it all go so wrong
the key trigger of the 2008 financial
meltdown was ez lending in the US
housing market in an era of very low
interest rates and reduced bank
regulation there was an astonishing
building boom across the United States
in California banks decided that
virtually anyone could qualify for a
home loan
Jim cling has been a real estate agent
in San Diego for over 20 years really in
2004 2005 if you could fog a mirror you
could get a loan that's how bad it was
they didn't really know or care about
the qualifications of the buyers and
whether those people could make those
payments or not apparently wasn't much
of a concern Bill is given to be more
than you can manage all those mortgage
has a whole range of solutions here to
people just like you so if you're
thinking of buying a home or refinancing
even if your credit is less than perfect
Ameriquest can help call one
banks began making what were called
subprime loans to people who could ill
afford to pay back the money especially
if house prices ever went down the one
man who could have stopped that practice
was then US Federal Reserve Chairman
Alan Greenspan for 20 years the world's
most powerful bank
Greenspan was revered in Washington
his power feared even by presidents the
Federal Reserve was the one agency that
had the full authority to regulate
subprime lending and despite all the
evidence despite all the yellow and red
lights going off they chose not to staff
reports I mean would you just ask you
would you put this under the category of
ups should have done it I mean my
experience has been in the business I
was in I was right 70 percent of the
time but I was wrong
30 percent of the time and there were an
awful lot of mistakes in 21 years and I
would point out that the captain as I
tannic was 99% right and 1% wrong it's
the size of the mistake that matters we
now know that banks and mortgage
companies were indulging in all sorts of
fraudulent practices to pump up their
mortgage business
many of the loans were extremely complex
and the terms hidden from borrowers
there were low teaser rates that would
automatically reset to much higher
payments after a few months it was no
accident that the most complex mortgages
were sold to the least sophisticated
buyers especially in poor and minority
neighborhoods like this one in South
Central Los Angeles walk in your daily
business congresswoman Maxine Waters has
represented the district for 19 years in
the US House of Representatives
information you know I've seen mortgages
that were given to 17-year old people
who were on a fixed income whose income
was never going to increase but that
market was going to reset within a few
years where was that money going to come
from I've seen mortgages that I think
are criminal Angelo Mozilo was the
undisputed king of the US subprime
market he is called the golden boy
because of his permanent ten and because
at the height of the sub prime real
estate boom he was making about a
hundred million dollars a year everybody
wanted to own a piece of real estate to
get into the game he became the darling
of business magazines with a slew of
fawning profiles of his rags-to-riches
story he always claimed that he was a
friend to the poor and that his lending
practices were helping scores of
Americans attain the dream of
homeownership it's one thing for him to
say that he was a friend to the poor but
in the final analysis when you see that
these poor people are now in foreclosure
now cannot get loan modifications now
ending up on the streets then certainly
that defies how he could have been you
know friendship or people
Mozilla's company Countrywide Financial
Group e come the biggest mortgage lender
in the United States call countrywide we
never stop thinking about what you need
and that makes home buying easy really
countrywide was sold to Bank of America
and almost immediately plunged in value
Angela Mozilla was placed under
investigation by the Securities and
Exchange Commission the SEC uncovered
very damaging private emails in which
Mozilla expressed his true feelings
about the dangerous subprime mortgages
he was peddling he wrote in all my years
in the business I have never seen a more
toxic product at the same time Mozilla
was publicly reassuring all his
investors in clients countrywide used
the product as a sound investment for
our bank and a sound financial
management tool for consumers it does
appear that there was a private view of
the markets and there was one that was
espouse to borrowers rating agencies the
investing public the SEC has now charged
Mozilla with insider trading and
securities fraud
[Music]
lenders like Angelo Mozilo really didn't
care if people ever paid their mortgages
because those loans did not stay on the
mortgage companies booked mortgages were
bundled together with other loans from
across the country and moved to Wall
Street
there they were packaged up into complex
new financial products bankers went wild
for these financial securities who were
really just stacks of IOUs
there was almost no government
regulation of this market it became a
massive system of buying and selling
these IOUs with fees being charged on
each transaction it was just all away to
make fees and to package up these
streams of supposed cash flows and sell
them off to investors I mean for a while
there anybody who touched a mortgage
made money it was like the most perfect
product I once had this view that when
people started talking about toxic
assets but somehow they were like a good
piece of fruit that had turned bad all
turns out they were a rotten piece of
fruit from day one and all along the way
whether it was the broker the lender the
securitizer the market maker everyone
seems to have taken the view that they
had no responsibility for the product
that they were moving along in the
system
that became unfortunately this cancerous
material that was injected into
financial institutions all over the
world
[Music]
one of the first places these toxic
products landed was the financial
district of London England nicknamed the
city there was a golden age here in the
years before the melting Garant Anderson
arrived in the city as a young trader in
1996 he had been a hippie selling
trinkets on the beaches of India until
his older brother found him a job in a
London brokerage I literally didn't know
what the city was I thought it was aware
that there was a stock market and I said
well why I mean you have to wear a suit
and things like that he said I'll tell
you why it's quite simple you'll have
about three four hundred thousand pounds
within about four or five years and then
you can go off and live the life you
want you want to live since the selling
of trinkets wasn't going down too well I
thought why not I had no idea about
finance whatsoever I didn't know the p/e
ratio was I didn't know what a yield was
when you're in the city all you have to
do continually is present of you and
present it strongly and attendee
believed in it it was all about
schmoozing clients taking them to strip
joints taking them to bars getting that
company credit card out and really
giving a bash
the wild atmosphere in Britain was
brought about because Chancellor of the
Exchequer Gordon Brown was easing
financial regulation there he called his
new approach the light touch we will
advance if there is light touch
regulation a competitive tax environment
and Michael Jordan fell in light touch
with an efforts really to make the City
of London the world's greatest financial
center and it meant giving the finance
ears giving the bankers a very free hand
in the marketplace Paul Martin was
Canada's finance minister in those years
he says deregulation came about because
of a competition between New York and
London to become the financial capital
of the world the race to become number
one is very very important but how do
you attract the financial industry where
the most logical way is what they call a
regulatory arbitrage which simply says
let's gut the regulatory system and
therefore people who work more people
will come the prevailing culture was one
that the markets always go up it was a
easy way to make money drinking
champagne fat-cat analysts it was a
joyous time everywhere you looked there
was great big new offices being put up
statues being put in the four courts
people building great monuments to
themselves in terms of the buildings so
they occupied in the way that they
behaved by 2004 Garant Anderson was
making a salary of $300,000 a year plus
an annual bonus of seven hundred
thousand we all he was invited on to
business television shows as an analyst
strong we had profit for tax growth of
nine and a half percent the whole game
is increasing your bonuses you don't go
into the city to do the world some good
you go there to make money as quickly as
possible and if that means lying
cheating and stealing that's what you do
regulators and politicians are just
deemed to be idiots it's all about
we will thrive with light touch
regulation and that of course is exactly
what Gordon Brown was encouraging as
transfix checker and interestingly he
calls my precise period in the city the
age of irresponsibility it was partly to
do with the fact he just said anything
goes and you know to me it's just
obvious the way people were behaving was
a rational way of behaving in the
context of the bonus system and the lack
of regular before long the
anglo-american risky financial model was
spreading around the world from Iceland
to Devon
if one country could be the microcosm of
everything that went wrong in the years
before the meltdown Iceland is it it is
a place of staggering natural beauty
[Music]
from the geysers to its waterfalls
to its famous blue lagoon it is a magnet
for tourists
one thing Iceland was never known for
was banking and high finance at least
until a few years ago Iceland was
transformed through the ideas of one man
longtime prime minister Dabba Dodson he
decided to shake Iceland out of its
social democratic past and remake the
country according to his free-market
principles he surrounded himself with
like-minded admirers Dobson is somebody
who fulfills the two criteria that
Machiavelli puts up about political
leaders he is cunning as a fox and his
creatures as a lion Gama Dalton wanted
to private on almost everything touched
by government
Iceland's number one resource industry
has always been fishing odds and
parceled up the country's fishing
grounds and pass them off to big ship
owners on Eagle helgesson's popular
political TV show the reaction was
disbelief
died in a wreck illuminate silver day
and for many people this would sound us
it's almost surreal you take the fishing
grounds efficient swims in the sea and
you give it to a bunch of people who own
ships for a row for good this is the
main resource of our country this was
the beginning of what came later in 2003
Anson made his most controversial
privatisation some of the biggest banks
in the country were auctioned off in
suspicious circumstances coincidentally
they ended up in the hands of some of
Dabba Dodson's closest friends mr. Rosso
spent were father and son who came from
Russia with some money they had made
from shady dealings in the brewery
business in the st. Petersburg and
suddenly they were formed themselves to
be the owners of the oldest bank in
Iceland these guys didn't know the first
thing about thanking in retrospective
they're either greedy criminals or
complete fools
the newly privatized Icelandic banks
embarks on an origin of dangerous
financial practices bankers sold
securities back and forth to each other
at vast markups but falsely inflated
their value all Iceland errs were
encouraged to buy a house or even to the
central bank lowered interest rates
flooding the country with easy credit
as in the United States this triggered
an unprecedented real-estate boom ice
lenders living and working abroad came
home to take advantage of the wild
market I ain't in the UK to listen a
3-person before when I came home I
bought a flat for nine million kronor
here's downtown almost close to where we
are now one and a half years later I
sell it for almost fifteen million
kroner I'm like hey what what's going on
I've done nothing to this plot and here
we are at six million kronor in my
pocket just for keeping it for one and a
half years and of course when you're
when you're benefiting from it you're
sort of okay well this is great
there's a saying now if something is
extravagant oh this is so 2007 you can't
be serious mm the 7 is having Elton John
in your 50th birthday party as one of
the business tycoons did if you just
went too far people took one loan too
many people bought one card too many
Iceland was not alone in its reckless
financial planning during the boom years
[Music]
[Music]
the world champion of the global real
estate bubble was surely Dubai in the
United Arab Emirates money was no object
as every local shake and every booming
company competed to see who could erect
the most ostentatious building no idea
was considered too outlandish when
waterfront property rose dramatically in
value
Dubai decided to make more shifts vacuum
sand off the ocean floor to make the
famous Palm Island on them were built an
endless line of luxury condominiums and
hotels that were snapped up by wealthy
investors from across Europe Africa and
the Middle East
Canadian Robert Lee went to work for
devised leading real-estate company 10
years ago
devine it's heydays we used to call the
sale center of the fish market it's you
know people could come and it would say
give me an apartment any apartment I
don't care what two bedrooms rhythm just
give me an apartment
because in a way people buying options
because most people buying things with
zero intention of actually living in it
so they're buying coupons could resell
it somebody else will be selling a
billion dollars worth of real estate in
one day
all of the slowed from the vision of one
man to buy ruler Sheikh Mohammed bin
Rashid Al Maktoum when he saw the first
plans for what would become the world's
tallest building the Burj Khalifa he had
only one comment to the developer make
it bigger I was silly to suggest a 90
storey building and the meeting was very
short he just left
but you know I've been with him a long
time so I won't begin to design studios
and then we put something really
marvelous and his question was how much
higher than anybody else I said about
40% plus great he called me the next day
and he said there were a crane was there
no limit to how high Dubai could fly
before it got too close to the Sun there
was always a nagging sensation that is -
by going to be like the other cities
around the world that has seen the fall
but at the same time you live here for a
few years you basically buy the story
you drink the kool-aid anything hey we
must be different while Sheikh Muhammad
apparently believed but the party could
go on forever some began to wonder when
the global real estate bubble would
burst and what would set it off
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Music]
the man who would become the central
actor in the meltdown took his position
on the stage in 2016
former goldman sachs CEO hank paulson
was one of the toughest of the Wall
Street Titans then he accepted the
invitation of george w bush to become
the u.s. treasury secretary it was a
controversial choice Paulson was not
universally loved on Wall Street
he was probably the nastiest guy of all
days to call miss snake and this is
coming from The Wall Street executives
themselves no you know you really can't
believe everything he tells there is why
they like obscure they couldn't trust
him Hank Paulson's aggressive combative
style came as a bit of a shock in
government circles is a guy who would go
through a brick wall to achieve his
objective leopard doesn't change his
spots I mean you know why does scorpions
sting they sting because that's their
nature and you know Hank Paulson didn't
change his nature when he went to
Washington shortly after Hank Paulson
arrived in Washington the prices of
California houses began to slide sales
of existing homes are down a full 12
percent just against prices dropped
overextended homeowners threw more
properties onto the market triggering a
downward spiral ain't Paulson called me
and started talking about subprime
mortgages in the United States there was
a general consensus that there was too
much credit and too much money sloshing
around globally we had had discussions
about where this excess credit was
likely to show itself and it was showing
itself in subprime mortgages in the
United States and that was a a large
problem
although few seem to realize it the
world was now infected with the toxic
financial products that depended on the
u.s. real estate market
[Music]
it was inevitable but someone somewhere
was going to blow the whistle and
question what these financial products
were actually worth
as it happened the alarm sounded in
Paris in August 2007
the giant French bank BNP paribas
discovered that many of its investment
funds were filled with toxic US
securities they stopped all withdrawals
from those funds it was a little bit
like an old-fashioned movie where the
bank president locks the door and tells
people they can't get their money it's
kind of it doesn't exactly make you feel
good about the world at the Ministry of
Economic Affairs in Paris the BNP
paribas ition triggered immediate crisis
meetings convened by Finance Minister
Christine Lagarde KOMO said - kaduche
mostly antibiotic we set a interruption
becomes immediate photo-op our higher
education media Tareq lee bumsoo second
recalcitrant under the first name or his
on the the dollar that then debuted a
feature the only difficulty
the very parable couldn't value my
security then one started asking how
many other companies couldn't value
their securities how did anyone know
what the value of asset managers were or
even Bank for the good of course banks
were holding the same securities as I
suddenly face in some of the foundations
of 21st century finance began to crumble
in September 2007 cracks were appearing
in the foundations of the global economy
the Titans of the anglo-american
financial system
began to tremble first up was Britain's
Adam Apple Garth a true superstar in
London's business class Apple Garth had
it all he joined an obscure bank called
Northern Rock in 1983 and had a meteoric
rise becoming CEO of the bank in 2001 oh
he was a boolean
fellow full of himself full of
confidence tell he could do no wrong
love the idea that he was become a
transatlantic jet setter he'd go over to
New York to arrange an exchange of
securitized in and felt he had a model
which was much better than everybody
else he didn't get it he didn't he
didn't get that he developed an unstable
model and that the wholesale market went
wrong his bank would fall off a cliff
very very fast which is exactly what
happened good evening one of Britain's
biggest mortgage lenders northern rock
is applying to the Bank of England for
emergency financial support
BBC News has learned that the bank
within hours of the BBC bulletins
worried Northern Rock customers lined up
to get their money out
maybe maybe not but I'd rather know that
it was gonna delete my bank and then
I've taken all of my money out most
people in the Western world had never
seen a bank run before with their own
eyes and so it was something they found
almost impossible to imagine the British
government was very slow to react to the
pen
it was egg on our face as the British
authorities no doubt about that and
letting those cues not only formed but
continued for two days was very damaging
to the reputation of British banking now
to Mapple Garth was hauled before a
British parliamentary investigation of
the failure of his bank but he was
characteristically defiant a circle girl
he actually accepted a little row it was
a good business model but clearly
couldn't and deal with the enforcing
global freezing of the liquid milk
saying it was only for seeing at this
committee been discussing it for six
months
the Northern Rock crisis in Britain
could have been taken as a serious
warning on Wall Street but it was not I
think people saw this as a that's
happening over there that's not
happening here I think that the sense of
interconnectedness was not realized
until the very last moment
wallstreet did not really start paying
attention to the growing international
crisis until one of its own mega stars
began wobbling in orbit flamboyant head
a one of America's oldest and biggest
banks
[Music]
through the spring of 2008 US Treasury
secretary Hank Paulson was constantly
reassuring his international colleagues
that everything was fine but the US
economy and that only mild tinkering was
required with the global financial
system in private French finance
minister Christine Lagarde advised her
friend that he was being very foolish
greedy honk omoi Lu tsunami canoes at
ease de su a virtual appliance and
educatio lock real diamond uncle pothi
the first major US casualty of the
financial crisis came with the dramatic
fall of one company and one man the
richest CEO on Wall Street Jimmy Cayne
was a legend he had come up through the
ranks to become president and chief
executive officer of America's fifth
largest investment bank Bear Stearns
he was famous for his back-slapping
hard-drinking and high living style
[Music]
Jimmy is really out of central casting I
mean I've described him as a as a you
know an amiable rogue I mean he's
definitely can be quite charming
definitely can be quite ruthless has a
twinkle in his eye and I think that
combination of ruthlessness and charm
that people get to the top with that
combination Jimmy Cayne was a flashy
risk-taker in business and in his
personal life in 2007 he was worth over
1 billion dollars and he wanted everyone
to know it every Thursday afternoon
after the stock market closed he would
board a private helicopter a few blocks
from his Manhattan office and fly off to
his country house on the Jersey Shore
for weekends of bridge and golf he did
have one troubling habit that would come
back to haunt him he did used to brag
about smoking pot I'm in the elevator of
Bear Stearns and it was 2004-2005 and
Jimmy Cayne tried to hand me what look
like a joint I'm like a change pot
smoking became public at the worst
possible time for his firm in the fall
of 2007 Bear Stearns risky bets on
mortgage-backed securities began to go
wrong the firm started to hemorrhage
money then in November the Wall Street
Journal carried a front-page story which
portrayed Jimmy Kane as an absentee
landlord who was always out of touch at
either golf games or bridge tournaments
while his firm was in crisis to top it
off the journal publicly revealed his
taste for marijuana Joe Kernan was my
colleague on CNBC says hey Charlie what
do you think about that hatchet job that
that the journal just did on Jimmy Cayne
and I don't know why I did this but I
started imitating smoking a joint force
issue but also apparently yeah that ban
on smoking hi there what does it mean
explain with my cell phone rings and
it's Jimmy Cayne screaming at me and
he's like what do you do with your time
I don't smoke pot I said stop it stop it
I said
I said listen who cares I mean you know
it's it you know you're not breaking you
know it's kind of a harmless crime don't
you just laugh it off and I'll never
forget what he said to me he goes yeah
he goes laughing oh if you're trying to
laugh it off
running a company you know Jimmy had
made a lot of enemies on Wall Street it
was very competitive Darwin in place if
they smelled you know Chum in the water
this sharks are going to circle
in January 2008 Jimmy Cayne was forced
out of the CEO position and became an
unpaid chairman of the board Bear
Stearns
but the firm continued a downward slide
it had more exposure to toxic financial
products than any other Wall Street firm
Kane had left a ticking time bomb behind
and it exploded in March 2008 rumors
swept the financial world that Bear
Stearns had liquidity problems trouble
raising cash when Hank Paulson heard the
rumors he told his Washington staff this
will be over within days he knew that
Bears clients would immediately pull
their cash out of the bank causing it to
collapse we have bring business news
tonight the storied Investment Bank Bear
Stearns is reportedly close to telling
it Paulson was right on Sunday March
16th Bear Stearns was taken over by
rival JP Morgan in a deal bankrolled by
the US government just one year earlier
Bear share price had been a lofty $170
get this it's valued at about $2 a share
in this deal two bucks a share just last
year people thought it was a typo bear
stock had traded what in the 30s or 40s
the the preview closes in the previous
Friday and so you know the idea that it
would be worth 2 bucks a share was
impossible to fathom
in May 2010 when Jimmy Cayne was
summoned before the Financial Crisis
Inquiry Commission to account for the
collapse of his bank he seemed to
suggest it had nothing to do with him
Kane presented Bear Stearns as a victim
of market history the Markus loss of
confidence even though it was
unjustified at irrationally became a
self-fulfilling prophecy when I hear a
lot of the people come before us I'm
struck by the extent to which all the
fingers point away from themselves and
I'm struck by the extent to which so
many people on Wall Street
somehow do not draw a correlation
between the actions and activities and
the risks they were undertaking and the
crisis that occurred most world
investors took exactly the wrong message
from the bailout of Bear Stearns that
some banks were now considered too big
to fail a key message that emerged after
the Bear Stearns bailout was of no
matter what happens the American
government and in fact it was it was
presumed the European government will
not let a big bank go bust for some on
Wall Street it was obvious that the next
domino to fall would be America's fourth
largest bank the venerable Lehman
Brothers run by one of the most feared
and ruthless men in the United States
[Music]
perhaps the most reviled figure to
appear before the US Congress in the
aftermath of the meltdown was formerly
Minh Brother CEO Richard Fuld the 2008
collapse at his bank certainly caused
the most damage to the world economy and
it financially ruined millions of
Americans who had invested with Lehman
I'm very much aware that one day we had
a firm the next day we did not and the
hearing fulled became the prime target
for a public that was angry at bankers
[Music]
Green
Dick Fuld had spent his entire career at
Lehman Brothers starting at the bottom
and clawing his way up the land in later
years he assumed all the trappings of
unfettered power his word was long his
judgment never to be questioned there
was a huge couch loyalty to to cold as
the chief executive of the firm people
on the one hand admired what Dick Fuld
had achieved but secondly this was not
an organization where you as a matter of
casual incident decided it was a good
idea to disagree with dick way he
created Lehman Brothers it was almost a
cult of personality the personality was
his personality which was we it's us
against them we're going to fight
everybody and we're going to win Dick
Fuld was determined to intimidate anyone
who might profit in this infernal Lehman
UK video he was angry that some traders
were driving down his stock price but
what I really want to do is I want to
reach in rip out their heart and eat it
before they die
I think in the tape there's this
enormous laughter in the auditorium I
think that sort of reflects quite a lot
about how people within Lehman sorta
core the one hand it sounded one level
amusing and then you sort of thought to
yourself I suspect if you're in that
audience the really scary thing is he
sort of could probably do it
Lehman Brothers entered its death spiral
on September 11th 2008 the stock was
plummeting Dick Fuld was advised that it
was time for a fire sale of his
corporate assets but he resisted
telephone records show that US Treasury
secretary Hank Paulson spoke frequently
with fault but he felt his message was
not getting through
he was definitely exasperated with Dick
Fuld I think everybody was he seemed to
be unable to recognize the gravity of
the situation his firm was in and unable
to do the things that were needed on
Friday September 12 Hank Paulson decided
that it was time for drastic action to
save Lehman Brothers but he did not want
to authorize another government bailout
he flew to New York on his private jet
and summoned all the Wall Street CEOs to
an emergency meeting at the New York
Federal Reserve building you know the
fire alarms are going off the tornado
siren is going and so when the Chief of
Police and the chief of the fire
department says we need the heads of all
the major employers in our town to come
together to come up with a plan you come
at 6:00 p.m. Hank Paulson started that
secret meeting with America's leading
bank CEO Jamie Dimon of JPMorgan Lloyd
Blankfein of Goldman Sachs John Thain of
Merrill Lynch and John Mack of organ
Stanley I begin working on a plan
Paulson told them that they all knew why
they were there without their help
Lehman would not open for business on
Monday and the consequences for everyone
sitting around that table would be
disaster
across town Dick Fuld was astounded that
Hank Paulson had not invited him to the
crisis meeting here his company is
basically being carved up and he's not
allowed to be there he's calling in
they're not returning his call
inside Lehman Brothers there was an air
of unreality the firm had been in
existence since 1850 they had survived
the Great Depression of the 1930s they
had survived the 9/11 attack that
destroyed their offices in the World
Trade Center sure they could survive
this tonight one of the biggest
investment firms is in serious trouble
Lehman Brothers with a for Lehman
Brothers stock has been plummeting along
with confidence and its ability to
survive these people have been through
it before they were going through it
again do you know what the rest of the
world hates us but that's okay because
we're going to emerge on top here and I
believe that was what was persisting at
Lehman Brothers right until midnight on
the famous weekend I don't think anyone
really the senior management believed it
was going to happen on Sunday the
bankers finally came up with a
private-sector plan to save Lehman
Brothers the company would be divided
into the solid assets of Lehman would be
purchased by Barclays a British bank the
American Bankers agreed to take over the
questionable parts of the company just
as everyone was about to celebrate were
derived that the British government
would not approve the deal
Hank Paulson placed an emergency call to
British Chancellor Alistair Darwin but
couldn't budge him
I understand Hank Paulson's problem he
had to sort out at LeMans problem on TV
we had better conversations we had were
very amicable and we understood each
other's position what I was quite clear
I could not agree to something where the
British taxpayer was taking on a
liability that people didn't fully
understand Paulson hung up feeling
deflated and frustrated he announced to
everyone in the room
the British screwed us objectively this
deal was never gonna happen
and the most striking thing about this
whole story is how little effort the
Americans gave to talking to the British
authorities until literally the last
minute Paulson knew Lehman failure would
bring financial catastrophe millions of
people around the world would lose their
savings and pensions at this moment of
maximum tension Hank Paulson had a panic
attack he slipped out of the room and
called his wife I just said Wendy Lehman
Brothers is going to fail and it's going
to be very bad and a lot of people are
looking to me and I don't have all the
answers and I'm afraid would you would
you pray for me this has been a historic
Sunday on Wall Street N and it's not
over yet
at this hour the Lehman Brothers
investment bank appears headed toward
bankers E with six hundred thirteen
billion dollars in debt Lehman is by far
the largest bankruptcy ever in this
country dwarfing on the sidewalks of New
York and
investment houses around the world there
was a rising sense of panic
one who felt it was Mohamed el-erian of
PIMCO in California among the world's
largest institutional investors with one
trillion dollars under management I
remember calling my wife and telling her
go to the cash machine take cash out
because I'm not sure that the banks are
going to open tomorrow there was a
feeling that the system was incredibly
fragile that the Unsinkable was clearly
sinking Lehman Brothers officially
declared bankruptcy at 2:00 a.m. there
was widespread fear that could trigger a
chain reaction that would take down the
world banking system
at the New York Federal Reserve then
president Tim Geithner told his staff to
prepare for the crash landing of Lehman
he told them to put foam on the runway
the problem is they didn't put nearly
enough foam on the runway and there were
all sorts of unintended consequence the
ripples of the anticipated turned out to
be a tsunami tsunami unleashed by the
crash of Lehman Brothers would sweep
around the globe destroying millions of
jobs and wiping out the economic future
of entire countries
protests rocked world capitals from
Reykjavik to Beijing
to London
[Applause]
sometime during the night of September
17 2008 the world financial system went
into cardiac arrest
the failure of Lehman Brothers the
largest bankruptcy in US history had
sent financial markets into a tailspin
the New York Stock Exchange had its
biggest one-day drop since the 9/11
attack markets from London and Paris to
Shanghai fell in lockstep Russia
suspended all trading
in an epidemic of fear the world's major
banks stopped lending money and
accepting collateral from each other
the next morning at precisely 10:15 a.m.
president george w bush stepped out of
the Oval Office to try and reassure the
public the American people are concerned
about the situation our financial
markets have canceled my travel today
stay in Washington and consult with my
economic advisors bush convened that
emergency meeting in the White House
Roosevelt group according to notes US
Treasury secretary Hank Paulson told the
president that the United States was on
the edge of a total financial meltdown
he said if we don't act boldly we could
be in a depression deeper than the Great
Depression Paulson had also warned this
is the financial equivalent of war and
we're going to need wartime powers there
was a moment I think in this country
where at least for several days the de
facto president United States actually
was not President Bush but it was an
unelected gentleman from wall street
named Hank Paulson
over the last two years Hank Paulson has
been summoned before numerous
congressional investigations of the
Melton everyone realizes that the
ruthless former CEO of Goldman Sachs
played the leading role and everyone
wants to know why he did what he did he
was supposed to be the main
free-enterprise er in the Bush
administration but he ended up
overseeing the greatest government
intervention in the economy since the
Great Depression
all investigations go back to his key
decision in September 2008 the decision
to allow Lehman Brothers to fare in the
White House on that Monday Hank Paulson
seemed almost flippant about the
catastrophic bankruptcy good afternoon
everyone and I hope you all had an
enjoyable weekend he said that it was
not the role of government to save
private businesses I never once
considered that it was appropriate to
put taxpayer money on the line with us
in resolving language August not saving
a little but like saying well we're not
going to put the fire out in your house
because you caused the fire because you
were smoking in bed and the guy who
lives next door say well that's great
for me when my house goes to because
you're trying to teach this guy a lesson
the Lehman failure had repercussions
around the world millions of people
would lose their life savings pension
plans were decimated French finance
minister Christine Lagarde would play a
key role in the crisis although she was
a close friend of Hank Paulson she
publicly called his Lehman decision
horrendous survey led predict more
random attendre decision Rita Ali Polk
Benson episodic CENTAC a few pesky stop
off exit 18 novel decision su de la
sombra desert investment banker on
complete chaos Panetta lebryk eco
football today Sunday hasta maana los
hombres de Bono consider echo to Cleo's
console parties etc sck tetete else on
block ay truly description also nope
luke luke sidney as i see the function s
amana
the immediate impact came in London
where the Lehman Brothers UK office had
to instantly shut down operations a lot
of LeMans trading was done through a
subsidiary in London and every Friday it
would send all its cash back to New York
so on the Monday morning in London there
was no cash the holding company had gone
into chapter 11 and there wasn't a penny
to pay the staff and that was about the
worst way you could possibly close a
bank and so you had these pictures of
stuff just leaving with boxes full of
files the uncertainty on day one was
huge and very damaging how you feeling
as you think so all of these investors
not just in Europe and Asia but in the
United States and everywhere all of a
sudden have no access to this cash no
access to any of these assets and have
to start selling down their own assets
as fire sale prices and they're getting
margin calls and it's producing this
sort of vicious circle and that was
something that I don't think anybody
both among the regulators and even the
Wall Street CEOs appreciated was going
to be the reaction
in international financial markets there
was rising panic it began to look as if
many other banks could follow Lehman
into the abyss there was great
uncertainty too about where this was
going to end it was really gut wrenching
uncertainty and that is hard to accept
I mean you deal with it but you kind of
go where is the bottom here many
governments blamed the United States the
US authorities have not got a grip on
this they lose they're losing control
and I think you saw that in the trade
credit suddenly it was impossible to get
trade credit and literally from that
week you see this dramatic downturn in
world trade and of course we were hit by
that we're a trading country so the
collateral damage was huge all I'd turn
to Hank Paulson to see what the US
government would do next he was not
always clear about his intentions
generally there was we said that we we
work he's not very articulate he has a
hard time explaining what he's doing he
seems to be very impulsive he's
constantly on the phone barking orders
he's impatient he drives his people very
hard he understands very quickly how
severe the financial problems are but I
think he muddled the message in ways
that may make it worse because it's very
confusing he says one thing and does
another and then he changes his mind
again Paulson's ability to reverse
directions came to the fore in the next
crisis he confronted the near collapse
of the world's biggest insurance company
AIG
[Music]
it emerged that the dealings of one
obscure executive at AIG threatened the
entire world financial system
his name was Joseph Cassano Cassano
lived in the most exclusive neighborhood
in London eating at 7:00 a.m. the 53
year old American executive would hop on
his bicycle for the short trip to the
office
he may have drafted like a bike
messenger but in fact he was the head of
the financial products division of AIG
he had moved to London because the kind
of trading he did was banned in the
United States Cassano would ensure
companies against the failure of their
business partners it was a very risky
thing to do but in conference calls with
investors he claimed that it was a no
lose proposition
[Music]
this hard for us with and with without
being flippant even CEO scenario that
would see us losing $1 in any of those
transactions Joseph Cassano bet that a
lot of banks and mortgage companies
around the world could never fail all at
once of course the downside was that if
for any reason this product started to
miss perform if the housing market
crashed in a way that people hadn't seen
in living memory then of course AIG
would face a very big bill but Cassano
like many traders didn't worry too much
about that and the terrible truth was at
inside AIG very few people other than
Cassano himself and his particular unit
had any idea what AIG financial products
was up to in September 2008 when many
banks around the world began collapsing
thus a nose whiskey insurance game
pushed AIG to the edge of bankruptcy
Hank Paulson was quick to deny that he
had any intention of stepping in to save
AIG the truth was that the company's
desperate financial situation came as a
complete shock to the Treasury secretary
and all regulatory agencies in the
United States told surprise which is a
complete indictment of the financial
regulatory system how can you be
surprised by something that is so big
and so dangerous that if it gets in
trouble you have to spend hundreds of
billions of taxpayers money to put it
out of its misery
nobody knew just how big a casino AIG
was running reality was AIG was such a
monstrous creature with tentacles and so
many parts of the financial system but
if you had let a AIG go down you really
would have been risking dragging the
wider Western financial system with it
in the end Paulson bowed to the
inevitable saved AIG with 85 billion
dollars of taxpayer money I think there
was this Center shot that AIG was being
saved I think also a sense of relief I
do think that at that point people
didn't realize how bad things really
were but thought that boy
AIG one we would be in a lot more
trouble Joseph Cassano was fired by AIG
[Applause]
but he walked away with 315 million
dollars sorry we have no time
on Thursday September 18th US Federal
Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke and hank
paulson went to ask congressional
leaders for more powers and several
hundred billion dollars to staunch the
bleeding the meeting took place in the
office of the most powerful woman on
Capitol Hill House Speaker Nancy Pelosi
good evening I'm very pleased to welcome
the Democratic and Republican leadership
of the House and Senate as well as
Bernanke speaks first and you know Fed
Chairman are usually kind of careful
about predicting doom and gloom because
if they say they're going to be showers
everybody assumes it's going to be a
hurricane and he comes in and says it's
going to be a hurricane he says that if
you don't put some money up taxpayer
money to bail out the financials we'll
have another great depression and most
of the members of Congress there are
just completely stunned Harry Reid the
majority leader the senator from Nevada
says to him well how long do we have and
Bernanke says a couple of days Harry
Reid says the center of the United
States has not flush a toilet in a
couple of days they really thought they
were staring at the economic of this
that's what what was in front of them
and you know we focus so much on Lehman
Brothers and AIG but it was those next
Domino's it was Morgan Stanley go it was
Goldman Sachs going next and go after
that we were talking about General
Electric an American icon Hank Paulson's
telephone logs showed that he was
receiving calls from the head of almost
every major corporation in America many
of them like Jeffrey Immelt of General
Electric worried that bankruptcy was
just around the corner
Alston realized that he had to pump
government money into the financial
system to allow banks to resume lending
to consumers and to each other he came
up with a plan called tarp the Troubled
Asset Relief Program the government
would strengthen US banks using taxpayer
money to buy their questionable assets
we've got to get to something else
question we got to keep it simple very
simple the proposal was not well
received Hank Paulson who wasn't very
good dealing with Congress at the best
of times
turned up with a very thin proposal of a
similar kind to recapitalize the banks
but it wasn't well prepared there's only
10 pages long whereas most bills in
Congress are seven or eight hundred
pages long
there was no account about how the money
would spend and Congress turned down the
plan they didn't like it you see what
has been holding up the deal
Ohio congresswoman Marcy Kaptur voted
against the bailer I saw it as a means
for Wall Street to take a very gun-shy
Congress a few weeks before election and
strike the fear of God into them and get
anything you wanted out of them and
essentially transfer all of the losses
that they knew were happening to the
public sector all mr. Paulson we're not
going to do what you're asking us to do
the vote did not turn out as Hank
Paulson expected
on this vote the yeas are 205 a nays are
228 the motion is not adopted the
bailout package was defeated today
stocks fell off a cliff the largest
single point drop in history well they
were horrified they thought that they
had made the case that we were on the
cusp of another Great Depression and
they couldn't believe that Congress
wouldn't approve the money they were
stunned and it was and made the crisis
works because it made everybody wonder
whether our political system and attack
together Hank Paulson said he never felt
worse than when his proposal was voted
down and he began to show it one of the
sort of physical reactions he has is he
does this sort of dry heaves it's sort
of almost a nervous emotional tired it's
his form of sickness if you will there's
a moment when he goes to the hill he's
trying to convince all these
congressional members to pass tarp and
that evening you know they but they
bring him a trash can and they said you
each we get the you know the
Congressional doctor to come and he says
no no this happens to be a lot Paulson's
international colleagues could see that
he was under enormous pressure Alethia
sunomono distress exceptional cause okay
New Jersey depression in conversation
telefónica straight average vajayjay a
Madea response on a pelvic and Saguna
esophageal correlated on the
non-dedicated
the tone extraordinaire more group food
is Audrina
[Music]
ben bernanke and hank paulson warned
congressional leaders that if they did
not get sweeping new towers and 700
billion dollars there was a serious
chance of another Great Depression in
the end they got the powers and the
money but the signs of depression
started appearing anywhere
in the last few months of 2008 signs of
economic depression appeared in many
parts of the United States there were
over 1 million home foreclosures the
greatest share in California two years
later the foreclosure rate is still
increasing when she doesn't get right
now
deputy mark a baker of the Sacramento
Sheriff's Department used to enforce
only one or two foreclosures a month now
he has 20 to 30 a week
[Music]
the owner here had poor health and no
insurance and so lost everything
both sides Ryan ticket don't move to
California that's all I got to say
construction worker John kaznyk is
helping the family move out on the
foreclosure deadline piling their
belongings onto the sidewalk he too has
been out of work for months
it knows no spining elses what's
happening to the California Dream okay
hey used to be good here hey no more
sheriff a baker has one of the toughest
jobs in the state he often has to
forcibly remove people and sometimes
even has to draw his weapon he is
haunted by the case of one older man who
was not going to listen to reason
he continually called the bank and made
threats to them the bank made me aware
of this I showed up with another officer
we approached the house and made entry
into the house and we did he he shot
himself his suicide living room was dark
he was sitting in the living room on a
couch didn't leave a note for us didn't
leave any explanation at all and he did
pass away the day after that
his family if I lived there his whole
life and the bank took his house and he
probably felt that he had nowhere else
to go after being foreclosed many former
home owners have no place to go and fall
into despair some have to sleep in their
cars
[Music]
single mothers Nicole O'Connor and
Audrey Shriver have just found places in
the st. Johns women shelter in
Sacramento both had been living in their
cars for weeks with their children
audrey has also been battling cancer
I've been working since I was 15 so I
have a lot of history but physically I'm
just not up to it you know right now and
so for the months before I came here me
and the two kids were living out of my
van
yeah and that's scary not many places to
park a car overnight being older right
knows that security run Ragland you're
not supposed to park here before it's
supposed to go and you know you're
single woman pregnant seven months
pregnant and you're like where do I go
where do I go I'm not I don't not used
to living on the street I didn't know
where to turn
he's cry in a small you know a small van
and want to cry all night is don't know
where to turn
under government pressure California
banks and mortgage companies hold events
like this one in San Diego homeowners
facing foreclosure are offered one last
chance
they line up to talk one more time with
bank officials but there is little room
for negotiation
it is exasperating for homeowners like
Jack who did not wish to provide last
name they don't do any favors for
anybody that's all about money they
don't care about people they can send
them all make them homeless put them in
the street I don't care if they're
elderly disabled people who lost their
jobs or had a health condition or mental
health condition they could care less
Thank You Carolyn
that it's only in America Bravo feed the
rich that's how it is in America the
actions of banks during the financial
crisis raise the ire of many US
politicians they don't return your phone
call or they put you through so many
hoops that you get so confused that you
just give up and that's the whole idea
where you out make it confusing make it
very intimidating and you'll walk away
and then someone else ends up owning
that property not you so you've lost
everything that you've invested in
cannellini from Ohio rise Marcy Kaptur
went to the US House of Representatives
and told Americans to fight back against
foreclosures even by resistant to
Sheriff what I'm telling people right
now is stay in your homes if the
American people anybody out there is
being foreclosed don't leave you'll be
squatters in your own home don't you
leave in Ohio and Michigan and Indiana
and Illinois and all these other places
where our people are being treated like
chattel I would venture to say well over
75% of the people that get these notices
from lending institutions have no clue
about how to defend their own interest
legally it is just it's a tragedy
on Monday October 13th 2008 as the US
economy was spiraling downwards
America's top bank CEOs were summoned to
an emergency meeting at the US Treasury
Building in Washington
News cameras caught fleeting images of
the arrival of Jamie Dimon JP Morgan and
Lloyd blank line of Goldman Sachs
John Thain of Merrill Lynch
and John Mack of Morgan Stanley it was a
holiday weekend and the purpose of the
meeting was kept secret from the
participants I damnit attack US Treasury
secretary Hank Paulson had decided the
time had come for radical action he
intended to launch a virtual government
takeover of the US banking system by
making direct government investments in
all major banks
he knew that many bankers would be
reluctant to accept Paulson as a problem
which is basically the government the
United States can't force the banks to
take this taxpayer capital he wants them
to take it because he wants to put
capital into the weakest banks and he
wants the financial system to have more
capital because if it doesn't have more
capital it's going to shrink and that's
going to hurt us all so we have to use
his forcefulness to make them feel like
that doesn't have a choice and he does
the bankers knew that if they accepted
the money they would also have to accept
a lot more government interference in
the way they ran their businesses right
down to the size of their bonuses
something they desperately wish to avoid
in the end each of the nine CEOs present
signed a hastily drafted single sheet of
paper
ten billion dollars of government
investment for Merrill Lynch ten billion
for Goldman Sachs twenty five billion
dollars for JP Morgan two hundred and
fifty billion in all
- Hank Paulson's own surprise they
capitulated much more quickly and easily
than he ever imagined
literally by 4:00 or 5:00 in the
afternoon it was done telling more buddy
the biggest welfare check in history had
been paid to Wall Street Hank Paulson
may have had sound financial reasons for
doing what he did but he had no idea
what the public reaction would be
protesters filled the streets denouncing
bailouts for billionaire bankers
Paulsen is still under fire for his
handling of the financial crisis at
congressional investigations he is
pressed about what exactly US taxpayers
got for their billions of dollars
Ohio's Marcy Kaptur is determined to
hold him to account well you know we've
gotten a better deal for the taxpayers
you sure certainly got a good deal for a
lot of your former clients I think if
you look at what the taxpayer is going
to make on a number of these companies
it will have been good but the biggest
advantage to the taxpayer is what didn't
happen and that we did not have a
collapse we did not have a double the
number of foreclosures in Ohio and oh
they're they're happening mr. uh mr.
Paulson you have to come and visit us in
Ohio and see the results of your handi
well I know how terrible it is I'm just
telling you it would have been worse
that's your best argument that's not
good enough
you probably don't agree there was a
crisis I agree it was the crisis of your
making for ferry get a woman's pound is
expiring back
[Applause]
yep anon the collapse of 2008 quickly
spread to Europe and so did the rage
against bankers and politicians
[Applause]
[Music]
[Applause]
the two years since the financial
meltdown have been marked by constant
violent protests overseas police had
fought pitched battles with
demonstrators in London in Italy
and it was clean
[Music]
protests in Greece began with farmers
and quickly thread to fill service
workers and students all of whom are
facing severe funding cuts because of
the meltdown from the very start
European governments stumbled in
response to the turmoil
conflicts first appeared at this meeting
in Paris on October 4th 2008 banks in
Britain and France had already started
to collapse but Europe's leaders
couldn't agree on what to do about it
Frances christine lagarde had proposed
the European rescue fund for troubled
banks but Germany's Angela Merkel wanted
nothing to do with bailouts of any other
countries financial problems in a closed
session of the summit Merkel sternly
told President Nicolas Sarkozy every
country must clean up its own ship
ironically that very day a German
mortgage lender suddenly needed a
massive government bailout and it was
Merkel who had to write the check a
French newspaper quoted Sarkozy is
gloating Merkel told me each to his own
shit and then she ends up in it maybe
the meeting failed but it was not my
failure it was Merkel she fell into her
own trap
[Music]
the whole affair was not a great
advertisement for a European unity
pondrom c'est pas de Jul de Coronado
Kyoto's accent a Almanza pop
organization owned a clip a
Mediterranean toast about todos de tu
mundo same emissary low hop se van set
PE subra SOPA de Provence Sunday pay a
reckless event a lota polo simulation o
largest wat respective Choe ryong-hae
al-azhar make a dosa East Asian European
Kate a veritable miracle a decrease a
constitution l function domain are
coherent consensual qui vive ml function
Pato man so long Susan Federation
compare functionality de Janiero Canada
pal example we now know that the only
thing that really unified the European
powers was anger at the United States a
tug of war played out behind closed
doors when world finance ministers
descended on Washington to confront the
Americans in the first week of October
2008
that critical meeting was chaired by
Hank Paulson
Bank started the meeting place saying
you know we're in a bad situation here
we have banks failing in the United
States banks failing in the United
Kingdom so the regional banks in Germany
had failed it was unclear that the
markets would even open on the Monday
and we better deal with this and that's
a sobering conversation French Finance
Minister Christine Lagarde admits
anti-american feelings were running high
[Music]
yes estas a co-leader eglee morphine OC
a partir de nasi lemak America ets on
our agenda syndulla Mobilia cosas de
hablar
Adela glee los hombres de secrecy no see
ya precipitate los sábados economy dalam
under constitutional committee the
reaction the Europeans is for the most
part is very aggressive a very
accusatory of the United States you
caused this because if you let Lehman
Brothers fail I didn't think it was
particularly useful I mean and I pointed
out to some of my colleagues a lot of
the European banks were leveraged at 30
to 1 and 40 to 1 so they couldn't really
be too critical of investment banks on
Wall Street they're relievers the same
way
the g7 finance ministers met President
Bush the next day at the White House he
acknowledged that the United States bore
the chief responsibility for causing the
crisis and promised that the US would
change its ways to help clean up the
mess the finance ministers left the
White House with a new plan that was
agreed to by all g20 finance ministers
the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund
so by Saturday night everybody in the
financial world that had been in to save
government or in the central bank's had
endorsed the plan I think actually
that's quite positive news in terms of
world government former Canadian Prime
Minister Paul Martin says world leaders
were struggling with how the game of
international finance had changed the
best example I think in many ways is you
know is this person buys a house in
California pays twice as much as that he
can afford and twice as much as the
house is worth on the basis of the value
of houses going out begets a subprime
mortgage and it defaults and what
happens as a result of his default Asian
markets crept crater and municipalities
in northern Norway are declaring
bankruptcy
that is an interconnectedness which I
don't think anybody fully understood far
from the corridors of power some
countries were immediately devastated by
the global financial collapse
Isis was headed for bankruptcy and ruin
during the meltdown the worst
international dispute over money came
between Britain and Iceland
Iceland flew higher and crashed harder
than almost all other countries
in the boom years Iceland had privatized
its banks
the new owners embarked on a binge of
questionable financial practices
many isomers thought they had developed
a world-beating new banking model the
global financial collapse would prove
them wrong angle helgesen is Iceland's
most popular political broadcaster died
in Rimini it was only a small country
with no history of banking no history of
stock markets thought that they knew
best
even it's on record from the Icelandic
Chamber of Commerce saying of course the
Scandinavian countries cannot teach
Iceland anything because we are cleverer
than them in the years leading up to the
crisis Icelandic banks opened operations
in London and launched major ad
campaigns to convince British citizens
to deposit their money in high interest
Atlantic accounts
[Music]
credit cards club parts discount cards
frequent flyer cards ridiculous the
actor John Cleese became a pitchman for
the cooking bag so all you Iceman lizica
let's check it out I say right I save
was an Internet deposit scheme run by
land effect because I saves an online
Savings Bank completely yummy fruit not
quite in October 2008 Iceland's banks
quickly collapsed and had to be taken
over by the government
Prime Minister Gerhard I went on
national television to announce that the
country was facing bankruptcy and rule
so high thyroid relief of announcement
at least as catherine pugh it meant a
vast area west of 800 last laburnum in
deliberative wobbly engineer the older
young fruit will bless see Islam
the UK government immediately demanded
that Iceland guarantee British deposits
in Icelandic bank accounts already
facing bankruptcy
Iceland refused British Prime Minister
Gordon Brown was furious
is completely unacceptable I've been in
touch with the Icelandic gent Prime
Minister I said that this is effectively
a legal action that they've taken we are
freezing with the assets of Icelandic
companies in the United Kingdom Britain
in Bolton's draconian anti-terrorism
legislation and placed Iceland and
Landis Bank on its official list of
proscribed organizations i selectors
couldn't believe it you have the
al-qaeda you have a Taliban we have
North Korea and you have the lunch
monkey of Iceland the financial Ministry
of Iceland and the central bank of
Iceland so when you're on this list you
have no chance
so whatever credibility there's left
it's gone
ice blenders were very upset that Gordon
Brown had categorized them as terrorists
I always basically think things he's a
bastard
we considered breaking the friendly
country the problem we got was that we
understood the then Icelandic government
to be saying to us that the creditors
outside Iceland weren't going to get
anything and we couldn't we just
couldn't sit back and allow that to
happen I think the the application of
terror of legislation that was intended
to deal with terrorists against a
friendly country and all Dahl a NATO
ally was absurd this would never never
have been done had they been dealing
with a more powerful country in Iceland
I think there was nothing about bullying
Iceland
I mean Iceland had arrived these banks
to develop and to ruin themselves and
ruin the country things that clearly
taught brought us on our global ears but
look on the bright side
they thought mistreated Doritos or visit
one financial system their teetered on
the brink of collapse
and the crisis the government's taking
out these full-page ads reminding people
to remember their loved ones to think of
their children this is also sort of the
end of an illusion that has sort of
collapsed because for a while everybody
thought that they would be living in a
famously rich society where everybody
was moving around money and we had to
sort of reinvent ourselves as a nation
the financial meltdown triggered an
epidemic of unemployment around the
world perhaps the most astonishing
collapse
was in China
[Music]
the interconnectedness of the world
economy became starkly apparent in late
2008 in China
Xiao Jing is China's textile capital and
was among the first places to be hit by
the full impact of the global financial
crisis the story begins with tell Xiao
long the millionaire owner of this
textile plant in shall shake town
factory employed 4,000 workers in an
industrial compound that covered the
size of several football fields
[Music]
how drove around town every day showing
off his latest Mercedes and he was
widely seen here as an advertisement for
the new China
unfortunately in the fall of 2008
international orders for clothing from
town factories dried up all at once
foreign customers told him they couldn't
even pay for the shipments he had
already exported how quickly became
desperate
he had no cash reserves to pay his
workers and there was no way under
Chinese law that he could file for
bankruptcy protection from his creditors
and so late one night in October cows
sold his Mercedes burned the financial
records of his companies and disappeared
into the night
[Applause]
Talon fielding dozens of Chinese factory
owners did exactly the same thing there
was a wave of bankruptcies in the
Chinese industrial sector in late 2008
and millions of Chinese workers were
suddenly thrown onto the street many
textile and toy factory workers were old
wants of wages no no I am just want to
be paid what they deserve and we are not
asking for anything I do not deserve
okay let the only the thing to remember
about Chinese industry and Chinese
companies is that they're highly
reactive and responsive you think these
are companies that can turn around a toy
design and make it an export before
Christmas you know sometimes in a matter
of weeks and they're exactly the same
when orders start falling off they close
very quickly and there is sort of
instant reaction to lack of
profitability which is far all the
workers it's a very brutal form of
capitalism someone got on the roof to
jump this woman says but the police just
said go ahead other workers revealed
they haven't eaten for two days and dong
Fang is the labor activists in Hong Kong
who hosts a hotline radio show devoted
to workers right Jian saw he says
China's labor unions were of no help to
the laid off workers because those
unions operate as virtual branches of
the government they never showed how to
represent the workers how to help the
workers so therefore everything they
react in a way that a worker is dong
rain
like Christmas 2008 there were an
estimated 15 million unemployed workers
in China thousands of factories had
closed some demonstrations broke out in
several cities some police cars were
overturned millions of angry workers
demonstrating in the streets is about
the worst nightmare for China's
communist government the interesting
thing is that the Communist Party was
extremely worried that that might happen
and it's always worried because its
legitimacy the legitimacy of the
Communist Party of China depends
absolutely on delivering economic growth
and if you talk to Communist Party
officials they will admit that they'll
say look if we don't deliver economic
growth there's nothing else because
we're clearly not really communist
anymore ideologically we have an
essentially capitalist economy and if we
don't make it work then we are the ones
to blame and therefore we have to keep
the liver income growth so they're very
sensitive about any form of unrest
2008 demonstrations echoed the notorious
Chinon minute risings of 1989 when
Chinese citizens lost their fear of
dictatorship and stood up to the
communist government
and on sang was a leader of the Chenin
min protests but speaking from
experience here workers not to
participate in the violent
demonstrations of 2008 one of the lesson
I learned from 1989 this huge massive
street action looks powerful yes but
after look back down everybody
disappeared we're human beings we have
here in front of machine guns even a
million people in the streets continued
for three days that power is not really
reliable
the Chinese Communist government quickly
suppressed the demonstrations there
at the end of 2008 workers around the
world joined the global protest against
the economic devastation brought on by
the financial meltdown
in Iceland demonstrators pushed for the
overthrow of the government in France
some bosses were kidnapped and held
hostage by angry employee
the victims of the prices worth fighting
back
the years since the 2008 collapse have
been marked by demonstrations around the
world
[Applause]
owing to the loss of an estimated 30
million jobs in many places there were
violent street protests but they were
easily weathered by governments and
large corporation
in some countries however the struggle
went much further and left a lasting
mark
[Music]
[Applause]
the epicenter of this battle was in
France where workers have always been
quick to the barricades
because of the meltdown in March 2009
the Continental Tire company announced
that it would be forced to close its
factory in the town of Claire WA cutting
eleven hundred and twenty jobs
[Music]
the plant was still showing a profit but
according to the factory boss v4z the
workers here were just not as motivated
and productive as they should be sadawa
sthe frickin wood no visitor specialist
to the Continental workers label for the
a thief and a wire they convened a
meeting at the plant to organize the
protest they simply may not be funny for
Cody no time for these showed up to
address them he made a show of his
patience and forbearance
until an egg in the head changed his
mind
immediately decided that perhaps he had
underestimated the situation and made a
tactical withdrawal fielder battle
why did that happen what because people
were shocked they were angry suppose you
see Kira to odo Peralta kilograms on
Lucho Osito
[Music]
[Applause]
the Continental employees moved on to
occupy the town office when union leader
said hey Matt you received news that a
judge refused to grant them an
injunction to stop the plant closing he
and the workers began trashing the place
[Music]
yeah before dishonor the clarinet des
des bois des Oh chi-su future Dora
Seppala credenza DiPaola bureaus ce
c'est la vie knows yep a club euros
physical avi y la vie osmolarity marsh
we fear the school images of usually in
a Toledo the worker uprising began to
spread across the country and became
increasingly threatening
the caterpillar heavy equipment company
in Grenada announced that in spite of
record profits they would be cutting
20,000 jobs worldwide over 700 here in
France the global meltdown would reduce
demand for their bulldozers so
production would have to slow down
[Music]
on March 2nd workers surrounded the
plant
even a little paper almost all that they
were following the instructions of union
leader PRP kureta who like his father
before him has worked his whole life at
caterpillar Oneidas rima a unacceptable
or Ted d SE se que con Oni he chiqing
confess to free Don condo pouvez pas
accepted cosa de Ferran instead a
benefice record release on silica so
three weeks of negotiations led nowhere
[Applause]
furious workers surrounded the
management offices and decided to hold
the management team captain
the first union leader on the scene was
Nicola Benoit school early patents Oh
Papa ski doko Lisa V a Avignon atop the
negotiation po disk et is no she said
uncle Lisa lie unit on ki tongfu no open
it by the universities of the
negotiation cell use versatile
litigate paper Nicola product neck led
the management team that was taken
prisoner at first he refused any further
discussions with the union so far for
predictors Thomas you will Polly
negotiations with the caterpillar bosses
held captive the situation became
increasingly dangerous the police did
not immediately intervene the union
leaders were trying to keep control of
the situation
meanwhile noise here the media were then
told that the bosses would be staying
the night
yeah overnight as the captive losses
we're trying to get some sleep in their
offices angry workers did not leave them
in peace
[Music]
the caterpillar kidnapping incident made
news around the world it was widely
described as boss napping in the French
house at the u.s. Tractor Company
caterpillar where managers were locked
in and stripped of their speakerphone
boss snapped where you ball night
President Nicolas Sarkozy realized this
extreme reaction to the global meltdown
was turning into a public relations
disaster for France he went on national
television to denounce the kidnappers
this resistance is one the restrictive
pretty show only does anybody to vow
Jubilee sympathy only shows himself
doesn't eat Iguala you up it privately
however French finance minister
Christine Lagarde was critical of
Caterpillar management she thought that
the situation was exacerbated by the
ham-fisted tactics of the American
company a common problem with foreign
owned firms unas Ivanka stated on
DiSanto Chris sue capital it was a crude
elementa policy ratio see develop APIs
Cooper skewness also the decision idea
after an anxious night caterpillar
management agreed to resume negotiations
in decision-making for the yellow
application in exchange the Union
allowed the bosses to leave the plant
although there were some tense moments
on the way out
[Applause]
Jerrica Coretta tried to claim victory
faster than this as you can as you want
to copy knowledge of people feel come on
I said
[Applause]
the caterpillar bosses who were
kidnapped decided to keep silent about
their ordeal but many bosses and France
realized they could soon end up in a
similar predicament for a koala renew
essentially iske science operations one
of them was Marcus care you the human
resources manager for a u.s. car parts
company called molex
[Music]
he was sent into the town of vilmer near
toulouse to close a molex factory that
had operated here for many years
[Music]
the workers were furious and very
quickly their anger focused on carrying
along with nasty graffiti carry you says
he became the target of email threats
you know when you read about some
extremist channel saying that that's a
people like me should be exterminated
and also it's I think diarrhea it's a
it's a shocking to see that the town of
vilmer would be hard hit by the closure
of the molex plant which represents 20%
of its tax revenues in the local parish
priest Philip Bechet led the community
support effort for the molex workers
kusu-kusu so Mobile is a Jewess continue
a Alek poker ultra vino de vente and is
a Christian
on the morning of April 20th 2009 in the
new park hysteria was consulting a
security company about how to act in
case he should be kidnapped
ironically that afternoon union leader
Denny Caribs showed up and placed him in
captivity Versa million devotee Papa
Judaism
oh yeah eBay kutiman tenemos algunas
Casio Yahoo Guardia BEC no Paco Dona -
today for module 4 cloves atheism within
one hour there were media all over the
plant
I felt like an animal in the cage the
people there they offered some food it
offered as mattress as well so that we
could comfortably sleep in this office
the mattress was ups with the dirty and
also I was in touch with our our
security advisor he said walk in one out
of two cases distinct into sandwiches so
I didn't want to touch that
after 26 hours while Theriot and his
colleague Colin Kohlberg were released
from captivity was arranges reduce
energy continues even as they left they
felt threatened you can see from people
shouting and screaming that it was
extremely heavy aggression there my
colleague Amy she she came out and she
was in tears afterwards because she
didn't expect she had been working quite
a couple of years with these people to
to react like this
in the end the Mullins company paid some
extra compensation to the laid off
workers but did not back down the
clothing plant
the rage against Marcus tario only
increased to the point that he travels
with bodyguards as he conducts final
negotiations Carrie you complained that
he was treated like a monkey in a zoo
but union-leader paris' openly threatens
him with much worse
typical particular you see for River
secretary Mabus Augusta Georgia to de
commencer aviary dc4 Pacifica sorry you
see this it affect my bond
vive la différence occurred is Ottoman
kilo you edited Amontillado Finance
Minister Christine Lagarde has to walk a
fine line of a union militancy in France
she denounces violence that she knows
that foreign companies don't like the
turbulent atmosphere here on the other
hand she points out that the people who
have paid the greatest price for the
global financial collapse our workers
direction el mozo Saskia likhodeev also
note a verse Sukey Sukey s on TV demo
less effectively dr. Prince PK Damaris
Davos dr. Shyam Prasad Edison Simone
SCADA John keep a blowjob
many in France believe that workers
fundamental rights have been violated in
the wake of the financial crisis and
that workers here need to fight back des
even more user Vita part opposition
yosuta nearly caused resisted father
Philip Bechet says that French workers
give an example to the world by defining
employment as an essential human right
sot vo keen accept OPA Ficino
sakura proposes Koloff FA a donkey's la
hora de el de fondo de forma la follow
ho SE se llama easy said o de fondo SI
los try a
retrouvaille Sato citizen totem pole on
the llama presenta ye
[Music]
Iceland was a microcosm of everything
that went wrong during the global
financial crisis
the sudden collapse of the country's
banks in the fall of 2008 wiped out the
pensions and savings of most ice lenders
every citizen was now saddled with a
debt estimated at three hundred and
fifty thousand dollars per person
Iceland errs were furious at the greed
of bankers and government cronyism that
contributed to the meltdown
in early 2009 some took to the streets
to express their dissatisfaction first
they surrounded the national parliament
and protest leaders appealed to the
public to come out and support them I
thought wasn't very optimistic that we
would be able to mobilize the people but
every week every day you got the
shocking news that completely shook the
foundations of you know your sense of
what was moral the immorality that was
exposed to us was so shocking that
people started to come together the
Reykjavik police moved into position
protect the Parliament
inevitably there was couple
[Applause]
nothing like this had ever happened in
Iceland and both sides were unsure how
to perceive
[Music]
On January 21st the anger focused on
Icelandic Prime Minister Gerhard
his car was surrounded and pelted with
eggs and garbage he was shaken by the
incident especially because it came
shortly after a difficult visit to his
doctor when people were talking my card
I had luckily diagnosis the night before
that I had to have cancer so all of this
in my memory is very very ribbit I can
understand why people were angry
particularly those who had lost money
who had lost their jobs there was a
crisis but nobody had really expected of
enormous proportions video is John Avila
Atlantic poet and singer hoarder
tortoise it was the main protest leader
[Applause]
set to the people in we are all angry
but use your anger as a positive force
don't destroy don't use violence don't
attack people don't go to the homes of
the politicians because that's private
we can never use anger to get to destroy
courtesan asked the crowd to go home and
get their pots and pans then come down
and serenade the politicians in the
partly hidden makeup on this amazing
done and it was you for I centers
ordinary people to come out and and do
something sort of illegal like not
obeying these orders and so forth and in
the end it almost became trifle there
were so many people with pots and pans
and homemade drums and there was this
beating and the fires outside the
parliament in a sense it was sort of The
Unbearable Lightness of being to be
there who experience this with in the
nation and to see the joy and experience
the joy one will find me that was wanted
On January 23rd Icelandic Prime Minister
Gerhard addressed his countrymen on
national television and announced that
he was resigning due to illness
evaluated me informant some laylamon
trusting in us to hosted a group of his
governing coalition fell apart national
elections were called the new government
in Iceland was left to clean up the
incredible mess left by the bankers and
politicians who preceded them or he does
he ever need 12:16 grammar SiC Wilson
became the new finance master team our
oral history unlike obviously the
international crises are hitting a lot
of countries but in Iceland it's
probably more painful than almost
anywhere else because things were taking
through to such extremes in Iceland this
neoliberal privatization experiment that
was driven forward by greed and bad
practices in business had a terrible
ending and now we are paying the price
and and like usually it's not the people
that cause the problem that has to tie a
tie do afterwards
to many islanders feel they are living
in the ruins of a collapsed asylums
every night reykjavik police see the
symptoms like an upswing and domestic
violence here a woman has called for
help because her estranged husband has
broken into her house and grabbed her
baby in a bit of drunken desperation
[Music]
the police calmly talked the unemployed
man into giving up without a fight
[Applause]
constable Stefon I nursin says police
here are sympathetic with people who
become despondent after they lose their
jobs we're just people like everybody
else we have mortgages and car payments
we have to make so we're in the same
situation as everyone else
protest leader Birgitta jónsdóttir was
elected to the Icelandic parliament I
feel incredibly strange and at the same
time sirs deeply honored to be trusted
to be in there
I would dis carry on doing what I was
elected to to be a parade through voice
for ordinary people for the grassroots
movement within this building there as a
result of the meltdown young people in
Isis decades of high taxes and reduced
Social Services to help pay off the
debts run up by Icelandic banks
at this art college in Reykjavik the
students are multilingual well-educated
and mobile and there is a great fear
that a high proportion of them will just
give up on Iceland and move to other
countries Corso Jubilee is one who plans
to emigrate and most of people I know
don't want to live here forever they all
want to leave everyone I don't know what
I don't know one single person dies that
really wants to stay at icelandic
protest leader or dirt or person has
resumed his career as a performer he
realizes that many of his countrymen are
demoralized and that many young people
want to leave but he is quite sure that
Iceland can still have a bright future
I think many of these people if it go
away and they see they look around in
the world and they start valuing
revaluing seeing what relief they will
come back I travelled the world that
I've seen so many things that I think
this society is a very good one
and we have the opportunity to build it
up and I see signs of this beginning
people are really standing together and
helping each other
[Music]
in confronting the problems of a failed
economy Iceland at least has the
advantage of a strong social safety net
[Music]
the situation is much more difficult in
what is being called the Western world's
most surprising failed state California
[Music]
in the three months following the
meltdown there were an estimated 1
million foreclosures in the United
States
sweeping many middle-class families into
poverty
tent cities began springing up across
the country as the homeless desperately
searched for somewhere to spend the
night
this one suddenly appeared in a field in
Sacramento California the capital of a
state that was long considered America's
richest
[Music]
it was reminiscent of the tent cities
that appeared in this area during the
Great Depression of the 1930s in those
days they were called Hoovervilles after
then US President Herbert Hoover back
then homeless people camped along the
banks of the Sacramento River at the
edge of town and again today the
homeless have pitched their tents in the
exact same spot
it is a dangerous place because the
river can suddenly overflow its banks
and flood the area build Eola says they
have tried to camp and safer places in
Sacramento but were chased away the
camping law state that if you're inside
the city limits you cannot pitch a tent
for more than 24 hours against camp in
one spot for more 24 hours even with
written permission from the property
owner I have two months homeless this is
all building me these guys lead me the
way
[Music]
municipal officials in Sacramento
quickly ordered the big tent cities
dispersed and did everything in their
power to drive the homeless out of their
jurisdiction many were arrested or fined
the harrelson family in Sacramento have
been homeless for months when dent
overcame them they sold their house and
tried to move in with relatives but it
didn't work out they are on bicycles now
because they can't afford a car which is
sadly ironic miss Frances is a retired
auto worker where few general motors for
about 30 years and I got earlier when
they came out with early retirement I
jumped on it thought it was a big deal
it turned out to be the family has spent
some nights camping beside the
Sacramento River which Angelina did not
enjoy I'm a girly girl I don't like bugs
I don't like dirt and it gets really
cold at night and then being dark
outside and knowing that there's
critters around like skunks or raccoons
terrifies me
[Music]
the house ins eight-year-old son Joseph
attends the mustardseed School in
Sacramento a school specially for
children who are homeless we do need
this don't we go in we breakfast there
and do a journal and be alone
after the afternoon do math or science
just for class after the global
financial collapse not so many families
out of their houses and down below the
poverty level there are now over 1.5
million homeless children in the United
States the school is privately funded by
a charity called loaves & Fishes it's
not uncommon when the kids first come
you know we have fact lunches that
groups from the community have fixed for
the kids and a child will be eating her
lunch and the teachers will notice that
she's hiding food and when asked that
little girl will say well it's for my
mother I know she's going to be hungry
and for a child to be hiding food to
take care of her hungry mother is not
the way things should be
there's times where he gets really
frustrated at us and he'll tell us why
can't you just give us a home like other
normal kids I want my own room back it
breaks my heart when he gets frustrated
like that it really breaks my heart to
have to sit there and tell him you know
I'm sorry
[Music]
more and more charity organizations are
stepping up to offer food and clothing
to the homeless but the demand just
keeps growing
almost two years after the meltdown
unemployment and homelessness in
California is still getting worse not
better
there are over 100,000 homeless military
veterans in the United States the
greatest collection of them in the Los
Angeles area many of them suffer from
post-traumatic stress and other mental
illnesses
one of them recently crawled into a
dumpster in Santa Monica and burned
himself alive the LA County Jail now
houses the greatest collection of
mentally ill people in the country the
government here simply can't provide any
other facilities or treatment for them
please welcome the 38th governor of the
state of California Arnold Governor
Arnold Schwarzenegger recently announced
a new range of budget cuts which will
certainly make the situation even worse
but he remains optimistic the power of
california's innovators in under burners
is still strong we are still the shining
city on a hill item considered by any
means.the field state many of the
governor's critics say he's turning
California into a wasteland that
resembles his famous Terminator movies
he doesn't see
when I was doing movies I enjoyed
destroying everything I mean I loved
blowing up buildings and destroying cars
and wiping out people and all those kind
of things to better find the landscapes
was there it was just everything was
burning and everything was a wreck but
now when you turn on the news you see
the same thing when they talk about the
economy but the reality of it is it's
not that bad it is bad we did go down
with the economy but we're going to be
ok in California this debate is turning
into a bit of a family feud for
Republican Governor Schwarzenegger he is
married to Maria Shriver whose family
has long been associated with the
Democratic Party
his brother-in-law Bobby Shriver is now
the mayor of Santa Monica
he thinks California is a failed state
the optimistic side of the argument is
the state's failed
something radical needs to happen the
non optimistic side to me anyways look
everything's going to be ok when in fact
it's not ok now it's getting worse and
it could get a lot worse if you're a
disabled senior at home and someone
comes and gives you your food and cleans
your diaper once a day that person is
about to be fired
you're gonna have to move out of your
apartment into a nursing home where you
don't know anybody in order to save $15
a day in California most creative
smartest group of people in America
can't figure out how to finance that
that's a failed situation
this is absolutely outrageous many
people believe that Canada was largely
spared by the global financial crisis
the people of Windsor Ontario don't feel
that way
in the spring of 2010 the residents of
Windsor Ontario come to a picnic to say
goodbye to the General Motors
Corporation
it's a bittersweet occasion the company
is bringing its 90 year history in this
city to an end the closure of its last
plant here
[Music]
the last 500 GM workers in Windsor are
losing their jobs and joining the list
of workers around the world who have
been hurt by the meltdown the auto
industry has been among the worst hip
[Music]
and it's hype General Motors employed
7,000 workers in Windsor
[Music]
but today GM says there is just not
enough work to keep this transmission
plant open
as forty nine-year-old race the Marge
spends his last days on the assembly
line he has fond memories of the day he
walked in the door in 1981 as a child I
visited the plant as a young boy I
always said I'm going to work at General
Motors and I got the job I was a static
it's a beautiful thing
working for the biggest corporation in
the world
[Music]
many of these Auto Workers started young
and follow the same path as their
fathers and grandfathers many assume
they had jobs for life and don't really
know how to do anything else it came as
a total shock when GM advised them in
May 2008 that this plant would be
closing for good it's a sad day I'm not
when I started people left a job for me
so that I could retire I'm going to
retire and I'm not leaving a job for my
children that's disheartening
it really is do you feel a bit sometime
responsible for them sure sure we all do
we all have to take responsibility for
that
[Music]
at the height of the financial crisis it
looked as if General Motors would not be
the only major casualty in the
automobile sector
[Music]
chrysler was headed for bankruptcy as
well
the Chrysler minivan plant in Windsor
employs over forty three hundred workers
[Music]
Canadian federal and provincial
politicians were summoned to an
emergency meeting in Chrysler
headquarters in Detroit Ontario's
Minister of Economic Development and
trade was there Windsor
Sandra patello they sat down with us and
started talking about what their
condition really was and it was it was
very frightening to hear and I guess
being from Windsor being brought up here
most of our lifeblood has been from the
automotive sector I thought I would
never see the day that I was here or get
a sense that this could collapse at the
height of the 2008 crisis executives
from the big three US auto companies
came to Washington to ask for a massive
government bailout famously they all
arrived in private corporate jets
there was a wave of revulsion from
politicians and workers who do you think
you are you're asking for fifty billion
dollars and you fly in on a corporate
jet
those are our profits as well as workers
every worker I know at our plant they
said you gotta be kidding me
the US government came up with the
bailout money and Canada quickly
followed suit
Canadian Finance Minister Jim Flaherty
is the Member of Parliament for Ottawa
another writing that depends on the
automotive sector
[Music]
he points out that there were many jobs
at stake in Canada beyond those that the
big three US car companies the
fundamental challenge was this where
we're going to be in the auto business
or not
and a big driver from my point of view
was the fact we have three of the
largest global parts companies in the
world in Canada and that's where most of
the technology technological innovation
is so we lose chrysler we lose General
Motors they continue in the United
States and Europe and elsewhere we're
going to lose those parts companies who
do they'll have to follow them this is
absolutely outrageous
one group of workers in Windsor decided
to fight back against their plant
closing the incident came at the Aramco
car parts plant which manufactured
stamped metal components for Chrysler
in March 2009 workers were called on a
Monday night and told to stay home the
American owned plant was shutting down
a radical workers realized that their
management was trying to sell all the
equipment and sneak off without paying
any kind of settlement to employ some of
whom had worked for decades and world 30
or 40 thousand dollars they decided to
stop trucks that were arriving to empty
out the plan then when management still
refused to negotiate with them
the workers occupied the plant among the
union leaders standing on the roof with
Jerry Farnum the workers here have
decided to take over the plant that's
the only thing they have in order to try
to get the monies that are going to them
that's what they're doing the battle
moved on to a downtown hotel where a rad
COEs parent company was trying to hold
an auction to sell off the equipment
inside the plant the workers were able
to mobilize to disrupt the proceedings
there were a few tense moments
[Applause]
until the police finally intervenes I
assure you and I guarantee you that
there will be no washing today that's my
cross
it turns out that the American owners of
this plant were already fugitives from
justice a Radko was operated by a
California company called Catalina the
company website now defunct shows the
name Gregory Willis as chief executive
officer this Michigan document shows
that a few weeks before the plant was
closed
Catalina's owners took the precaution of
officially dissolving the company the
same owners had played the same game in
2006 and Friends there as well the plant
was closed
the workers occupied it but in France
the owners were tried and convicted of
breaking French law in Windsor union
leader Gerry Farnum says that Canada had
similar laws but they are not enforced
our government doesn't have balls to
step up to the plate Engle after what it
what's rightfully old to the workers and
the reality of the day this part here
really pisses me off because of the fact
that the government has laws in place
but they're not being enacted on at all
in the end Chrysler stepped in and paid
the workers about a quarter of what they
were owned and so the Aramco occupation
ended unfortunately only a handful of
them have been able to find work in
other plants this is a nice dropping
did you see a race the Mart forcibly
retired from GM at age 49 the future
looks a little scary he realizes that he
is unlikely to find a new career that
pays anything like the auto industry but
he is ready to make the best of it
I still have young children that I need
to put through University so there will
be a change in my work employment I'm
not sure exactly what what door is going
to open for me yet I'm still my dad was
a carpenter and I may have to pick up my
tool belt again that's a possibility the
most devastating effects of the
financial collapse are being felt in the
countries that flew the highest during
the global real estate boom in Spain and
in Dubai
most workers around the world had little
way to fight back against the effects of
the meltdown during the boom years Spain
was called the miracle of Europe no more
at 6 a.m. every morning at the Plaza
elliptical in Madrid immigrant workers
from many countries line up and hope to
be picked for a day's work by small
contractors who drive by
[Music]
with unemployment at 20% they were the
first to lose their jobs
[Music]
the Spanish government recently offered
to pay immigrants to go back to where
they are from you took up the offer
inaudible traffic Solomon from melon
says he will hold on here in hopes that
things will improve voter apathy
independence she sees no evidence that
will happen be able to condition
whatever you we fight the real estate
crash in Dubai has been even worse for
the army of construction workers who
came here from India and Pakistan and
all over South Asia
they are paid on average three dollars a
day many of them have been thrown out of
work many have not been paid for months
there were 200,000 laborers at once here
and the practice such that if you want
to come to devise a laborer you just
don't apply you actually go to your home
city in Bangladesh or some and Karachi
and pay a middleman money so you're
buying yourself a visa okay
and while you're working you're actually
paying back maybe your prepaid Visa
Rights for the first year so imagine if
those guys didn't get paid for two or
three months
some of these workers went on strike
demanding back pain Dubai authorities
started rounding up unemployed workers
and forcibly expelling them from the
country
for many it is unclear whether it is
worth to stay or to go home because many
of them had to take on death in their
home country in order to get to Dubai to
pay for their visas and sponsorship that
they're actually going to go home either
at a loss or in the worst case indebted
to money sharks in their home country so
in many ways they're the biggest losers
that we divide crisis as the grim toll
of the financial crisis continues to
mount around the world many governments
are looking for the true causes of the
melt debt in many cases what they are
finding is criminals
the search for the causes of the global
financial meltdown has led to some
evidence of fraud and corruption in the
city the financial district of London
England during the boom the wild party
Union flaunted excess of the banking
world became legendary then a deep
throat appeared someone who was telling
tales out of school that could get
everyone in trouble city boy was an
anonymous column that appeared in a
small local newspaper and soon attracted
a wide following eventually city boy was
revealed to be the 35 year old extremely
successful investment banker garant
Anderson I would focus on false rumors
I'd focus on their drugs and strip
joints sexism racism I would tend to
focus on the less salubrious sides of
the city because I wanted people where I
suppose of those the things that were
causing me stress and grief and making
me feel rather dubious about my job and
so I wanted to just really either go
into the confessional and tell everyone
about it
city boys revelations included what he
saw as widespread immoral and even
criminal behavior in London's financial
world
he says traders would regularly conspire
to circulate false rumors about a
company in order to drive its stock
price up or down depending on the bets
they had placed he says that every day
traders were feeding each other inside
information that would allow them to
illegally profit from deals and that
mentality was all pervasive in front of
trading the spreading of false rumors
was becoming more and more prevalent it
was basically a genuinely a Wild West
casino it was a get-rich-quick the good
times going to stop rolling at any
minute we've got to make her money and I
found it quite disgusting in it in a way
I had a very religious background but my
grandparents and missionaries my
father's a Labour MP I was a hippie what
the hell was I doing
in this world the low-level fraud
revealed in Britain was nothing compared
to the behavior discovered at senior
corporate levels in America
US investigators however discovered that
criminal behavior is hard to prove when
it involves some of the most powerful
people on Wall Street the first two u.s.
executives charged with fraud were Ralph
Cioffi and Matthew Tennant who ran a
giant hedge fund America's fifth largest
investment bank Bear Stearns
they were among the top golden boys on
Wall Street but the failure of their
investment fund in 2007 eventually led
to the collapse of the bank investors
lost billions
investigators discovered that in March
2007 the two realized that their fund
was melting down
chiaki email tenon they'll worry for me
is that the subprime losses will be far
worse than anything people's at mom
meanwhile 10 and bragged that he was
still finding suckers to invest in a
fund he knew was failing believe it or
not I've been able to convince people to
add more money they reminded me of the
emails that we saw during the tech stock
bubble where the analysts would go out
and chill for some stock and then in an
email tell his colleagues this is crap I
think it's appalling that people who are
making that much money and who are
purport to be smarter than everybody
else basically turn out to be nothing
more than devious snake oil salesmen
at their trial she off the antenna and
hired a parade of high-powered expert
witnesses to testify that their actions
were not illegal just one of those
experts are Glenn Hubbard a former
economic adviser to George W Bush was
paid $100,000 for his testimony not a
negative comment the two were found not
guilty although they now face a raft of
civil charges from the Security and
Exchange Commission the case was seen as
a shocking demonstration of the power of
Wall Street money if we have a Wall
Street bank that can afford very very
clever litigators that have an awful lot
of firepower behind them they can
overwhelm the Securities and Exchange
Commission they can overwhelm other
government agencies they probably will
but that doesn't mean that they were
playing the game straight that doesn't
mean that they were following the
intention of the law
in recent months a lot of investigators
in the United States have focused on the
richest investment bank Goldman Sachs
the meeting of the Financial Crisis
Inquiry Commission will come to order
in the hearings of the congressional
Commission examining the meltdown
chairman Phil angelitos went after
Goldman CEO Lloyd Blankfein for betting
against his own customers in the market
for complicated financial products do
you believe that was a proper legal
ethical practice the short answer is
this is the practice of a market maker
and I would like to explain this blank
line claimed that his bank was just
putting together deals matching buyers
who believed house prices were going up
with sellers who believed house prices
would go down he argued it was
completely normal for Goldman to take
one side of that bet or lend money to
the buyer or the seller he providing
necessary liquidity has market makers to
help ensure that buyers and sellers can
complete their transactions and
securities markets can function
efficiently Goldman Sachs was not merely
matching buyers sellers they were
actively creating products for sale into
the marketplace with the Goldman Sachs
impre moderate behind now I believe that
carries with it responsibility Lloyd
Blankfein denies that responsibility
he said betting against his own clients
was okay because all parties knew what
they were getting into I'm just going to
be blunt with you it sounds to me a
little bit like selling a car with
faulty brakes and then buying an
insurance policy on the buyer of those
cars and Rob said Oracle's an advert
here is an institution with it probably
professional only investors dedicated in
most cases to this business representing
pension funds who have the life savings
of police officers each are the
professional investors who want this
exposure
but that was immediately contradicted by
evidence unwittingly provided by a young
Goldman traitor named every store a US
Senate committee discovered emails in
which mr. tor had bragged that he was
selling to unsophisticated investors or
as he called them widows and orphans
that I ran into at the airport Goldman
Sachs has claimed that it had no idea
that the US housing market was destined
to collapse but way back in January 2007
fab Tour wrote the whole building is
about to collapse anytime now only
potential survivor the fabulous fab
standing in the middle of these complex
highly leveraged exotic trades he
created Febres tor and Goldman Sachs
were charged with fraud by the US
Securities and Exchange Commission I
denied categorically the SEC delegations
and I will defend myself in court
against this false claim got it 105 yes
mr. to Senate investigations Committee
Chairman Carl Levin went after tor
superiors at goldman sachs reading other
emails which indicated they knew they
were selling faulty products to their
own clients june 22 is a date of this
email boy that timber wolf was one
shitty deal how much of that shitty deal
did you sell to your clients after June
22 2007 mr. Chairman I I don't know the
answer to that but the price would have
reflected levels that they wanted to
invest but they don't know what's if you
didn't tell him you thought it was a
shitty deal well I didn't say that
come on visitor sparksville mr. Chad
Goldman Sachs be trying to sell and by
the way it sold it a lot of it after
that date should Goldman Sachs he trying
to sell a shitty deal
well can you answer it I don't want
those answer that one yes or no but I
mean we expect I think when we go into
the hardware store or when we go into
the toy store for our children that when
we buy products that they're good
products and that the people selling
them stand behind them it's really the
nature of responsibility
in a society neck an economy
goldman sachs eventually settled its
fraud case by paying an unprecedented
five hundred and fifty million dollar
fine but several members of the US
Congress sent this letter to the
Department of Justice officially
requesting a criminal investigation of
Goldman and its senior executives one of
the reasons I'm interested in criminal
proceedings is because you can go after
their bank accounts you can actually pry
open claw open their accounts their
personal accounts there are seven homes
their limousines their yachts you can go
after I'm looking for justice for the
American people and how we're going to
get the money back that our people are
owed only two days after goldman sachs
was charged with fraud chairman lloyd
blankfein
authorized a five point five billion
dollar package of new bonuses for his
executives
that was somewhat galling to members of
Congress who had seen the company
benefit to the tune of several hundred
billion dollars from the US government
bailout goldman sachs was not a normal
bank
it was a speculator in the market how
would it be if you went to Las Vegas and
you gambled all your money away and then
at the very end music oh my goodness my
bad behavior should be rewarded right
and you get the government the United
States to pay for your losses in Las
Vegas that's a great deal that's what he
did and they not only took their losses
and gave them to someone else
they paid himself bonuses for doing it
the search for fraud and corruption
behind the meltdown was also underway in
Europe where some high-level con artists
are going right back to business
[Music]
in the boom years Spain was widely
referred to as the miracle of Europe
there were more houses built here than
France Germany and several other
European countries combined but now we
know there was a great deal of greed and
corruption beneath the surface among the
brightest stars of the real-estate boom
here with Francisco Hernando a true
Spanish success story he lived a
flamboyant lifestyle surrounded by his
motorcycle racing team his corporate
jets and his private yacht not just any
up but at 236 feet long
costing 80 million dollars the biggest
most expensive yacht in Spain
[Music]
in 2004 Francisco Hernando built what
was supposed to be his crowning glory
near the town of Stefania one hour south
of Madrid a giant condominium
development the size of a small city
there were 89 buildings containing
13,000 apartments the project was
approved in record time his town would
bear his personal imprint community
garden named after his wife Maria aw
Damon and neared the entrance a 20-foot
statue of his parents para para para lo
chemical powder officials can't go clear
on me at the gala unveiling of the
project
Hernando was treated like a rock star by
the Spanish media then a young reporter
started to examine the story more
closely when I see a Primera's they say
scabiei knows everyone was saying wow
that's great that's wonderful
he's a self-made man el problema es
cuando de médecine si historia in
business the problem is when you dig
deep into the story you discover that
the project was approved in record time
with no provision for things like water
roads health facilities all things that
should be provided for families living
there it wasn't normal to see it
approved with all these shortcomings
Alejandra Ramon soon discovered that the
Cecina project had been arranged with
massive bribes to the mayor of the
nearby town
the mayor was arrested
journalists investigating Francisco
Fernando's previous projects found a
similar trail of corruption and bribery
he did not welcome this new brand of
media attention today Hernando showcased
development of Cesana is a ghost town
without all the proper hookups for water
and sewage very few people could
actually move in there is just one empty
building after another connected by
deserted streets
because of the meltdown the market for
condominiums has collapsed Francisco
Hernando has evaded prosecution because
Spanish police have not yet been able to
prove that he was the source of all the
bribes in a fit of peat he announced
that he's taking his business out of
Spain and moving to Equatorial Guinea
where he is already involved in another
scandal what I said you are going to be
something we've seen this guy do the
same thing over and over now in
different countries you know I don't
know if this guy knows how to do it any
other way maybe that's just how he does
things over the last two years criminal
investigations in Spain have resulted in
dozens of arrests in the city of
Marbella almost the entire town council
stands accused of accepting bribes from
real estate developers
because of the meltdown two-thirds of
Spanish municipalities are now facing
bankruptcy the crash has been even more
spectacular in a bigger real-estate boom
town in the years before the meltdown
Dubai had the biggest real estate
Bonanza in the world then the market
here tumbled losing 50 percent of its
value
leaving divided virtually insolvent you
would think that would upset divided
supreme leader Sheikh Mohammed bin
Rashid Al Maktoum but apparently not in
January 2010 Sheikh Mohammed through
this massive party to mark the opening
of the world's tallest building the Burj
Khalifa
shaykh muhammad calls himself Dubai CEO
he always claimed that he ran his
government according to strict business
principles but now many are quietly
questioning his judgment and his
leadership well I think when you portray
yourself as the CEO of Dubai Inc if a
company goes bust and disgraces itself
and leaves a lot of people indebted
normally in order any restructuring the
CEO has to be has to be replaced the
problem in a traditional monarchy or an
autocracy in this case is that the CEO
remains government and business
officials in Dubai have followed the
sheiks lead at the top of the Burj Tower
on the day it opened
Dubai's leading developer tries to
portray the Dubai real estate crash as a
good thing maybe values are changing and
that's good because the city at one
point get to be too expensive so I think
that's good for the customers and that's
good for the city moving through divine
you encounter a lot of evidence that
things are not quite as rosy as well
leadership pretend this brand new eight
billion dollar transit system was built
by Japanese companies but now the Dubai
government can't pay for it
the Japanese are being offered a few
cents on the dollar over a period of
many years
before the crash Dubai was home to the
world's greatest collection of building
cranes but now the construction sites
have ground to a virtual halt
many of these real estate developments
have been spurred on by speculators who
never intended to occupy the unit's only
to flip them for a profit the government
here did everything to encourage the
scheme too many critics that was from
Dubai in many ways with not to be too in
charitable was there was a state estate
pyramid scheme estate Ponzi it relied on
more people coming in to buy their
properties or even their deposits of
people who were who being there a little
bit earlier than them and it had to keep
on going the crash when it happened in
Dubai was like a game of musical chairs
coming to an end the fools who are left
with these half-finished properties or
in some cases patches of sand were
unable to sell on the premiums because
they were worthless by this stage
in the ultimate denial of reality Dubai
is moving right into its next real
estate mega project called the world it
is a series of islands off the coast
roughly in the shape of a world map
developers are supposed to buy the
islands and build their own tourist
facilities on them
Austrian Joseph Klinedinst has bought
the islands of Central Europe
the first island to be developed will be
Germany Joseph believes passionately in
this project his dream here includes
hotels and condominiums to be used
year-round by German tourists why would
those tourists come here when the
temperature in Dubai reaches 40 degrees
Celsius which it does four months at a
time
easy Joseph says he's going to
air-conditioned entire streets the R&D
institute from germany the fraunhofer
institute came up is a excellent idea to
help during this time we will build a
1.6 kilometer long Bulevar climate
controlled so that people can walk
outside 12 months a year and enjoy enjoy
the climate controlled portable Josef's
optimism seems hard to justify the
parent company of the world project has
announced that it cannot pay its debts
to its many creditors the international
skepticism about Dubai is only growing
especially because the government here
has been very secretive and even
disingenuous about the state of its
finances Dubai's proposed island
paradise with air-conditioned streets
may be a harder sell than they imagined
I believe they were even plans to have
refrigerated beaches in Dubai at one
point and I'm not sure in the post
credit crunch world that the smart money
will be going to Dubai in quite that way
any more transparency due diligence and
sustainability will be the watchwords of
the next decade and divide sales and all
counts
I wouldn't feel particularly confident
if I'd invested businesses millions of
dollars in purchasing these patches of
sand
while Sheikh Mohammed tries to pretend
that the meltdown never happened other
world leaders are trying to get to the
root of the problem there have been some
very tough questions including one from
an unexpected source
Queen Elizabeth has lived through the
Great Depression World War and numerous
financial collapses but she found the
2008 meltdown especially troubling a few
weeks after the crash she decided to
make her first ever visit to the London
School of Economics for a few minutes
she made polite conversation with her
hosts and then surprised them with a
tough question about the financial
crisis if they were all so smart why did
nobody notice it coming the staff at the
LSE were somewhat flummoxed by the
question and eventually wrote to the
Queen that it was a failure of
imagination
Martin wolf of the Financial Times of
London considered one of the foremost
economic lines in Britain has a more
intriguing answer you will never foresee
these things because the system is
ultimately just too complicated for
anybody really to understand the economy
is an extremely complex adaptive system
and in fact I think it is the most
complex system we know it has the
complexity of billions of people engaged
producing billions of products over time
and space and there are people and
because they're people they are subject
to all the emotions of human beings both
euphoria and panic and all the rest of
it collectively and individually such a
system will generate very complicated
phenomena and it will often be very very
difficult to interpret them the United
States government is also searching for
what went wrong there is general
agreement that it was a major failure of
the US regulatory system starting with
the SEC the Securities and Exchange
Commission the SEC was asleep at the
switch the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation for much of the time was
asleep at the switch the Treasury for
much of the time was asleep at the
switch but the drowsiness was all
induced by this very very powerful
opiate called market fundamentalism the
idea that markets were basically perfect
they could do no wrong that investors
were smart that smart investors would
make all the enquiries they needed to
make that information was relatively and
relevant and and and easily available to
everyone that therefore there could not
be any problem
in Britain the government regulator is
the financial services authority which
didn't do much better
they seemed easily foiled by legions of
avaricious young smart elders
basically the attitude to politicians
regulators is hands-off we'll do our own
thing and of course what we're trying to
say there is let us abuse a system that
it's open to abuse so we can make vast
amounts of money and please don't hassle
us the interesting thing is that when
the good times are rolling we say
hands-off don't regulator stop having
any involvement with us and then as soon
as we get in trouble we come cap in hand
and saying actually can um sort us out
so it's okay it's a heads I win tails
you lose or as as many people in Britain
have said we privatize the profits of
the banks to a select few idiots like me
and we nationalize the losses to
everyone the idiots out there the
civilians
French finance minister Christine
Lagarde is playing a key role in
research for effective new financial
regulations here privately from
businessmen a lot governments can pass
any regulation they want we will always
be able to outsmart governments and
politicians in particular season cops
wait Laura Mvula said only natural men
could decide upon toenail is abstract
cotton etem sit on phone I conferred on
an attorney pues si Yi guacamole posada
de la se la même chose the governor mo
fix deciding Elmen de hacer de Beauvoir
la regla voila photography bokudoh
consider fiscally double card management
on consistent cetera the controller is
absurd if a customer at or outsmarting
each other
Don Quixote focused on Oh on TCP la
moneda load Vasily do control nella
hydrometeorology
token a domino
in the united states the quest for new
financial regulations has been swayed by
the deep pockets of Wall Street bankers
there was real anger at the banks after
the meltdown and widespread demand to
hold Wall Street accountable right here
on page
consider this on Capitol Hill Wall
Street lobbyists outnumber elected
politicians 5 to 1
the politicians are surrounded and
outgunned
somehow the wallstreet claims that it
lost out in the financial reform package
eventually signed into law by Barack
Obama I would be very skeptical of all
Wall Street claims that they've failed
in terms of this new financial package
certainly they have an interest in
making the public feel that they failed
and certainly members of Congress
Democrats and Republicans have an
interest in making the public feel that
they were very tough on Wall Street that
certainly is the rhetoric but look
carefully under the surface
look at these 1500 pages look at how
many loopholes are still there Wall
Street came out exceedingly well they
lost the rhetorical contest they won the
regulatory contest the third per new
international financial regulation is
proving equally difficult
it is being led by Dominique
strauss-kahn at the International
Monetary Fund he was a longtime French
finance minister and is considered a
leading candidate to be the next
president of France the crisis also
shows that some very risky behavior in
the financial sector may put at risk the
whole system and of course is in the
nature of the banking system to take
risk that's why we have a banking system
that's fine but there's a limit to the
kind of risk that you may take and if
you make a profit it's a dividual profit
and if you have a losses it's a
collective loss so putting in place
different kind of regulation that avoid
or that limit this appetite for risk is
also part of what has to be done and if
we don't do anything of this then of
course we means that we didn't learn
anything from the crisis and I can't
imagine it will be the right attitude
[Music]
the failure to agree on new
international financial rules will allow
big banks to play one country off
another to see where they can find the
most relaxed regulation many believe the
competition between New York and London
to be the financial capital of the world
was a major contributing factor to the
2008 meltdown
the real problem that we face going
ahead is that the same kind of pressure
where is going to be the financial
capital the world is going to come back
once the crisis memories of the crisis
have faded certainly Frankfurt and Paris
are going to be back into the race but
so are Tokyo so is Singapore and so is
Shanghai and so is Hong Kong and what I
think may well happen at some point is
Shanghai and Hong Kong combined then you
are really going to see a race to where
is going to be the financial capital and
unless we have some kind of global
oversight it is going to be regulatory
arbitrage it is going to be a race to
the bottom most of this is really
country Dominique strauss-kahn believes
that a repeat of the 2008 global
financial collapse is inevitable I won't
say it can't happen again it will happen
again when I don't know two years five
years ten years twenty years there's no
reason to believe that we have the
silver bullet that make it possible to
avoid any kind of crisis and then in the
global economy the question is to try to
first prevent avoid as much as possible
and when we are able to avoid a crisis
to have tools to mitigate the effect of
the crisis
[Applause]
while politicians argued over
regulations which might prevent the next
global crisis along came an explosion
which made everyone think it was already
here
[Applause]
in the spring of 2010 it looked as if
the next global financial crisis was
already started
[Applause]
the government of Greece had clumped
dangerously into debt and would no
longer be able to pay its creditors
[Applause]
demonstrations filled the streets of
Athens as millions lost paid benefits
yeah they devalue BrahMos again my own
immersive media kala Merri after in a
position to Barbara Obama have two
particular the first artistic let me
take another political career for me I
[Music]
automatically become many international
investors believe that if Greece them
other countries such as Portugal Spain
Italy and Ireland would not be far
behind
all those countries found it very hard
to borrow money
why should I lend any money to you
unless I trust that you're going to pay
me back and if you show that you are not
reliable I'm not going to trust you or
I'm going to demand huge interest rates
in terms of making my next loan to you
sovereigns are no different from banks
no different from individuals
so we've got to restore trust
Trust was supposed to be restored in
Greece and other weak European countries
with a one trillion dollar bailout
funded by the strongest European powers
and the International Monetary Fund so
Dominique strauss-kahn worries that the
bailout is only a temporary solution to
Europe's problems the problem of Europe
is a bigger problem than the Greek
crisis the problem of Europe is a
problem of low growth the prong of
Europe is the fact that there's almost
no increase in productivity and that
this huge set of countries accounting
for close to 1 so that the global GDP is
just unable to in the recovery to take
advantage of the recovery
so far the recovery in most parts of the
world has been funded by massive
government spending this was the way to
quickly create jobs and everything from
construction to engineering and thus
alleviate the unemployment crisis now a
lot of people would say you're just
putting off the pain for a later date
and indeed we are what we're doing is
those government's are taking on debt to
do that and it's our children and
grandchildren who presumably will
eventually have to repay that debt in
order to to finance our little rescue
today which might not work and might
only put things put a day of reckoning
off for another couple of years for some
leaders such as Nicolas Sarkozy of
France the global financial crisis has
been a profound shock that radically
transformed their view of the world
[Applause]
Sarkozy has always been seen as a
right-wing free-enterprise er very much
pro capitalist and pro-american then
France was rocked by plant closures and
labor upheavals some workers even
kidnapped their bosses and turned to
other forms of violence
in Philippi in September 2008 Sarkozy
gave a speech that astonished his
audience release affair
c'est fini well Marcie
- Chris oh yeah - Jacques Oh c'est fini
serve Rajesh Khanna - so ray otávio said
Chris amento coca-cola bill immobile
irritability nausea say big inflation
unsatisfied needs urgent when examined
the conscience do accession valor de la
high partition de de voz de la location
delicious de la strategy de piel is a
llegar de soto de la nación de vionnet's
quacks - soprano no 7 to severe penalty
legally just on Dec 23rd Shirley Kell
Jim Maceda president Sarkozy have been
some of the world's leading economists
to come up with new ways of measuring
growth and prosperity to give greater
consideration to the environment and
quality of life he wants a rethinking of
capitals what gets measured gets done
see when I talk about the Moussa fish
calcio shows Rudin Fotolia with a mania
very observant sorry papa vocalizing
Dhokla la musio dishes at extreme mantis
not to deny an example simple possible
lunar country Vujicic ready to reveal a
support three Atrato sonikku console
module ooh
don't fall for shark shows Californian
valor for all six entry
[Applause]
while many Western nations are
rethinking capitalism China is embracing
it with a fervor that could prove
dangerous
the Chinese economy has been surging
ahead in the last few years and many
economists seem to believe that China
can become a kind of engine that pulls
the world out of recession
[Applause]
Chinese consumers are becoming richer
there is hope that their increased
spending will kick-start the global
economy
on the other hand there is widespread
concern that the next real-estate bubble
that will lead to the next global
meltdown
is already inflating here
in the world's largest municipality
Chongqing you see the construction of an
endless supply of apartments right
beside other apartment buildings that
are largely unoccupied seems eerily
familiar from the real-estate bubble
which preceded the 2008 meltdown in
Dubai and elsewhere the Chinese
Communist Party however tends to conceal
any unpleasant facts about the economy
here
professor Michael Pettis teaches in the
business school at Beijing University
he says China watchers have to resort to
odd measures to try to get at the truth
about the real estate bubble a friend of
mine in Shanghai came up with a very
interesting indirect way of measuring
inventory in Shanghai you know a couple
months ago we had an eclipse of the Sun
at 10 o'clock in the morning in China
time and it was a total eclipse in
Shanghai so his reasoning was at 10
o'clock in the morning he was supposed
to be at work so all the office lights
should be on and he just rode around the
city checking out the office lights and
he said that he you know it's not a very
scientific measure but it led him to
feel that there was an awful lot of
empty office space now there has been a
more scientific study in which
electricity consumption was closely
measured in new office buildings and
condominium the study confirms an
enormous glut of unused office space and
estimates that there are 65 million
empty apartments in China all evidence
of a very dangerous real-estate bubble
in the next few years China and India
are expected to take over some of the
top spots among the world's leading
economies which only increases the worry
about financial meltdowns starting there
if were affected by a slowdown in the
United States if we're affected by a
slowdown in Europe what's going to
happen what are the two economies two
and a half billion people
China and India when there's a slowdown
there what's going to happen when a
hedge fund fails in India what's going
to happen when there's a mortgage
meltdown in China the effect on the rest
of us is going to be enormous and that
time to deal with those kinds of issues
is now before in fact it happens because
if we don't ensure that Chinese banks
are transparent if we don't ensure that
the Indian financial industry has a set
of regulations that that at least live
to a minimal stand world standard then
we're going to be in a mess that's going
to make today look like a picnic
[Applause]
in the last two years
Canadians learned about the power and
unpredictability of a financial crisis
[Applause]
Canada has had only a small taste of the
wrenching protests and disruption that
became the hallmark of the financial
collapse around the world
this was the first truly global economic
meltdown
where the interconnectedness of the
world economy exploded in ways that very
few bankers and economists had foreseen
and very few politicians knew how to
deal with history has taught world
leaders that major economic crises like
the Great Depression go on for years
just when you think it's over along
comes another relapse
[Music]
even though the causes of the 2008
meltdown are now clear there is no magic
formula to stop it from happening again
the world has to start planning for the
next crisis even as we recognize that
this one is not over yet
[Music]