howdy this is Jim rut and this is the
Jim rut show
[Music]
listeners have asked us provide pointers
some of the resources we talked about on
the show we now have links to books and
articles referenced in recent podcasts
that are available on our website
we also offer full transcripts go to Jim
ruts show com
that's Jim ruts show com today's guest
is Forrest Landry the founder and CEO
Magic Flight a company that was among
the first introduced the portable
vaporizer to the world it's great to be
here Jim I love to talk to you
glad to have you I should be an
interesting conversation in addition to
his interest in business for says many
other interests under the auspices of
the Ronin Institute he does research
into the things including the manner and
degree by which products and systems
design influences culture and ecology
and he explores the nature of the
interface between the organic and the
inorganic particularly has realized the
relationship between concept and
computation and he also researches the
manner models by which effective
personal and social governance could
potentially be achieved and that's just
on his research side he's also a
philosopher with some serious work in
both ethics and metaphysics big stuff
but we're for it we go there why don't
you tell us just a little bit about
Magic Flight well as you mentioned the
organic and inorganic so it's a
woodworking company and so we try to
emphasize the use of materials that are
renewable experiences that are
essentially very much first person not
necessarily defined in terms of some
interface or some compute boundary and
to really basically look at what are
very very clear and simple solutions to
what would otherwise be difficult
problems so in effect you know design
has a lot of interesting challenges
associated with it so we try to
essentially go beyond just a traditional
methods of thinking about design look at
you know tried-and-true but also to
really bring that forward and to learn
what is the complete system solution in
the space of problem solving so Magic
Flight looks at that from a point of
view of you know how can we do this when
the industrial design how can I do this
with various kinds of tooling what is it
like to talk about the experience of the
employee and the experience of the
customer and an integrated way
so we don't really believe that there
are necessary trade-offs between those
kinds of things a lot of times we can
find design solutions that allow us to
get all that we want and that's that's
what we strive for that's great
beyond your business life you're working
on some of the biggest issues in the
world what is your motivation how do you
see the current state of the world you
know what is it that's motivating you do
the work that you do well in short I
have a great regard for the fact of
being alive at all so in effect I
consider to be able to breathe and to
look at the Stars and have an experience
of awe to be you know really a very
fundamental gift and so I think that in
one sense you know I'm wanting to be in
service to have you know essentially
other life other people be able to
experience that gift as well so we're
thinking about our children in the
future and such like that so I guess you
could say that in a fundamental way I'm
really in service to nature I'm in
service to the future of humanity into
thinking about those things in a very
strong way so I you know I love I love
the wild I love to preserve you know
essentially really good healthy
experiences and to essentially preserve
the capacity for us to to thrive I think
that it's not necessarily the case that
you know we have to have some sort of
again trade-off between human well-being
and natural well-being I think both can
be achieved in a really good way and
that that's a lot of what I'm looking at
is you know what motivates me what is it
what is it that I'm really passionate
about how could would create thriving in
the long term not just in a short term
but for the next thousand years how can
we make it so that you know the world is
a genuinely beautiful place and a
genuinely healthy place to live in and
that people really like being here what
do you make of the you know the current
status quo the way the world is
currently operating with respect to
those goals well I don't think I need to
go very far to say it doesn't look very
good right now a lot of our choice
making processes is not grounded and
things that actually have a long-term
stance in fact they're not even
optimized very well for short-term
stance and so in effect when I look at
the choice making that is happening in
the world today and the ways in which
we're building things I see a lot of
lost opportunities a lot of lost you
know resources that are essentially
squandered we are currently in a
situation where there's tremendous
opportunity and we
even on yeah we're on an epoch it seems
to me where the future is ours it could
be more glorious than anything most
humans have ever imagined or it could be
the worst of disasters and it's all up
to us pretty much and so in effect
there's a there's a real choice here I
mean we can either go into a dystopia or
we can make the world a healthier place
to be in so in effect we kind of have to
know how to make a choice like that like
what does it mean to to to be conscious
of the values from which we're choosing
yeah we'll get to that in a minute but
before we do I actually doable it'll bit
into your work on philosophy and I
thought some of that might be useful to
surface as a foundation let's start with
your thinking about ethics to the degree
that I understood it and I am by no
means a philosopher you seem to make a
distinction between ethics which was a
essentially a fundamental process for
thinking about the world and morality
which is more arbitrary and defined
within a specific domain could you say a
little bit more about those so it's a
bit like the difference between
principles and rules so a principle
effectively is is a general sort of
heuristic that we say okay well if we're
in a world where these kinds of things
are the case then it's probably going to
be important for us to think about these
kinds of issues and so in effect when
we're looking at rules we're looking at
things which are very very specific to a
particular situation so say you're on a
email form or something like that a rule
might be don't type everything in
capital letters because you can't
distinguish between common words like
polish and polish and so in effect
there's these sort of background ideas
that are very very general that get
translated into specific ideas that are
relevant within a particular context of
communication and when I say
communication I'm thinking of all forms
of communication you know physical
action building things driving down the
street you know all of those kinds of
interactions can be thought of as a
communication between self and world in
a general way so if I'm going to you
know talk about choices you know first
of all I have to say what is the basis
of the choice am I just basically
following a rule that is specific to a
particular world
or have a check to make sure that that
rule actually makes sense within a
greater context of values could give us
an example well as I mentioned you know
on the internet forum there are certain
things which which make a lot of sense
as far as good behavior and what what
actually constitutes communication that
fulfills the function of communication
ie we make sense of our lives we
understand choices that we're making a
little better and so on when we're
talking about ethics what we're
basically saying is okay well what are
the general principles of communication
that apply in every forum so for example
if I have a medium of communication
where if I just say the word hang up
that it hangs up the phone then all the
sudden I now have a limit as to what I
can actually say in the communication
channel because things that are content
are now going to affect the context so
in effect we identify that there's this
sort of principle that if I have a
relationship between content and context
such that there's a conditional ization
on the context based upon the content
then in effect I limit the capacity of
the communication channel to carry
information so in effect there are
certain things that happen in the world
that basically limit communication and
we find that those are less than
desirable so we translate that into a
specific situation so for instance if I
you know in a conversation with somebody
and I pull out a gun and I shoot them
that ends the conversation I mean
there's there's a very fundamental
change of state there and so in a sense
of recognizing that you know there are
these general principles about
communication itself what does it mean
to have reciprocity what does it mean to
have symmetry you know information
theoretic kinds of ways of thinking
about it which are very very abstract
translated into concrete realities of
thou shalt not kill as a commandment you
know that there's a relationship between
these two things and a lot of times as
the world changes we have to rethink the
relationship between the principles and
the rules so as everybody knows the
world has gotten much different than it
was say 200 years ago
the introduction of technology and the
internet and cars and automobiles planes
and all that all of this stuff has has
really drastically changed the world in
which we live and so in effect what
we're trying to do now is to say okay
how do we understand what are the
choices that we need to make what are
the principles that we need to apply
this who in effect even understand what
good set of codes would be in a
particular
mein of action so in effect it's kind of
like the conversations that are the
basis of policymaking or the
conversations that are the basis of
judicial process or things like that you
know in effect we're just trying at this
point to understand how do we understand
the situation well enough so that the
choices about how to implement things at
the level of policy at the level of
rules actually makes sense relative to
what our underlying values are and that
does seem to be the challenge of the
time and can we find a firm basis on
which to craft a set of operating rules
which I think you call morality for our
time yes that's correct
so in effect the you asked about why is
the philosophy important well if we if
we treat the topic of ethics as being
the principles of effective choice right
so so now we can say well immediately
you know what are those principles but
we also have to have some notion of what
do we mean by effective and what do we
mean by choice one of the great dilemmas
of the time and this is one of the
reason why you know metaphysics is
actually kind of important is that we
really need coherent thinking about the
nature of the relationship between
choice and causation
at the moment there's a lot of really
good thinking about causation we have
science and technology where it's
effectively disciplines of how to think
about causation in a really good way
we've we've learned about reason we have
an effective L to clear thinking tools
in that space but we don't have
similarly good tools about thinking
about what is when we mean by choice in
fact if we take science tech technology
as at face value they would assert
something along the lines of maybe there
isn't choice maybe the world is
deterministic maybe there's some sense
in which the notion of choices and
illusion and without really addressing
you know what is the fundamental basis
of choice how do we understand that
concept than the the concept of ethics
itself doesn't end up having you know a
foundation so one of the things that the
metaphysics does is it gives us a clear
way of thinking about the notion of
choice and therefore a clear way of
notion of thinking about the notion of
effective choice as a subclass of choice
and then we can start thinking about
what are the principles of effective
choice and all of this is pretty
important because if we don't have a
clear sense as to what those principles
are then there really isn't any clear
thinking about the nature of what an
effective choice actually is in any
particular context
so you know in effect we can we can
start with these really abstract things
but ultimately it ends up being about
pretty practical issues
yeah let's step back to choice soon but
let me take a little dive into
metaphysics you know people who listen
to the show know I'm known to say from
time to time when I hear the word
metaphysics I reach for my pistol
historically one of those people ago
metaphysics what am i Jeff Maloney just
give me a pistol malla gee that's all I
need
however I did read some of your material
on your metaphysics and it was at least
intelligible let me run back when I
thought I heard you can tell me whether
I was hearing it right or not and I can
give you my critique on what you had to
say you know my take was that you were
trying to bridge the gap between realism
and idealism however my take was that
the realism that you put forth was
essentially a straw man version that
really isn't relevant to what realists
think today and that it seemed to be
only about the hardcore physical matter
when you know practicing realists now
take into consideration the dynamics of
all sorts of mentally know things like
Systems Theory Network Theory complexity
science higher levels of cognitive
neuroscience etc they're all about
change over time the distinction I've
called the distinction between the
dancer which is the matter and the dance
the dynamics and if we consider all
those to be part of realism do we
actually need metaphysics and if we do
tell me why well actually I actually
agree with everything that you've been
saying so first of all let's let's be
clear about what we mean by metaphysics
cuz I because I think the observation
you're making about hey you know when
we're talking about metaphysics what are
we actually talking about the whole New
Age movement has largely made it a you
know a topic that's not intellectually
coherent so you know the first thing
that says is what are we talking about
well metaphysics is the questions of
what is and how do we know it's more or
less an academic discipline the way I'm
thinking about it so I have great
appreciation for the sentiment so in
effect it's not so much from my
perspective about bridging the the
relationship between
realism and idealism so much as actually
creating a foundation for both of those
concepts so instead of saying one or the
other of those ways is is true what
we're really trying to do is we're
trying to say how do we support these
concepts from an even deeper basis so
that this doesn't end up being a contest
the other thing is is that I think I
actually agree with the notion that it's
not just about matter it's also about
the interactions and the dynamics and
their progression through time and in
addition to that I would add actually
there's even a third category so there's
the sort of stuff in space perspective
then there's the forces in time
perspective and then there is the
probabilities and possibilities so in
effect what we're essentially saying is
that it's not just even about the
dynamics but it's also about the
sequences of possible histories when we
look at quantum mechanics for example we
look at things which have to do with
alternate situations like if this
particular measurement happens and this
state is determined and these other
states become the possible futures so in
effect there's a many-worlds
interpretation and we kind of see
ourselves as basically being in one
context or in another as dependent upon
measurement process so in effect we
could think of measurement processes not
just being a distinct thing but also a
kind of dynamic that is the
interrelationship between observable
objective States and virtual eyes
potential States as as mediated by say
you know one of the wave equations so I
think that you know the notion of
dynamic or the notion of realism is
actually a very strong and very coherent
point of view and it's actually
bracketed by these two other frames of
reference the actuality and the
potentiality I think that when when
people look at realism and idealism in
the in the older way you're right they
tend to think about it as either being
deterministic in the sense of you know
defined by external phenomena to find my
matter versus in some sort of subjective
sense as in you know who's the observer
who's making the measurement what moment
in time is the is the selection of which
possible worlds were going to end up in
so in effect it's not so much that the
ways in which I'm thinking of these are
our strong man or cricketer so much as
they're trying to look at kind of what
is what is the fundamental idealized
state by which the
and these concepts okay that's good yeah
I continue to remain a realist but with
the distinctions that I made that they
know there I do believe there is a real
world out there there's only one of them
probably not a multiverse at least not
in the quantum-mechanical of many worlds
theory in fact I put my flag down on the
as if many worlds interpretation which
is do the math as if many worlds but by
some process we don't understand only
one of them becomes real think we
actually meet on all of this I mean I
know the way you're describing realism
to me sounds very coherent I think the
only adjustment that I would be making
is instead of attaching the notion of
real directly to the objective which is
what realism would would normally do I
mean idealism in a complimentary way I
would say that the notion of real is
attached to the subjective that in this
particular orientation we're saying that
real is attached to the relationship
between the object even a subjective so
in other words the interaction is real
and anything we project as being what
that interaction tells us about the
objective worlds or what that
interaction tells us about the
subjective those are things which are
happy phenomena of the notion of real
which lives at the interaction level
yeah though I would also I think it's
also and this is yet to be fully
determined but at least my sense most
likely that we're going to discover that
the subjective is less spooky than it
seems and once we fully understand how
consciousness works for instance we're
gonna be surprised that we ever got
ourselves so tangled up and knots you
know that the subjective is a biological
process like any other biology of course
is compounded of first chemistry and
below that physics and it just is what
it is and it's an emergent phenomena
from the way matter and the dynamics of
matter are ordered and particularly and
it animals is essentially an emergent
dynamic process at the intersection
between perception on one side memory on
the other memory can be both genetic
memory and lifetime memory and some form
of processing in between and it's
probably no more than that so that which
case the whole idea of a hard problem
just goes away it just is what it is
well there's a lot of subtle things
associated that we're going to get
kind of fire field from thinking about
choice and you know how to do governance
and things like that if we go down this
particular road I mean I personally am
NOT a favor of the many worlds theory
myself I tend to be more on the
Copenhagen interpretation side but when
we get to the the whole notion of you
know can we derive a first-person
perspective from a third-person
mechanical world or can we think about a
choice purely in terms of causation can
we can we actually model consciousness
in terms of compute you know based upon
you know again a lot of thinking about
this kind of thing I actually think that
the notion of computing consciousness
are distinct and that in effect we don't
really have a coherent notion of
consciousness because we're trying to
think about it in terms of compute but
that's a you know that's that's a whole
you know can of worms and we could spend
you know obviously days talking about
this sort of thing I guess the thing is
is that if we're if we're looking at you
know what are the principles of ethics
and how to ethics translate into you
know choices about the world and so on
and so forth we can either you know try
to reconcile the relationship between
choice and causation at a fundamental
level or we can do pretty much what what
Western legal systems have done which is
assume that there is consciousness
assume there is choice assume there is a
subjective and that the subjective has
some sort of notion of choice and then
try to figure out what your as prudence
looks like after that so you know again
it depends upon what conversation you
want to have yeah you know I do like to
dive into these foundations a little bit
then we'll pop up to a more applied
level but again when I hear
conversations about things like free
will or determinism versus random
strikes me that that all misses the
point that what we have is a specific
mechanism let's call it a human body
with a brain in it a series of
resonances between the neurons and the
body and the stomach and the perceptions
from the census et cetera and stuff
comes in and then affordances are
triggered and that's it I think you know
to say what is their free will just
seems to me a question that has no
meaning we know that we do trigger
affordances ie we do things in response
to our genetic and lifetime memories and
in response to our
options but is there anything actually
useful in trying to call that free will
well I don't tend to use the notion free
will I mean the notion of free and the
notion of we'll both have certain
complications associated with them I
mean I use the word choice fairly
specifically ie there's a range of
potentials as some sort of selection and
then there's a consequence in the way I
think about things there's no such thing
as absolutely free without having some
at least maybe multiple limitations and
there's no notion of limitation it
doesn't have some degree of freedom
associated with it and these are you
know implied in the in the structure of
the relationships so in a sense when
we're getting into you know can we model
the whole thing just in terms of
molecular biology or can we model the
whole thing in terms of some sort of
determinism I've looked at those
questions pretty closely and I and I
think that really the answer is just
know you know in effect when we when we
look at like reductionism as a as a
fundamental principle you know to
basically say that everything that is
knowable about chemistry could in
principle be defined purely in terms of
our understanding of quantum mechanics
or you know take the general standard
model and and and try to see if that in
combination with quantum mechanic can be
used as a basis to derive everything
that is knowable about chemistry well as
some people have observed who have deep
knowledge of both topics it turns out
there's phenomena in chemistry that just
in principle can't be explained on the
basis of the standard model
so in effect there's a there's some
kinds of emergent phenomena that we just
don't have the capacity to essentially
derive in any kind of first principled
way based upon the the notions of
causation on the quote prior domain of
physics and this is actually very
surprising so because the thing is I
said if we look at the notion of
reductionism as a philosophy as a
principle and we take you know what is
the place what is the the exemplar of
the strongest likely relationship where
we would be able to see a relationship
between physics and chemistry as being
the quintessential exemplars a hard
science reductionist perspective it
turns out that not even in that case
does it work so there
for the notion of reductionism itself
has to be called into question yeah and
that's very true and of course that's
one of the core foundations of
complexity sciences that in fact the
absolute definition of emergence is that
it cannot be predicted from lower-level
States and actually and we can get out
of having to worry about deterministic
worlds even easier than that from a
practical perspective even if we retreat
to physics some surprisingly simple
physical models fall prey to
deterministic chaos or even the most
tiny differences in initial conditions
produced wildly different trajectories
of even a very simple physical system so
therefore from any practical perspective
even if you had a whole universe made
out of computer owned iam you still
couldn't calculate two trajectories of
some surprisingly simple physical
systems so the you know the worry about
determinism from either a practical or
theoretical perspective seems to me not
worth pursuing I think we're agreed on
this the interesting thing about what
you just described I call it microstate
amplification that things that are in
the you know the extreme right side of
the decimal point end up becoming
macroscopically important and so in
effect you know we can look at well what
is knowable about the microstate of the
domain will ultimately there's an
information boundary there there's a
there's a place that we can see that
there are actual limits as to what is
possible to know at all even in
principle fact when we when we go into
these things and we say okay well there
is a notion of other then what is
knowable there's essentially a
fundamentally not just known and the
unknown but there's actually the
unknowable so then when we go thinking
about the nature of choice and so on you
know there's there's there's now a basis
for us to say okay well there's there's
more than just the feedback of the of
the you know physical system that we're
looking at there's also this something
else and you know we could again skip
over a whole lot of intermediate levels
but at certain point we can say
something like utilitarian ethics that's
based purely upon feedback mechanisms
and you know objective metric and
criteria and stuff like that
optimization problems to some extent
isn't the whole story that there needs
to be some notion of a value ethics a
kind of way of thinking about
you know what do we really care about
what really matters here what is what is
the kind of things that are
fundamentally our basis of choice that
doesn't come from some sort of feedback
mechanism that's let's go there but
before we do it I want to do one last
digression into foundations and this was
something I did not know you were
interested in until I started doing my
research a couple days ago and I was
very interested by the little tiny
one-page paper you wrote called the
epistemic sandwich cuz there's nary I'm
very interested in his time and I am
generally aligned with the group of
people like hunger and small and who
believe time is real and that the time
may be more real in space
and you've made a pretty interesting
argument I wouldn't say it was it was a
lead-pipe cinch but it seemed a good way
to get to a non entropic arrow of time
at least the the range of space in which
we live I thought that was quite
interesting great well I'm glad that you
had an interest in that I tend to find
myself in a fairly interesting position
so on one hand I can definitely count
myself in the camp of saying you know
time is in a certain sense more
fundamental than space and more
fundamental than possibility so in
effect there's a there's this by
symmetric relationship that effectively
comes out of that but that that's only
one way to think about it it turns out
that there is this thing called the Inca
mensuration theorem which basically says
there's a completely complementary
perspective of how to think about it
which is the perspective that modern
physics largely seems to be taking which
is that we have this third person
orientation to sort of what you've been
treating as a kind of classical realist
perspective as a you know time is an
illusion that effectively we can talk
about the complete world state of the
universe and so in effect there's this
really deep into relationship between
the symmetry and the discontinuity that
we see in the foundations of quantum
mechanics and general relativity and the
sort of physicalist realist perspective
and this you know as a third-person
perspective ultimately and then this
first-person perspective which treats
the asymmetry of time is fundamental and
the notion of the continuity of
consciousness is fundamental and then in
effect we can
be in one way of thinking about it or in
the other way of thinking about it and
that those two in effect are mutually
mutually a Fagin always of
conceptualizing the universe and so in
effect the whole reason that metaphysics
is of interest is because it's the basis
by which we can derive this principle of
this Fagin allottee between those two
perspectives in a sense becomes the
ordinated basis by which the concepts
themselves are really understood and
that makes it actually pretty profoundly
important you have to dig a little
further in that because I would say that
I you know I tend to align myself more
with the arrow of time is real more in
the least small and model and by the way
folks there is an episode of on the show
from Lee small we go into these in some
considerable detail have to go back and
relook and see at your argument on the
orthogonality and that they're
essentially dual ways of looking at the
world which would be quite interesting I
think we've probably spent as much time
on these kinds of foundational questions
as it makes sense to do let's switch to
value ethics it's certainly highly
important when we think about operating
in the real world ok what do you want to
know tell me what your theory is a value
ethics well there's a couple of specific
things so first of all is that when we
when we think about values its it's
important to contextualize that there's
there's a lot of other concepts that
people sort of tie in with this and
again coming from a sort of abstract
perspective I tend to think in terms of
meaningfulness and purposefulness so in
other words the notions of meaning
values and purposes have this
distinctness that those three concepts
are distinct they're not interchangeable
obviously they don't mean the same thing
and and by one we don't we don't really
want to substitute the other and a lot a
lot of people do this you know kind of
accidentally they they're thinking about
values in the way that they would think
about purposes and unfortunately that
that ends up creating a lot of confusion
because the way in which meaning works
the way in which values work in the way
in which purposes work are actually very
different they are they are truly kind
of different modalities of how to think
about relationships in life and so on
why don't we start with that I may I
will say that there's been a lot of talk
lately about meaning
fullness and a lot of us left me
scratching my head so I would love it if
you could go through those three and
provide your take on what they are and
how they're distinct from each other
great so let's take a very object
example so I have a toaster okay and as
far as I'm concerned the purpose of the
toaster is to cook toast I put put some
bread in and I push the button and a few
minutes later I get some some breakfast
so as far as the relationship between
myself and the toaster is concerned if
we if we consider the toaster and the
purpose of the toaster is defined by
something external to the toaster in
other words I am NOT the toaster the
toaster has a purpose assigned to it by
something other than the object of the
toaster when we talk about values we're
actually talking about something which
is you know completely different like so
if I you know have children and and then
I think about you know maybe I'm a
farmer in some medieval context and I
might say you know my son is to replace
me and is to essentially assist with the
farm and so on and so forth well that
but the son might have his own desires
as to what he wants to do with life and
and the value of the son isn't
necessarily good to be find just in
terms of the functions that he's going
to perform for the family he may decide
that he has wants to go to school or
does something else and of course these
are somewhat modern interpretations but
the idea here is is that when we think
about the value of something we're
thinking about it as being innate in
other words not something imposed from
the outside as from the father to the
son but something that occurs from the
inside ie inside internal to the Sun
itself and you know the person you know
when we when we talk about values we
talk about them as coming from inside of
ourselves and manifesting in the choices
that we make in in into the world so
there's a kind of origin of expression
versus target of expression kind of
aspect of thinking about it so in effect
if we if we want to look at what the
notion of meaningfulness is
meaningfulness in the sense of you know
whether or not the word dog means a
furry creature that has legs and barks
the sound in the air dog and the
particular associations that we
subjectively make internal and the
object
reference that it has to a free creature
that happens to be in the room sitting
next to me you know those associations
are not held purely in an external way
nor purely in an internal way they
happen to occur in the relationship
between the subjective and the object of
their inherently transpersonal so in
effect if we were to sort of sum up we
would say that purposes are defined in
such a way is that they come from the
outside values are defined in such a way
that they come from the inside and that
meaning is essentially something that is
between and in the relationship between
the inside and the outside okay now of
course sociologists will tell us that at
least from a human perspective our
values don't really come from inside us
they are actually very strongly
creatures of our community our family
our teachers our religions etc well I
would think that this is this is
actually a classical case of you know
the sociology doesn't isn't really as
interested in trying to come up with
definitions of these things that would
be metaphysically coherent in the way
that I'm using it so in effect it's sort
of like we actually want both we want to
have the clarity of the terminology and
the real results of the of the
anthropology sociology psychology really
integrated well and I think that to some
extent the things that the sociologists
are pointing to has as much to do with
meaningfulness you know the
meaningfulness of relationships in the
community the communications that are
occurring and so on so forth as much as
they're referring about values so
obviously when we talk about values
purpose and meaning these things
although they may be distinct concepts
they are not inseparable that wherever
any one of these concepts occurs the
other two will for sure occur whether
we're conscious of that or not and so a
lot of times because of the necessity of
this co-occurrence people tend to alight
the differences between them and and
that may or may not be important
depending upon what we're trying to do
if we're thinking about ethics and we're
really trying to have a kind of rigorous
way of thinking about this to really be
clear when we're making choices that are
are profoundly impactful if we're
thinking about existential risk or for
thinking about civilization
you know possibility of collapse and
and you know economic forces that are of
huge magnitude you know whether to set
policies that may go to war or whatnot
there's a there's a real importance that
we think about the ethics from a
principle point of view with with deep
deep deep clarity in effect there's
there's some real necessities around
this so for instance if we you know look
at the relationship between man machine
and nature and and we realize that you
know in the technology that we've
developed that we have created
capacities to create and destroy the
whole world
you know nuclear war or biotech or you
know things of that nature that in
effect we we now find ourselves in a
position of really needing to make very
very good principled choices and so as a
result the clarity and the quality of
the ethics that we're using has to be of
just absolutely paramount quality I mean
like you know if we have the power of
gods we effectively need to have the
kind of ethical coherency that a God
would have you know not to really take
this into religion but just to really
give an indication of just how important
it is to be profoundly clear about some
of these concepts that's perfect why
don't we try then to integrate a
specific example that gets to or applies
ethics in the context of the
meaningfulness values and purpose let's
take a real example so I'm making a
decision on whether to do some
experiment with CRISPR for instance well
there's a there's a lot of different
directions we can go of this so you
might be familiar with the work of Dave
Snowden we talked about the difference
between complicated
ie the kinds of things that we can do
with computation and simulation and so
on and complex which is situations that
are more like nature where there's lots
of lots of factors interacting and we
don't actually know the complete state
of the system at any given moment so you
know in one sense we can say okay how do
we make choices in the space of the
complex given that the only thing that
we really can't control the stuff that's
happening in the domain of the
complicated and it turns out that the
relationship between these two realms of
operation is actually it's pretty
important to really understand that
because there's some things that for
example we can't predict with any amount
of accuracy so when we're making choices
in this particular space we're refining
that we really
need to account for whether or not we
can do a safe to fail probe ie
can we interact with the complicated
world to gather some information about
it use that information in some way to
at least do a proxy of some sort of you
know vague simulation so we have at
least some indication as to what the
outcomes might be but but in that
situation we're still having to have
some notion of value what outcomes do we
consider to be successful what are we
actually looking to have happen and is
that you know the desires of what we are
wanting to have happen on what basis are
those things clarified so for example if
we're if we're looking at okay can we do
a safe to fill probe in a sense of
CRISPR well already it may be the case
that we can't - like for instance we
don't necessarily want to experiment you
know on biological systems because if
the thing has its replicating capacity
then it might be that once we've done
the experiment we'll never actually ever
get to do another experiment again
because we've destroyed the system in
which we were performing the experiment
so in that case we see already can't do
safe to fail probes if the probe itself
is too consequential so obviously you
don't test you know whether or not you
know global nuclear war is effectively
going to create you know nuclear winter
because that would obviously be bad you
you don't get to do that experiment more
than one time so in effect there's a
there's a notion here of first of all
what do we care about well just getting
the data from the from the safe to fill
probe is is really only a proxy for our
capacity to predict the future and the
capacity to predict the future is itself
relative to some sort of value statement
so you know the purposes of our safe to
fail probes are effectively connected to
the meaningfulness of our values so
there's another level here which is you
know also kind of kind of really
important is that when we think about
you know can we actually do experiments
of this particular kind somewhere along
the way we realized that we really just
can't always know what the impacts are
going to be even in principle and
therefore we have to think about can we
get clear as to whether we're doing the
right simulation at all are we even
asking the right questions so for
instance of
I do a whole bunch of simulations about
factor X but it turns out that the thing
that I'm really looking for is a
solution to problem Y then to some
extent you know I'm investing lots of
lots of energy into the wrong problem so
so in a lot of ways what we're really
trying to do here is essentially to ask
better questions can we get to the place
where we're even you know looking at
CRISPR and things like that you know
when we're thinking about it from an
ethical point of view it's like you know
do we actually know what the criteria of
success is do we do we have a real sense
as to what is the whole system's
approach that's actually going to be
satisficing to a whole range of
criterias rather than just the one or
two that we happen to be conscious of at
this moment so it's those kinds of
things which would be you know
directions in which we would go with
something like this and there's there
are others but those are the ones that
occur to me just off the top my head
yeah when I was talking with Dave
Snowden here on the show one of the
things I pointed out to him and he
agreed is that one of things you have to
keep in mind is that every complicated
system is inevitably embedded in at
least one complex system and that there
is a flow between the two they take for
instance a business a business is
basically a complicated system and yet
it interacts with a complex system
called the marketplace right and a farm
is a relatively complicated system
though it has some complexity to it but
it's mostly complicated and yet a farm
is embedded in an ecosystem which is a
classic complex system and so trying to
understand the the couplings between the
complicated and the complex I has to
always be done in the context that every
complicated system is embedded in at
least one complex system yeah I
completely agree the the main thing is
to understand that between the complex
and the complicated that the complex is
stronger is is actually in a certain
sense the foundational basis and so on
you know when we when we think about the
relationship between purposes and values
for example that in effect the values
have to be stronger than the purposes
that the values provide the basis for
our choice making as to what we're
actually going to attempt to do in the
world
and that those values aren't coming from
some sort of feedback mechanism they're
coming from some sort of deeper basis
some sort of you know I hesitate to use
the word but some sort of transcendent
perspective and again I'm not
necessarily advocating a particular
interpretation of the notion of
transcendent in this particular case but
I am saying that if you take the values
and we treat them as having come from
you know purely from the objective world
and they're always going to be subject
to some sort of feedback mechanisms that
effectively is going to debase the
values you effectively get gamed by the
system so you know having some clarity
as the distinction between inward and
outward is important and then having
some sort of clarity as to things which
are condition alized in a causal sense
and things which are non condition eyes
die eat the basis of our choices does
actually become important let's probe on
that I think that just came up with an
interesting idea that maybe will
illuminate this for me and hopefully for
the audience I mentioned farming
something I'm involved with I'm a farmer
my wife and I support local agriculture
businesses etc as well and farming is
sort of complicated it has some complex
elements but it's mostly complicated but
yet it's embedded in the ecosystem and
we make decisions as civilization on way
bigger scale than me on what kind of
farming that we do and that has huge
implications through its coupling from
the complicated to the complex and there
would least be my argument that
industrial farming is doing such damage
to the outer complex ecosystem that it's
not sustainable at all even at the
current level let alone at the level
which it has to be to provide a Western
level of standard of living for eight
billion people so how would your
analysis try to think about what that
should mean for how we do agriculture
well first of all I just want to you
know state for the record that I'm in
complete agreement with your point of
view that we really really do need to
move to a sustainable way of doing
things or else you know that which does
not sustain life will not continue to
live so you know how do we apply you
know ethics in this particular case well
it's not just about the ethics it's also
about you know what are our values and
our values in this particular sense say
well we want to be sustainable we want
be adaptive right so for instance not
just sustainable because if we if we
just implement sustainable it's a bit
like you know how do we keep a
complicated system going no matter what
happens in the complex world ie we build
some sort of thing that quote-unquote
lasts forever but as as we've already
mentioned given that the complex is the
basis for the complicated that
ultimately that doesn't work so we need
the capacity for the complex systems to
both be sustainable and to be adaptive
ie to evolve to basically work well with
the context in which they exist so for
instance as the natural world changes we
want to adapt our farming practices so
that they continue to be sustainable
over the long term and in order to do
that we have to bring in this third
element which is in the you know I know
you're probably gonna hate that I'm
going to use this word but but there's a
certain consciousness involved ie that
we're not just evolving in a blind sense
the same way that say evolution would do
because although evolution if you think
about the scientific method for example
which is you know to perform experiments
and to you know kind of dispassionately
recent review the results and then you
know based upon the results to perform
new experiments that nature implementing
the evolutionary model is effectively
the perfect scientist it tries
everything and it is completely
different absolutely about the results
so in fact what happens is is that you
know from our perspective some of those
experiments obviously fail you know we
could end up with entire species dying
off we could entire you know continents
basically becoming deserts so in effect
we're wanting to say okay if we're going
to actually do thriving if we're going
to want to move it beyond just what can
be done through a pure feedback based
methodology we're going to have to have
a kind of consciousness that transcends
just evolutionary process we've sort of
forced ourselves as a as a species into
this particular position because of our
use of technology technology has
essentially enabled a very strong
top-down sort of way of thinking and
currently it's it's it's kind of like
we're driving the top-down method as if
it was based upon the kind
of unconsciousness of the of the market
system the unconsciousness of
evolutionary process and we expect that
that actually is going to to have a good
outcome it's effectively a kind of
unconsciousness the market evolution is
unconscious in the fundamental way and
so as a result we end up with the worst
of both possible worlds you know pure
evolution working by itself for pure
technology working by itself so in
effect what we're needing to do is we're
needing to introduce a kind of values
based meaningfulness based way of
thinking about these things which
effectively means that we need to be
clear about what is our basis of choice
how are we thinking about choice in a
way that is holistic that's going to
account for both evolutionary aspects
and sustainability aspects and how do we
reconcile the relationship between
sustainability and evolution in a
conscious way which ie is you know
connected to the notions of our values
of thriving the values of life the
values of why we even thought that
adaptability and sustainability were
important in the first place yep
absolutely well said and by no means do
I disagree with you I mean the
evolutionary approach worked great for
billions of years in biology and kind of
the more loosely coupled social
evolution in humans until we passed a
certain threshold about two hundred and
fifty years ago which was when we
learned how to harvest fossil fuels then
the game changed entirely the scope of
what humans could do started to go up
exponentially a couple that with the
scientific method with the ability to
build information systems to manage
large-scale entities and human
capability started to dwarf the
resilience of human space you know prior
to 1750 there was really nothing humans
could do to seriously damage the
ecosystem now we can utterly destroy the
ecosystem we're at least so badly that
nothing more complicated than a
cockroach will survive so obviously once
we've reached this level of power as you
said we have the power of gods we need
to have the wisdom of gods and hopefully
not like the greco-roman gods who are
pretty damn capricious right you know
remember the Iliad all the wacky
the gods did there right we got to be
better gods than those
and and we have to you know think we now
are in charge and we so damn well have
the responsibility to figure out how we
can use this unbelievable power we have
responsibly to not track the ecosystem
yeah that sounds that sounds right to me
I mean I think that again you know in
proportion to the degree that there is
an asymmetry of power that we need
asymmetry of strength and so in effect
there's our continuity of strength
actually might be an even better way to
state this is that you know our wisdom
our capacity to really you know feel
through and think through these these
kinds of issues and to do both really
really well you know again to make good
choices in this space isn't just gonna
be dependent upon intellect it's also
going to be dependent upon the kind of
quality of feeling through the issues
and I don't see those as any sense in
opposition to one another this goes back
to part of the reason why it was so
important to distinguish between values
meaning and purpose in the first place
is that when we think about values we
can have all values values are not
defined in any kind of mutually
exclusive way whereas when we talk about
purposes purposes are mutually exclusive
you know you can basically do one thing
at a time and so in a sense there's a
there's a real need for us to to have a
good holding of both the the ways in
which we move from values into purpose
which is essentially as gated by this
notion of meaningfulness in other words
that there's a kind of flow that a
multiplicity of values that having a lot
of values allows us to identify
something which is really meaningful and
when we have a clear sense of many
things that are meaningful then we can
begin to start to think about you know a
single purpose and so in effect there's
a there's there's a kind of you know
progression here that is that is really
important for us to to implement because
if we don't as you mentioned you know
the the sort of emotionality of you know
the early depictions of Greek gods as an
example and and the kind of pseudo
family dynamics that they had as an
exemplar was not wisdom in the sense
that we would mean in fact if you look
at most of the religious idealization of
deity forms they actually have
would be if I were to apply the dsm-5
tremendous pathologies narcissism
magical thinking all sorts of stuff
which effectively would show up on the
dark triad of personality disorders and
so in effect what you end up with is a
sort of need to have a much much deeper
much much more coherent notion of what
it means to make good choices that is
based upon something that is is even
deeper than just you know I want and in
some unique sense but in a sense of we
want and some sort of collective sense
and to have that be you know genuinely
to have a genuine capacity for that so
this this is where we get from you know
the notions of these things as thought
about an individual sense you know
United States thinking in terms of life
liberty presume happiness was just a
very individual perspective to how do we
collectively you know make choices about
things like industrialized farming or
you know resource usage and whether or
not it makes sense to allocate resources
in this direction or in that direction
whether or not finance is defined purely
in terms of market forces has actually
got the level of intelligence necessary
to deal with the kinds of X risk you
know side effects that are currently
occurring so in effect you know there's
a there's a need for us to come down to
a much much deeper level of principle to
handle the scope of the questions that
we as a species are now currently faced
with yeah we have some giant challenges
to go from where we are where most
people are blind to these things to
where we need to be I mean first we need
some form of sense making right that
people even figure out what's going on
realistically then we need to you know
make some choices and then we need to
execute some actions you know what are
your thoughts on you know how do we move
from where we are today we're complete
muddle blind deaf and dumb to sense
making choice making an action taking
well that's that's actually the right
question and so you know one of the
things that I heard when I was you know
first learning how to be CEO and so on
is when you don't know what to do look
see and tell the truth so in other words
the first pieces is that we need to
actually enter into a kind of
observational state and then to you know
very dispassionately I mean because
again you know for if we're looking to
try to respond effectively there's a
certain
degree of we're not going to filter the
information like if you look at delay
emergency responders you know first
responders show up in a situation
they're just saying I see X and they
just broadcast that to the other people
that are in the group and and everybody
in the sense is sharing information in a
pretty much unfiltered way they're
really trying to create a ecosystem of
just resources informational resources
and and from that to basically begin to
have some sense as to what's going on
and and so in effect what we're looking
at is you know can we create the right
kind of information ecology well as you
may notice you know on the internet for
example we've actually done the exact
opposite thing that the market forces
have created huge incentives for
disinformation Ecology's and so in
effect you know one of the first things
that is important is for us to recognize
that we're not sharing information from
any sort of personal benefit perspective
does this help of my cause does has
helped me as an individual
well this enabled me to get laid with
this particular chick you know to to
some sort of you know community process
of I'm sharing this information because
collectively we live or die on the basis
of how well this works and so in a sense
there's a there's a there's a deep need
for us to to first you know perceive the
world as accurately as we can share that
information as transparently as we can
so in other words no filtering and then
to to very much have a sort of real
inquiry happen as kind of the beginning
of the sense-making process are we
asking the right questions what
questions do we need to ask in order to
answer the important questions what are
the important questions and so in effect
there's a you know before we even get to
the point of doing choice making where
we're asking questions about what is the
state of the world what is what is
actually our current position and then
we're asking questions as to you know
what is our compass in order to really
guide choices in an effective way it's
almost as if we need a you know three
things we need a we need a map we need a
compass and we need our current position
if you subtract any one of those things
you know I would say well I can lose an
awareness of the
I still need to know where I am you know
in a real sense in the world so I can
tell if there's a cliff in front of me
but if I if I absolutely had to have
just one thing I would say have the
compass obviously these things by
themselves don't really do as much but
if I have the compass and a compass is
saying you know you want to go in this
direction you know I'm looking for True
North I'm looking for you know what are
the criteria of success and the design
sense what are the things that
essentially is going to create a true
holistic comprehensive solution to a
problem such as restoring the Amazon or
aureus or creating health and coral
reefs or making sure that every man
woman and child is fed or making sure
that the world has you know a future in
the sense of not destroying itself
through some sort of ecological accident
that in effect what we're wanting to do
is is to say okay given our compass and
a knowledge of our current position if
we go in this particular direction we're
going to run into a cliff we're going to
go off a cliff are we going to go
straight into the brambles and then by
looking at the map we can start to think
about where are we going and how do we
get there that makes sense relative to
where we are now and so in a lot of ways
you know sense making in this particular
capacity is you know again what we're
trying to do is to show what is
necessary and sufficient to make good
choices in the areas of existential risk
in the areas of civilization collapse in
the areas of what does it mean to as a
community to solve the kinds of problems
which are critically necessary for us to
solve to continue as a species to
continue as an ecosystem given that you
know with all of these highly asymmetric
powers developed by technology that that
we now find ourselves in the both the
possession of and the responsibility of
making good choices in this particular
space so you know in that particular
sense we're looking at a relatively new
on stoop Roach you know if I if I
basically say you know like I look at a
neurology for example and you know I
take a look at an individual neuron and
let's say that we were to treat that
neuron the same way that you know we
currently treat you know life liberty
and the pursuit of happiness as values
that means that
every impulse signal that that neuron is
receiving on its dendrites is going to
be run through some sort of filtering
process as to whether that neuron thinks
it's going to be to its own interest to
broadcast that signal onto its it's
accion you know to send it downstream to
other neurons if it was defined in that
particular way that you know people were
operating on their the neurons were
operating on their own individual
personal benefit than the the level of
disinformation in the overall sphere of
action ends up being so low so poor that
you don't end up with with either
computation or consciousness so in
effect there's a there's a real need
here for us to recognize that
communication is not for our own sake I
mean you know there's a there's an
evolutionary capacity that has been
created in the human species you know we
have we have language but you know from
my perspective we don't know how to
communicate which is which is a real
irony you know in a very profound way
because you know in a sense we've we've
taken this adaptive capacity which may
originally have been for things like
assessing the health of a potential mate
to to think about long-term family
raising and to create culture in the
child so that the tribe could survive
that then all of a sudden you know once
we ended up with city-states kind of
capacities and then the Enlightenment
and so on that we took the perspective
that communication is really something
that is for individual benefit and
unfortunately we've reached a kind of
crisis where we're recognizing that that
is no longer the case that is no longer
true we can't we can't operate just from
the perspective that communication that
what we say and do with one another is
purely for an individual benefit that we
have to go beyond market process and
start looking at non-rival rest dynamics
that effectively have the capacity to
create the kind of conditions for good
sense banking to occur because obviously
the failure to do this was essentially
the end of the world so in this
particular sense you know these are
these are the kinds of things which
which which really come to mind
immediately as being absolutely germane
and relevant to you know how do we do
good sense making as a prelude to doing
good choice making itself as a prelude
to say non corruptible non capturable
implementation process any thoughts I
mean it looks like a shitshow from where
I sit out in the world you know if
anything our social sense making has
gotten worse by the introduction of the
Internet well it has and this is this is
part of the thing is it's that you know
when people introduce technologies like
the internet and so on so forth they
have you know a sense of the potential
of it and you know for every way which
something is good there are two ways in
which it could be bad and even
ironically for every way which something
is bad there are two ways in which is to
be good and so I think that you know as
technologists you know we have and again
you know I'm speaking as someone who has
you know industrial capacity and I've
started a company I've got resources and
tools you know I can build stuff and
also as a long-term software engineer
I've got work
deployed at the Pentagon I've got work
deployed at various three-letter
agencies and such and so you know in
effect there's a there's a real deep
sense as to our capacity as engineers
but as engineers we need to go beyond
the the stereotype of the you know sort
of Asperger's perspective of the world
and really get adept at thinking about
the sociological aspects the
anthropological and psychological
aspects and so in effect when we're when
we're looking at the internet for
example we need to again from a
principle basis not necessarily from a
market perspective but from a principle
basis to say you know we really need to
change the orientation of how this this
actually works how we're actually using
social media technology how we're
actually thinking about a social media
technology as it currently stands is is
very much deployed just purely in
service to corporate interests to the
shareholder benefit and you know is
basically neglectful of community
benefit of user benefit so one of the
things that has been a real interest to
me is the work of the Center for Humane
technology which has really been
promoting a reo of social technology as
basically being in service to community
as its primary objective rather than
being of service to some sort of
surveillance capitalism or attention
economy
and I think that without you know really
making some good inroads to recognizing
broadcasters I as broadcasters moving
you know some some you know policy and
legal phenomenon into place which which
has to do with the ethics of that you
know creating moral codes that
effectively say you know you're going to
be you would be responsible in your
relationship to the community and that
that is effectively a service and a
devotion that is fundamental to the
institution rather than you know
maximizing shareholder value on a
quarterly scale because obviously if
we're trying to think about sense-making
over evolutionary time scales you know
again in terms of farming practices and
adapting the nature and so on because
you know that is the reality in which we
live then in effect we're going to need
to be thinking on a much much longer
interval than say market Ecology's can
actually do because they are too much
and and compulsively driven on a
short-term perspective the multipolar
trap rules for rulers dynamic and all
that kind of stuff very much you know
essentially means that we really need to
go to a completely much much more
comprehensive way of thinking about
these things and it starts from you know
again an individual perspective of you
know while i can operate on my own
benefits some of the time i can't
operate on my own benefit all of the
time which is sort of the supposition
that most people have in regards to you
know what they say and do and and and
more over than that you know
collectively we need to get much much
better at at holding responsibilities in
association with authority so you know
when when a technology company has the
authority to define a platform you know
we say hey either be responsible for
that platform you know i actually do the
things that are that are necessary to
preserve the well-being of the community
on that platform and so you know i can
point to things like facebook and say
you know you do actually need to be
responsible for the impact of you know
whether or not you have politicians
basically spreading this information and
disabling the information ecology and
you know to some extent we can really
ask the question of it is it even the
case that a representative model of
governance is actually the right one do
we need some sort of sense making that
is effectively broader than that you
know some sort of direct democracy
process but but in you know again in a
larger context we're realizing that
you know at an individual level we
definitely need to move beyond the
notion that communication is purely for
our own individual life liberty and
pursuit of happiness to our kind of
collective life liberty the pursuit of
happiness because those two things are
not separate from one another they are
deeply entangled into it in effect we at
this particular point have a very naive
understanding of the nature of choice
and value and ethics and all this kind
of stuff so getting educated getting
clear as to you know what really matters
talking to one another about how these
things actually work I think is
absolutely essential yep I agree the
about center for humane technology I'm a
great fan of their work in fact Tristan
Harris is gonna be on the show next
month and we're gonna dig into this
quite a bit
it is interesting I've been involved in
building what we would now call the
internet since 1980 I built some of the
earliest things that we would now call
social media and at the time we had no
idea of the potential negative
implications we thought we were doing
not only good business but we were doing
something great for the you know the
civic soul of humanity we figured how
could it be any better than having
access to all this information let
anybody's voice be heard
etc how naive we turned out to be and
what's interesting is you know I think
we all know Facebook's at shitshow
Twitter's worse but here's something
that's kind of interesting there's many
of us now who know this but nobody that
I know of has built a decent
sense-making platform for the hundred
thousand or million woke people awake
people on the one who use the word woke
get me confused to those idiots but
awake people about these issues for us
to start to rally together I wonder why
that is well I don't necessarily know
why that is I'm not gonna speculate
about that I mean you mentioned naivete
earlier and to some extent there's a
need for us to have you know again both
technological experience but also social
logical and anthropological experience
and in addition to that a deep sense of
understanding of ethics and metaphysics
under it and so in a sense I'm saying
well okay we have as a species been
largely unconscious but you you do
actually point to essentially the real
thing
rather than trying to diagnose why
hasn't this happened you know I can
definitely do some extensive diagnosis
as to you know what got us here won't
get it there what is really the ultimate
basis of the the nature of the problems
that have come into the world and so on
and so forth but the point of such
analysis isn't so much to lay blame so
much as it is to provide litmus tests
for the success of a solution that we
might propose so in other words you know
if we were to think about okay well how
are we going to create a platform that
effectively is going to be the basis of
good sense making a good choice making
at a species level you know what are the
characteristic that it's going to look
like well ultimately immediately we
already start asking questions and the
questions as part of the sense making
we're doing with respect to the platform
itself as well as the thing that the
platform actually does and one of the
questions effectively just immediately
becomes it's not a platform you know why
should we have a platform rather than a
protocol because if I if I create it as
a platform then effectively I've already
created the kind of dynamics of capture
ability in the and the sort of market
forces themselves centralization that is
already identified as having been
somewhat disabling to the kind of choice
making processes we need to do which to
some extent really need to be
distributed you know there's kind of a
recognition that ultimately there's just
so much information that needs to be
processed in order to make a good choice
that is just simply not the case that
any amount that centralization is
effectively going to be able to handle
the bandwidth that is required for
example you know if I if I look at
institutional design and it's based upon
some sort of top-down model then just
from information theoretic constraints I
know that there's certain problems that
it can't solve things that for example
are so complex so complicated that no
single human being in their entire
lifetime could learn all that they would
need to do to make good choices in that
space you know that even if we were to
have you know that person surrounded by
a team of advisors or we don't have a
team of say 12 people that were trying
to make choices with respect to a
hundred thousand people it can
immediately be observed is there any
possible way that a person can have the
wisdom of a hundred thousand or that a
person can have the wisdom of the
billion of people that their choice
is actually influenced well even if we
look at you know small subgroups we can
ask the same question can any possible
organization of 12 people with any
amount of system structure or supports
on have the wisdom of a billion people
well probably not just because you know
again just just sheer logarithm
understandings of the dynamics of the
information flows we simply say okay
well we can get maybe a square root
level of you know reduction then the
number of nodes needing to process this
amount of information but we really
shouldn't try for better than that
because otherwise we start losing the
critical information necessary to make
good choices so even though we know that
from a market sense that distributed
systems are less efficient in the sense
of energy usage and sense of time and
sense of responsiveness you know that
they are ultimately necessary in order
to do the work that needs to be done
because we're actually looking at not an
efficiency basis but a quality basis is
the quality of the choices being made by
the not the platform but now the
protocol does the underlying protocol
have the characteristics necessary such
that the quality of the choices is
sufficiently good to be responsive to
things like existential risk so in
effect what we're really looking at here
is is not relative thresholds but but
absolute ones it not only has to be
better than our current solutions it has
to be good enough to actually be
satisficing relative to an absolute
metric and that in effect this sets hard
limits on what the level of minimum
quality of the outcome of the choice is
being made and their implementation
actually R which itself sets limitations
on what is the minimum quality of
sense-making which itself sets questions
on you know what is the minimum quality
of the questions being asked so you know
we're really looking at are we asking
the right questions do we have a way to
know and and and and to very much
develop a process in that particular
area so in recognition of all of that
I've been what what I've been doing to
respond all of this I mean you know I
spent their early part of my life
developing them in physics to have the
tool set and now I'm basically
anticipating spending
of the rest of my life basically putting
together you know things like a femoral
group process which are ways to enable a
much much higher level of quality of you
know question asking so that we at least
have a chance at doing kind of sense
making necessary to respond the kinds of
issues that humanity is faced with you
know my hopes and dreams at this
particular point you know again speaking
back to you know why was I ultimately
doing this you know loving nature loving
the wild you know basically being
thankful for the gift of life that
didn't affect I'm basically saying well
it seems like as best as I can tell that
the most effective use of my time is to
put it into developing you know these
capacities to do sense making at
civilization level scales so in effect
at this point you know I'm trying to you
know gather like-minded people to to
essentially assist in transcription to
assist in editing to assist in you know
basically providing the time and
resources necessary to develop protocols
of this kind that could potentially be
tested to see whether or not they
achieve the level of quality necessary
and to continue to develop in that
direction and so you know as a result of
all that that's kind of why I'm I'm
wanting to you know really give voice to
some of these notions recently there's
been some very harsh critique on the
notion of sense making out in the
so-called game be world you're familiar
with game be I believe you've been
associated with some of the other game B
players interesting Lee I did at Google
and your name and game B do not appear
anywhere on the internet which is kind
of interesting well I think we're
designed B rather than game B I think if
we think about it in terms of games
those winners and losers and we really
need it to be a you know win-win
solution or win-win-win solution in
other words if we really want to be
technically correct but I haven't really
been that active on the internet I have
I mean I've been around for a while so
you will find my my name connected to a
handful of things mostly just incidental
stuff but I haven't really taken very
much of a public perspective I'm mostly
just you know put my head down try to do
the work that needs to be done that's a
good thing maybe whatever get it back to
this critique about sense making because
there's been a lot of talk about sense
making and some attempts at it but one
of the critique
which you know does resonate with me to
a degree is that from where we stand
today where we're heading towards these
existential risks at an accelerating
rate since making by itself isn't even
close to enough right because even if we
knew what the right things to do are and
truthfully probably you and me and three
people that we know could sit around a
table and come up with a better
trajectory than we're on today by a
shitload where is the mechanism to use
the levers that can move the trajectory
of society so since making a loan is
just a waste of time frankly and
basically a wanking exercise unless
there's the ability to actually change
the trajectory of our society what do
you say to that well actually I agree I
never claimed that sense-making by
itself would be enough I mean without
since making choice making isn't enabled
but choice making by itself isn't enough
either so you know let's say you and I
got together and we we spent a bunch of
time figured out the answer made some
clear choices but then didn't have the
capacity to implement those choices to
have a capacity to bring them you know
into the world as Manifest results then
to some extent those choices are choices
you know there's this thing called the
principle of identity that which is
indistinguishable must be the same so in
effect if I can't distinguish between
having made a choice and not having made
a choice ie there are no consequences
then in effect you know there's there's
no real sense of choice making so you
know I definitely agree that bringing
things in a manifestation having the
capacity to actually implement is is is
a crucial thing but but I think that to
some extent what we're looking at here
is not an either/or question so you know
again sense making by itself is not
enough choice making by itself is not
enough implementation by itself is not
enough because even if we had the
capacity to implement whatever it is
that we chose the implementation
capacity without any kind of guidances
obviously also worthless so in effect
there's a there's a sense here of what's
necessary and what's sufficient so if we
had sense making and choice making and
implementation capacity then maybe we
have a chance is that sufficient it
might be at this particular point I
think that you know if we hit the
quality of implementation that is needed
if we hit the quality of choice making
that is new if we have the quality of
sense making that is needed then then
you know is that those things being
necessary is that sufficient to actually
move ourselves out of crisis and into
you know some sort of comprehensive
responsiveness well I think that it is I
mean at this particular point you know
I'm working on a hard proof of that but
the ultimate result here is is that we
do know that those things are necessary
because if we if we just look at
implementation capacity by itself I mean
while we actually have that already
institutions you know federal
governments and and you know a lot of
businesses and so on so forth already
have all the resources necessary to to
to implement an enormous change you mean
obviously changes have actually happens
technology has been deployed social
media platforms do exist and so on do
railroads and so on and in effect what
we're what we're looking here is saying
okay well given that you know as
individuals we can do great sense making
but as individuals we have terrible
implementation capacity and given that
as institutions we have tremendous
implementation capacity but terrible
sense making capacity that to some
extent we need to upgrade the sense
making capacity because without that we
can't have the institutions make choices
that actually matter so you know is the
structural design of the institutions as
we currently conceive them able to
essentially have all three at once sense
making information gathering capacity
that you know the quality of choices
that are comprehensive enough responsive
enough to complex not just complicated
design questions and then finally can we
have those implementations occur in a
way that is non corruptible that
actually represents the choices that are
made rather than say being co-opted by
some third party for private benefit and
so you know when we look at you know
implementation systems as they exist
currently we notice that corruption is
an issue and you know again there's lots
of governments in the world where
effectively due to the necessary
internal dynamics of those you know
institutions that you know it's at some
extent to just even ensure their own
survival that they end up having to make
very very poor choices with respect to
the well-being of
and so in a lot of ways we're looking at
you know if we just focus on
implementation criteria and basically
look at it from that that point of view
alone then we discover that we already
need to do sense making and choice
making about institutional design so
that we can ensure that the the way in
which those institutions manifest the
things that they do in the world don't
end up doing more harm than good if you
look at you know game theory game a
particularly it's it's it's very much
the case that people want to create
markets particularly if you manage to
create a new market and you create a
platform on which that market happens
then you get to essentially do a kind of
Metcalfe's law growth process and also
at the same time to be extracting value
from that market charging taxes in one
way or another you know charging rent or
you know taking a percentage of profits
or something like that
that you know the upside for you as a
market developer is enormous because you
know and you're not just doing you know
additive increase in wealth by the
results of your own efforts or a
multiplicative increase in wealth to say
the way you would as banker but the now
all the sudden you're doing exponential
increase in wealth because you're
effectively creating a tap on an entire
ecosystem that in effect of the problem
is is that that process is parasitic and
you know as you increase the number of
parasites in the system eventually the
wildebeest dies so you know in a lot of
ways what we're looking at here is you
know we actually need good quality
process for all three and that if we
don't hit sufficient quality thresholds
for all three that for sure this isn't
going to be enough so yeah I actually
agree with the critique that Seth making
isn't enough but on the other hand if we
don't at least apply good sense-making
with respect to institutional design
then you know whatever it is that we're
doing will probably end up being
captured by some hidden party and used
to their private benefit and just end up
by as a side effect externalizing
considerable harm to the well-being of
the Commons to the well-being of the
community and so you know personally you
know when you when you think about do I
have any real belief that the taxes that
I pay are actually going to go to my
well-being and if my
that question is no than then you know
my overall faith in the system is low
enough that I'm not interested in
increasing their capacities in the
implementation sense I'm interested in
increasing their capacities at the
choice making incense making levels and
and though unfortunately the gap is that
the sense making in choice making needs
to be needs to essentially wrestle
control of the implementation from a
self-serving status quo that's the real
challenge right in many countries is
just pure corrupt yet but in many
countries in our country it's not quite
pure corruption but it's soft corruption
of the political process by the vested
interests yeah I agree there are some
real serious challenges here I mean this
is in some respects you know speaking as
an engineer
seriously the the single most difficult
problem I could even attempt to imagine
you know there's there's there's clearly
some some real challenges here and you
know I mean you you mentioned that one
specifically but there are a host of
others which are which are also quite
gnarly and you know again this is the
kind of thing where you know quite
frankly I would love to have some some
qualified help you know but in this
particular sense you know I agree these
are these are real issues and these are
real challenges obviously if you know
someone were to come up with some way of
addressing these kind of things even
then they'd have to be very careful
about it because you know trying to
suggest hey you know I'm gonna wrestle
control away I mean well first of all
it's not even a question about control
it's actually a question of influence
does any neuron have control over what
the whole brain does does does the brain
even have control over itself I know
that you know in terms of just my own
subjective self I I can try to you know
control my state of feeling I can try to
control my behavior and so on so forth
but at best I'm going to only do is
learn good skills and to become
increasingly adaptive increasingly
healthy that's probably not going to be
some sort of you know overthrow or some
sort of coup it's going to be something
more like you know a gradual adoption of
of better practices and and you know
let's hope that that happens
sufficiently well and sufficiently fast
enough
yes I was gonna say that's all well and
good we know we'll gradually make the
Beast smarter but do we have time it all
depends on do we fall into a positive
feedback loop around climate is there a
pandemic there's you know lots of ways
we could we could run out of time and I
think that's a really interesting
question is the attempt to influence a
sufficient tactical strategy or does
there need to be something more decisive
I think as far as and that question is a
very good question it's like you know do
we have enough time well that's an
unknowable thing I have no idea right I
mean we can say hey these are issues if
the feedbacks that are going on in these
particular areas of crucial issues
there's an increasing number of crucial
issues that are near-term that need
address you know as it becomes more and
more obvious to people that hey we're
are actually out of time we really need
to be better at these kinds of things
the problem with the reset processes is
that you know you might hit reset but
you're not necessarily kind of end up
with a better state you you may have
slowed things down a little bit but you
still haven't developed the capacity to
prevent it from happening all over again
so for instance you know civilizations
have come and go if you look at the
historical record that we have you know
it's like you know a few hundred
civilizations that have lasted a few
hundred years some longer maybe a
thousand years or so but very few of
them in fact none of them are
civilization right now is is essentially
you know just on one of the longer sides
but but there's no guarantee that our
civilization is going to endure any
longer than any of the other examples
that have come and gone and so you know
in effect what we're really concerned
with here is can we upgrade the capacity
in some fundamental way because
regardless of how much time we have you
know we still haven't changed anything
so say we do the reset and we come out
on the other side of that but all the
institutions that we make at that point
all of the new civilization practices
that we put in place
you know coupled with the technology
that has been discovered and
rediscovered from our civilization you
know end up creating those same
existential risks those same
civilization collapse dynamics the same
 up market economies
you know conflated interests and
you know perverse incentives and all the
rest of that stuff that in effect we're
just going to end up in this bloom and
bust cycle the problem is is that given
the level of technological development
that we have we're now entangling entire
ecosystem so reset at this particular
point means you know reset for maybe you
know a billion years or maybe never I
mean it might be that we've damaged the
ecology so much that the human species
just doesn't endure and so in effect
there's a there's there's a real
question here of we can't do the
boom-and-bust cycles given the
asymmetric power of the technology so we
have to actually develop new capacities
and since making a choice making an
implementation then we have even if we
were looking at you know running out of
time we would still need to do this and
so in effect we're looking at it in a
sense of okay well needs to be done
either way regardless of the amount of
time I can't control or even know how
much time I have but I do know that
doing it while the current civilization
context is in place that I can I can
effectively do better design do better
engineering and social process in the
context of our existing civilization you
know to create design for for new
capacities to respond to these kinds of
issues using the context that we have so
in that sense I would say you know
resets not a good thing because you know
coming out of a reset we're not going to
have the kind of capacities to even
think about these issues because we're
basically living hand-to-mouth in the
Stone Age again so in effect what we're
therefore saying is well I can't control
the time period I can't control the
necessity the only thing I can do is use
the resources that we have today as best
as we possibly can to respond to this
thing as quickly as we possibly can so
as a result I end up basically asking
for support you know can people provide
you know good capacities to try to speed
up our capacity to good do good sense
make a good choice make a good
institutional design in this space good
Community Design ultimately Community
Design because that's the the crux of it
all is that you know in effect we have a
better chance of doing it now than we
would at any other point given that we
can integrate things like
all the knowledge we've collected in
science and technology sociology
anthropology psychology philosophy
metaphysics and just the works I mean
literally at this point we have the
maximum amount of information and
resource that we would ever really have
to be able to solve the problem and we
have the necessity to do it now because
we don't know how long we're going to
have to work on this so in effect the
only thing I can really do is to say
very much that we really need to do a
lot of development in this rates pretty
much stat into and to really have the
process that is creating this be very
much a non-commercial thing because we
know that the commercial processes is is
messed up so in effect you know we're
asking for donations rather than
investments we're asking for time
commitments rather than just you know
dollars because you know without having
some real good way to you know develop
this in a way that integrates the
comprehensive field of knowledge that
has been the outcome of Western
civilization and Eastern philosophies
and all that you know what we have as
the world essentially at this particular
point is both the need and at this point
the best enablement we could ask for
that's good we're getting close to the
end of our time here and unfortunately I
have lots of things I wanted to talk to
you about particularly some of my very
favorite things from your thinking about
small group practice you know your paper
on the nature of human assembly I went
and read that carefully I have a lot of
questions and we've talked before you
and I offline about your ephemeral group
process both very interesting but we
don't have time for that so my exit
question is something I found during my
research
you gave a TEDx talk called the accident
of unconsciousness where you talked
about how exceedingly unlikely it is for
us to exist right and that gets very
close to a topic that we've talked about
many times on this show which is the
Fermi paradox the Fermi paradox is from
Enrico Fermi during the Manhattan
Project where a bunch of young
physicists we're talking about oh
there's got to be a hundred thousand
intelligent species in the galaxy etc
and Fermi came by and said
okay where are they and that's been
where we're at we've now been searching
fairly seriously for other advanced
civilizations for 60 years and haven't
found any and the reason I raise this
because you you were actually close to
it and in fact I think you were there
but he didn't make it explicit as it
strikes me that this is a hugely
important maybe the single biggest
question about humanity and its role in
the universe if indeed we are alone and
we may be you know when I was thirteen
year old nerdy kid I would have said oh
yeah there's 100 fad just like the
physicists the young physicists at Los
Alamos oh yeah certainly gotta be other
intelligent species in the universe the
more I've learned about the more I've
studied it more I've thought about it
the less sure I am I'm now to the point
where I'm entirely agnostic but maybe we
are alone and of course there are other
folks like Stuart Kaufman we had on the
show not long ago he believes that life
always forms if the situation is even
close to right maybe he's right maybe
the people that say it's an exceedingly
rare event all right but where I think
you were going was until we know more we
probable it's probably safe for us to
assume that we are unique and if we are
unique in having reached the level of
general intelligence one could say that
we have a purpose as a species which is
to bring the universe to life and if we
destroy our life here or at least
destroy our ability to leave the earth
and to move out into the universe then
we'll have squandered one of the perhaps
the actual purpose of our existence I
couldn't agree more I think this is
absolutely the right direction to be
thinking about this site I definitely
have spent a lot of time thinking about
the Fermi paradox and its implications
and relevance as you definitely
mentioned in fact that was part of the
reason why even put that section into
the the tedx of the accident of
unconsciousness and so in effect yes I
do I do very much agree and there's a
lot of there's a lot of good thinking in
this space I'm thinking particularly of
Anor Sandberg and some of his recent
work in that which essentially uses
information theoretic methods to to
really address that question so I would
definitely recommend taking a look at
his work because he's addressing the
question and
kind of unique way and it's based upon
you know how do we how do we think about
questions like this using the tools of
information theory and risk modeling and
stuff like that another direction that I
think is is particularly important as
you mentioned is that you know let's
assume for example that we are you know
the unique species the unique life in
the universe I don't necessarily need to
make that particular claim because even
if there were life all over the universe
in the sense of you know lots and lots
of different manifestations I could say
that just from an information theoretic
perspective there's still a huge degree
of unity associated with this life so
there's a gift there there's a there's
an enormous miraculousness associated
with that gift and who to really
appreciate that and to understand that
it means that to some extent we actually
have to get the ethics of that right one
of the connections back to the Fermi
paradox is that one of the ideas about
you know why don't we see other
intelligent life in the universe is that
they very prudently would be aware of
well I don't want to contact another
civilization I want to ensure that I'm
absolutely invisible because without an
acknowledgement that there is
essentially a little sufficiently
developed level of ethical thinking and
behavior if I don't see that the basis
of choice that that particular species
is implementing that it's it's it's too
dangerous to talk to them
so in effect think to think of it from
like a first contact perspective right
so given kind of the background I'm
thinking a little bit of the way Nick
Bostrom would think of this is that okay
so we have the possibility of initiating
a first contact situation but let's
assume that both sides you know the
contact II and the contact or both have
enormous existential technology in other
words they have the capacity to to
leverage something like nuclear warheads
and there's no defense like like let's
say that's it's the technology is so
asymmetric in its power that if one side
were to initiate an attack on the other
that the defending side couldn't
possibly defend and and so you know we
say okay well
to really make the point you you you say
not only is it the case that there are
hugely asymmetric technologies that that
either side can have against the other
but that there's essentially thousands
of different kind of technologies each
of which is asymmetric in this
particular way and so you know if
contactor a and contactee B both have
any one of thousands of completely
asymmetric technologies which from the
perspective of the other one is both
unknown like you know we may have
developed completely asymmetric capacity
and nuclear technology but they may have
developed completely asymmetric Technica
pasady in biological technology and some
other party may have developed
completely asymmetric capacity and
compute technology now those happen to
be ones that we know about but let's
assume that some other species some
other race out in space somewhere
another has developed three completely
different technologies that we don't
have names for and that effectively or
just as as you know life destroying a
civilization destroying its planet
destroying us as those three could be
and so in effect we would basically say
well since we have no idea if I'm the
contactor and I'm basically saying hey I
want to talk to this other species but I
don't know that that of the species I
don't know what technologies they
developed just even the fact of letting
them know that we exist is an
existential risk to myself that's called
the dark forest theory on the Fermi
paradox or nobody's willing to speak up
in the dark forests because we believe
the forest is full of predators or at
least we're not sure and that could
indeed be the explanation one of it's
one of a hundred possible explanations
and these are all important and I think
the biggest part that is what we talked
about just as we introduced this which
is these are reasons why we need to be
smart about preserving ourselves because
we might be the only one which case if
we blow it this is huge and even if
we're not the only one to your point we
do bring a very high level of uniqueness
to the universe and over time we
shouldn't be able to spire perspective
through the universe and to blow that is
to blow something huge and that should
be at least one of our motivations to
think through these existential
risks to find a way find a way somehow
to get the wisdom of good God's now that
we seem to have the power of God's so
that's part of the reason why I
mentioned the dark forest thing is
because if there's actually an
additional reason if we assume that you
know there's this background that I've
just sort of set up the only context in
which any species would ever actually
talk to another one is if they knew that
the ethics that was implemented by the
opposing party was at least sufficient
to be able to be safe to talk to them so
in effect it's a bit like you know I
mentioned the nonrelativistic ethics is
the second path or the second aspect of
that TED talk and it's critically
important because if we as a world have
an ethics which is to that standard to
that level of thing then it becomes at
least possible that other species other
worlds would want to talk to us and
share resources and actually be in some
sort of relationship without that level
of development at least at a minimum
then we're just basically too unsafe to
talk to and effectively the predator
nature ends up being the dominant factor
and so in effect we're essentially
saying you know if we want to find other
intelligent life in the universe we have
to be a fit receptacle for that
information and so in effect it then
becomes incumbent upon its even in the
sense of maybe we're not to see the
universe but just to essentially be a
participant a citizen of the universe
that we have to be a good citizen and a
good citizen to some extent means that
we need to do enough self work not only
to survive but also to actually
participate an even better reason to get
our straight I agree all right on
that note thank you
this has been a amazing conversation I
wish we could go on for two and a half
hours and maybe it will have you back on
again to talk about some of these other
topics which we didn't get to so thank
you and this was great have a great day
have been appreciating this and it's
been a wonderful conversation as well
and I look forward to next time
[Music]
production services and audio editing by
jerod Jane's consulting music by Tom
Muller at modern space music that