we're in the midst of a mental health
crisis there are increases in anxiety
disorders depression despair suicide
rates for going up in North America
parts of Europe other parts of the world
and that mental health crisis is itself
due to and engaged with crises in the
environment in the political system and
those in turn are meshed with in a
deeper cultural historical crisis I call
the meeting crisis so the meeting crisis
expresses itself and many people are
giving voice to this in many different
ways is this increasing sense of
 is on the increase
it's more and more pervasive throughout
our lives and we're and we're there's a
sense of drowning in this old ocean of
 and we have to understand why
is this the case and what can we do
about it
so today there is an increase of people
feeling very disconnected from
themselves from each other from the
world from a viable and foreseeable
future let's discuss this let's work on
it together
let's rationally reflect on it what can
we do about the meeting crisis these
problems are our deep problems that
we're facing many people are talking
about the meeting crisis but what I want
to argue is that these problems are
deeper than just social media problems
political problems even economic
problems they're deeply historical
cultural cognitive problems and we need
to you need to penetrate into them
carefully and rigorously getting out of
this problem is going to be tremendously
difficult it's going to require
significant transformations in our
cognition our culture our communities
and in order to move forward in such a
difficult manner we have to reach more
deeply into our past to salvage the
resources we can for such an amazing
challenge I'll be talking about a lot of
people who have spoken in ways that will
provide us the resources we need we'll
talk about ancient figures like Socrates
Plato and Aristotle Jesus of Nazareth's
at heart of Gotama the Buddha but we'll
also talk about modern pivotal figures
we'll talk about people like Carl Jung
will talk about Nietzsche we'll talk
about Heidegger well we'll talk about
current work being done by psychologists
cognitive scientists neuroscientists
we're gonna cover a broad range of
topics we're going to talk about
shamanism and altered states of
consciousness related modern things like
psychedelic
mystical experience but we'll also talk
about existentialism nihilism we'll talk
about AI artificial intelligence what's
that telling us but also what can our
evolutionary past tell us about how we
wrestle with the mean crisis so this is
a complex and difficult problem there
are no easy answers we need to go
through this very carefully and
rigorously we got to get clear about
what the problem is and clear about what
our answer could be so I want to bring
all of this together in a coherent and a
clear fashion so that we together and
discover how to awaken from the meaning
crisis