welcome to the stola the stoah is a
digital campfire where equal hear and
dialogue about what matters most at the
night's edge what's happening now
[Music]
the snow is a place to cohere in
dialogue around what matters most a nice
edge of the moment don't touch that dial
for the next 60 minutes you're going to
enter an hour reality
some people never come back
how's that okay Vince horn is coming in
see that yeah so welcome and nice to see
some familiar faces and to welcome some
new people we could go a couple of
different ways today and I wish we had
this polling feature yeah so we could
revisit some of the questions that we
populated a couple of weeks ago but what
I was what I was trying to do is look at
them as a whole and I started having the
impulse to move on to a series that we
could build on around the question of
what is the spirituality we need does
that seem like it has energy ug for you
yeah so what do i what do i mean by that
you know we usually relate to
spirituality and religion as
technologies that we can ascribe to you
know they're there they exist for us we
try to evaluate them
pick and choose but all these all these
spiritualities have evolved in a
historical timeframe and the question is
what is the historical timeframe asking
of spirituality asking of us today and I
think it's an interesting question
because people often react to that as
really you get ya make up a spirituality
right we we have this sense of
compartmentalizing like spirituality
something that's like ontological
existing for you know and someone
discovered it right but really they are
creations of human collectives and their
experience in historical moments in time
so we see this happening I'm not the
only one that's bringing up this
question we see it happening in terms of
the religion with that's not a religion
and JonBenet Keys work and some of these
other people who are pursuing this
question I'm gonna tag it on you know
just just to be completely transparent
about what is arising and me is I also
want to tag it on two couple of things
that's been happening in the space the
conversation that Jared had with with
robbery last week around the
distinctions between Sutra and Tantra
conversations I've been having with Tom
Murray and John Churchill who was a
student of Dan Brown's conversations
with people in the monastic Academy and
the book recent book by Evan Thompson
why I am NOT a Buddhist and somehow in
my mind these are all percolating in
this constellation this movement toward
becoming more intentional about
this question is what is the
spirituality we need and trying to
catalyze that somehow now of course I
think this question deserves a little
more time and attention than a one-hour
stoah session or maybe we could do three
or four in a row but this this on the
other hand I think I think it doesn't
need so much gravitas you know this
question doesn't need to live in an
institution or or be sequestered in
behind the hallowed halls of a monastery
I think that and then another thing I
was talking to someone the other day
about collective insect practice is
doing an interview and I noticed that I
had switched in terms of my whole
orientation to that the collective
insight practice these practices usually
go over two and a half days on a weekend
they're very intensive and I was
starting to think think now of all the
changes in all the collective
intelligence we have around these
practices now and I'm starting to think
that these practice should should be
less like programs and more like apps
more like one offs more like these kinds
of things in the stoah I mean they could
lead to deeper engagements I think their
needs I think you could you could do a
lot more with kind of building skills
like we've been doing here in the star
these little bit skill building things
so all of this is kind of in this
question of the spirituality we meet we
need today and I just wanted to outline
it and then maybe I wanted to do an
exercise and the exercise I want to do
I've never before so we I want you to be
very non-judgmental about it and what I
mean by that is not have any framework
like what's the right answer
or I did the wrong thing or I'm gonna
discover something that's in the wrong
direction this is not an exercise that
has that kind of pointing out you know
like I know what I'm pointing out kind
of thing so so that's what what we'll do
today so first of all we need to have a
working definition of spirituality and
one that is quite robust and so I like
this out in a video on integral stage so
if you want to see the whole thing you
can it's a short pretty short video but
what I mean by spirituality is a set of
commitments and what I mean by
commitments are not necessarily
conscious all the time okay so this the
set of commitments are ontological so
what is the world like what what do we
commit to what we believe about the
world they are epistemological what do
we what do we what is our ultimate
understanding of how we know things how
are we going to relate to that there
axia logical which is means morals and
ethics and their metaphysical so you can
take any spirituality and you can do you
know identify it by these commitments of
the foundational commitments that we
make and so these questions then become
what are the commitments we need to make
in these four areas for the spirituality
we need now just to give you give you a
little how I answer some of that and
then we'll do the exercise so an
ontological commitment for example is is
is the world really real so Bhaskar said
that we should commit to ontological
realism which is
naive realism naive realism is you think
what you think about the world is the
way the world is
but ontological realism means there's
something about the world that exists
without our human interaction with it
that it's his term was in transient that
the world goes on if it's not perceived
and interacted with by humans so this
gives a sense that the you know it's
it's it's it's in distinction to that
the world is completely Maya or the
world is an illusion or the world is
just phenomenologically arising in my
attention or something like that or the
world is this this theater of trial and
error and choice for you to work off
original sinning and go to heaven so
these are all ontological commitments
like what is what is this world and I
think that in for the spirituality we
need today we need ontological a
commitment to ontological realism
because it's it's the only kind of
commitment I believe that will ground us
in protecting the earth if we are subtly
holding that it's not real then this is
not where our intention will go so again
I'm not saying this is the ultimate
ontological commitment for all time I'm
saying that we can fashion the
spirituality we need around the
ontological commitment that we seem to
need today so just just hold that very I
mean I'm very serious about that
commitment but I'm also serious about
the choice for that commitment and that
other ontological commitments arise in
other historical contexts and holding
what I just said means I'm also
committed to epistemic relativism and
these two right
I wrote a lot about how they actually
serve each other
that if you just have epistemic
relativism there's all kinds of problems
if you only have ontological realism you
have you know fights over your reality
but if you can hold these two together
they they serve each other an epistemic
real epistemic relativism is a
commitment to not only the partiality of
what we can know right so we we
committed that what we know is partial
truth so that that's been stated
elsewhere by Wilbur let's say but
there's a back end to that and that is
that all partial truths are wholly valid
in their context so they're not just so
they're partial truths and we tend to
then think of well they're not not very
valid because they're partial so you
have to hold these two commitments I
think an epistemic relativism at once
that all truths are partial but there
are 100% true in their context which is
just a piece and this makes us much more
compassionate with people who are from a
certain context and they're just telling
they're speaking their truth and you're
like ah let's just
that's true but partial you see the
difference I'm trying to make a point
here about what epistemic relativism
means it's not just oh yes but that's
partial when we say that we say it from
vantage point as if we can tell it's
partial because we have a higher truth
we have more of the truth right this is
this is the way people have been using
that phrase forever
so one of the things you can do in the
spirituality is to investigate this is
this is a whole truth arising in front
of me how can I see the context more
clearly and then come from that context
to help or to support or to you know
whatever participate so I think that's
an important kind of refrain for
epistemic relativism is not as trivial
as a lot of people have taken that
statement in the past
so the third one Axia logical means
ethics and that ethics and morals and
Bosch car had this notion of what he
called judgmental rationalism that we
should use judgmental rationalism to
evaluate morals and ethics and I think
that we need to push that further I
think it's you know a good starting
point but for me the spirituality we
need is something a little different
than that and so I want to call it
instead of judgment because judgment has
this hard cut to it I want to turn the
word into evaluative so we're always
evaluating across a spectrum of values
or such different than judgment and what
I mean is the distinction can't made
between rational judgment and aesthetic
judgment so when we look at beautiful
artwork our eyes are moving and we can
feel that we're making some kind of vat
of value evaluating experience you like
this yellow and then you're moving but
it's not a judgment unless you're an art
critic right so aesthetic judgment
I'm calling evaluative and the capacity
to be evaluative now instead of so he -
Kari called it judgmental rationalism
and I think rational is also we need to
push beyond rationalism it's too
categorical and I think we can push the
into this notion of reasonableness so an
axiology of evaluative reasonableness
and the word reasonable really evokes a
whole different stance toward judgment
let's say or evaluation because I can
for example I this is I use this I use
this example the other day it's kind of
it was a little bit trigger for the
people are talking to so I just gave you
a trigger warning you see how I put a
trigger warning in there without saying
good morning okay so for example there
have been something like a 500% increase
in gun purchases in the US since COBIT
right so I can actually I can see the
reasonableness of wanting to go out in
the climate of the US and get a gun like
I can really lean into that I can lean
into it I actually thought about it
myself
you know so but I can evaluate it as
less less or more reasonable than
something else but I can enter the
context in which it's reasonable and the
truth is it's not rational to go out and
get a gun to protect you from the
government let's say it's completely
irrational your gun is not gonna you
know no match for the military but I can
understand the reasonableness of it in a
certain context and then I can evaluate
that across other reasonableness right
so we can turn we can move from trying
to evaluate and judge rationally you
can't evaluate and judge for example the
information ecology around coal bed but
you can do something about valuation of
the reasonableness of certain of certain
choices let's say so it kind of is a
posture that I think creates a lot more
affordances a lot more you know I have a
have it examined this work it
from from a critical stance I'm still
kind of in the honeymoon period so but I
think that shift from rush judgemental
rationalism to evaluative reasonableness
is part of our commitment to the
spirituality we need okay
so so this is kind of like I'm just
showing you the kind of methodology that
a community could sit in and start to
have start to co-create this you know
this the spirituality we need it around
these kind of bones now those are pretty
easy the last one our metaphysical
commitments and this is what we're going
to do this untried exercise and then
maybe we'll talk about the exercise and
then I'll get into where this
spirituality we need goes in terms of
metaphysical commitments instead this
one is this was quite complex so just
for a moment you know just you know take
a meditation posture or just relax we
are gonna go this this is the easiest
level of meditation ever that's all we
need for this exercise and that is just
to pay attention to your thoughts let
your thoughts come and pay attention to
your thoughts or pay attention to
whatever is arising and if it's Lots
that's good because we just want to
experience what what our attention what
is the capacity of attention what is the
quality of attending to inner experience
so it could be any inner experience in
this case
yeah so if you have attention with
somebody said to have little attention
deficit disorder but you can still
experience your attention as being a
frenetic or frantic or whatever that
experience is that yes this is how my
attention works we just want to get in
touch with what we call what we call
attention just that that word
and as you're doing that you can put in
the chat room what are some of the
qualities or how how do you recognize it
as a tension so for example I noticed
that it skips I can go here I can go
there it has has that
get foregrounds good these are all
doesn't matter what we say but by by
using a word we know we'll know what
that attentional system is this is what
we're in touch with
these are all great great noticin ah
that's great that there's
yeahmaybe great that's I would say for
makings realize eight what does he call
realization salience is the attentional
system for him you know I'm just trying
to bracket what we call the attentional
system relevance realization thank you
that would be his you're his word the
attention system brackets right okay
good now so that was um the purpose of
that is I don't I'm not interested in
the attention system right so the
purpose of getting in touch with it is
because that's not what this exercise
I'm going to ask you to do that's not
where I want you to go okay does that
make sense
so now that you know okay you've got
this that that I'm not the purpose of
this and we're not interested in that
and now we're gonna spend ten minutes I
want you to
where is your will
and get in touch with that
now notice I'm not asking you to pay
attention to your will
yeah so there's something like that's a
nice distinction that what like you feel
the difference when you when I said that
this sense of not paying attention to
your will
you
okay let's um see if anybody wants to
share some of this experience and very
curious to see how you would language or
speak from this experience as I said I
haven't actually done that this before
this feels a lot like my meditation
practice
Eckhart Tolle which is a renunciation of
thought presence and can be very like my
inner dialogue has just been cleaning me
so this presence practice is skidding
into my body and there's that stillness
there detachment so when you're looking
at like where is my attention it was
like ping ping ping ping and I like I
could really direct it and then my will
just felt like an energy field coming
through my body but much outside of my
body and I can thanks to this ongoing
practice I can excuse myself from
thought pretty easily how long I can
stay there is something I'm growing so
when you said where's your will I just
switched to the stillness and just sort
of undulated there yes yeah I wasn't
sure if the word will was gonna work but
I didn't want something that preloaded
your experience either so that was that
was great feedback thank you
in my experience I was noticing that
like where is is your will
was that the question yeah or you know
it was hard to the prompt was hard to
figure out but yeah where is well I was
looking for my will or trying to find
that in my experience and then I found
that very like act of looking for it
that felt like my will to me ah but then
you said it was in your gut yes right
and so when you were with it in your gut
and you stopped looking that what was
that like see to look for your well is
to is to is pay attention to it this is
what I I would say so the the question
is one then he was odds and my god then
so you stop looking and what was what
was that like yeah that was like my just
initial response to to your prompt and
it just feels like a lot of energy like
that would be like the easiest way to
describe it without getting too
technical about it just feels like this
churning or this wanting to be directed
somewhere feels a little uncomfortable
actually yeah yeah so I you know rainy
is saying this you had the prompt where
is it actually engaged or attentional
system and then remember later I had to
kind of try to reframe don't don't
attend to it so I think that prompt the
prompt was not perfect so where is your
will or I could have said get in touch
with your will or something it needs
some improving but yeah it feels like
energy and it feels uncomfortable that's
that I think is
ah that's that's interesting that I can
resonate with that what's uncomfortable
about it like what's the quality of the
discomfort like intensity intensity when
I'm when I'm with it it just feels like
a lot and that I want to point it and
express it and do something with it so
it feels like yeah it's a quite an
interpretation to say with yeah I'd
noticed just even just now that I had
been eating and I feel like I'm like
what is bonita talking about when she
says will because there's like the
impulses and then there's like oh now
I'm being watched so I started like
noticing impulses with my to suppress
impulses and that is that my will or the
being original impre impulses like yeah
yeah feels like it's coming from a lot
of different places
it's a metaphor you use like an image or
something but feels like there's control
a tiger came up ah there's almost like
this fierce energy like yeah we need to
have an energy like like I felt this
sense of animal especially my eyes you
two I can enjoy your day
there's something about the inquiry that
initially brought to mind all of my
wants things that I want and what and
then it immediately went to this sort of
will that is that doesn't originate in
me it feels more like a life drive like
a like a drive that's sort of living
through me and just it's really curious
how I don't I don't identify it as my
own but yet it is in me and no that's
beautiful this is you're channeling
Schopenhauer he said I can well what I
want but I can't will that I will it
comes through me and this is I think the
intensity and the Tiger nurse of it it's
continuous with the energy of the
universe Hey and when you touch base
with that that's that that intensity
that or it's not me and it's intense or
it's not sourced by me yeah yeah
I had this kind of I guess that imagery
became available I my attention was my
thoughts were like these like kind of
bubbles or I would expand a contract and
it fell me I'll scream like will was
like at the edges of space in-between
and kind of could pusher or contract
away and but there was all these
different bubbles so it was in the space
between why it wasn't a thing itself
and in the same way that these bubbles
of thought like the attention ones
and I felt similar to a few of the last
years the the first one I didn't take as
much as attention as the inner
experience so I kind of landed in a
space of stillness and then when you
first asked where's will there was there
was a kind of an empty just a feeling of
awareness so it's like really whoa where
is it where to go there no well then
there's the kind of feeling of like an
embodied feeling of the Hara like yeah
really moving towards something and then
I kind of wasn't satisfied with that I
just stayed with that for a bit and then
I I started like you know thinking about
how I you know some work I have to do or
some problem I have with someone and
that I could kind of see the whole will
- I like what people said about once and
goals like I kind of generated a want
and then I was solving it I was like a
problem-solving mode and then a lot of
activities came up there kind of maybe a
little bit like video was talking about
those thought clouds or something they
were gonna go and then they would
extinguish and they'd be back in
awareness
for me the the experience was very
different from what I anticipated I
thought I would feel it in my gut but I
really felt most of it around my neck
and my upper shoulders faced and
metaphorically it was almost as if there
was possible extensions octopus-like
perhaps or multiple hands and
possibilities of doing things as almost
the two hands were not enough and there
were other ways moving around moving and
sort of having this multi-dimensional
perspective on things
yeah for me that's very interesting so
for me if I if I ask the question an
open-ended way I experience it more like
Donna and other people were talking
about that it drops me you know I feel
weighty it drops me into my lower
chakras it feels like if I could have
the capacity to open the whole force of
the universe could express itself
through me this intensity builds but
what you just described I'm also aware
of and that is this sense of very
directed will I mean I have there's
times when I've taken that energy and
I've stared down like which is like I
have a perceptual experience of a vortex
and it's like that energies come up and
it's like a steel blade and it that's
when it comes from for me like from here
you know this posture you would say so I
would say yes that that's in the same
domain it's it's interesting that you
brought it up is different quality now I
don't think that's how you experienced
it but I was trying to remember what
what that feels like when that the
powers in this area yes since you
mentioned the steel blade like if I had
to use a martial arts metaphor it was
almost as if one had like potentially
like Japanese words and then and the
ability to maneuver them was not a
linear though it was multi-dimensional
it was hysterical
I mean even my hands are moving in that
manner right now so it's almost as if
the hand was not the constraint violence
war and it was free enough that one
could cover the entire 360 degrees
anything else
so that was very helpful thank you and
[Music]
so now you tell a story that is a
[Music]
horribly bastardized narrative about
Buddhist metaphysics so yeah I'm not a
pathologist but just to give it some
kind of sense of the spirituality we
need and put it in a context so you know
when so again believe me this is a story
it's a story a parable take it more as a
metaphor but you know if we can imagine
the Buddha grew up he grew up in a
mythological culture and what he
discovered was with something very very
ingenious and he discovered that that
there was causal links between different
ways that you could react to phenomenon
of situations that created suffering
right he basically came up with if-then
thinking in in the cycle of suffering so
instead of just I'm destined to be a
slave by some kind of permanent laws of
the universe or I'm destined to be born
with original sin because some
eschatological order of God he said no
we can we can examine this
scientifically and see that there is
cause causal link so I think there's
thirteen causal links that and if you
break any one of those links you break
the chain of causality so we see
actually this notion of the causality of
human experience actually arising for
the first time and you see causality
also if they're thinking coming
in the Western world with Plato and you
know this is sculpturing in the mental
structure of consciousness so that so
that was very interesting and then you
could say that the next event or the
second turning was around Nagarjuna's
time and what they discovered then in
terms of causality is that mental models
and words and concepts even though they
were virtual an illusionary they had
real causal effects in the world right
so I could be a paranoid don't be
delusional a paranoid that you're gonna
kill me and that's completely alone
illusion right there's it's it's it's
not real it's a real illusion but it's
not it's an illusion but it'll change my
behavior such that I can go and get a
gun and kill you and that's a real
effect of the world so this notion of
that cause of causality that that
illusions in your mind or virtual
experiences could have real causal
implications in the real world was a
major another major mile post and so in
the human in human consciousness and
this created then most of the traditions
that spend all our time with the
attentional system right so the constant
okay we spend all our time with the
attentional system and there's there's
there's a lot of benefit for that but
one of the problems with starting with
the attentional system is that you start
with phenomenon that are already objects
in your mind and that has some benefits
and some limitations so I think the
spirituality we need has to work with
the intentional system
and we need a metaphysics of experience
that starts with well an intention but
with those practices be like now I know
that this parallels some of contra but I
think most of most of that work is whole
is horribly saturated with with the
attentional system also so this is part
of my way of getting into moving from
the metaphysics of the phenomenon the
phenomenal objects that are already
objects in your mind so it's kind of
funny see that injunction says let's
start with objects in your mind let's
pursue them to the end you'll find
they're empty of course empty because
you started with objects in your mind
it's kind of like a tautology
you know let's start with something and
this is this was hard Shawn's critique
of nourished in our Gardena basically in
a nutshell and so the question is we
need a metaphysics of experience that
starts with intention the intentional
system because it two traces back into
the natural real world as some of you
said like a tiger you're not going to
see in the tiger a phenomenon arising in
the Tigers mind objects in the Tigers
mind so you if you create your
spirituality around that then you'll
feel separate but if you create your
spirituality around intention and we'll
you'll see somebody's notice the
birdsong the swallows fledged this
morning and the little birds like this
is the first time they're flying there's
five tiny little swallows and they're so
ecstatic so I can see that in me and I
can see me and them I'm not gonna you
know I don't have the same kind of
separation so that
I would argue that that's a move toward
the spiritual the metaphysics of
experience for the spirituality we need
today now when Nagarjuna in his tribe
discovered this this this that the
mental you know mental objects were
causally implicated in the real world
this is something that is a huge benefit
but I think it stops short of what what
what we need today
and I think that tags back to Peters
question you know what is what is how
how how can I be strong enough to lead a
fulfilled life and this notion of strong
and fulfillment I think it's in the
intentional system any comments I don't
have a lot to say about it because this
is something I'm just starting to work
work on I like to say something I just
think like like in some ways this feels
to me like some of the things we have
already had in this course was more
profound than this division at least I
got some things we have had I cannot see
fit into this and in particularly I'm
thinking about the story part because
for me I think that a story is like both
on tone at the end
immersed under the Sun tavini and
benefit six and actually all four of
them so for me as like we're
understanding true stories so for me
it's like a basic category that cannot
be put into one of those four yeah so if
you can speak to her to that no that's
actually end up where my my my paper
ended up whatever in so far is that if
you have these set of commitments then
there's many many many stories that can
reflect them so this allows us then to
have a spirituality where there's
parables and there's myths in their
stories that reflect the same set of
commitments and that aren't come you
know competing or or working against
those commitments so
I want a spiritual life that allows them
just like you all have different ways of
expressing your intention your your your
will that the the way there and storied
now is liberated because we're very
clear on our set of commitments and
these stories will come through
different cultures different group
experiences different nomadic tribes
different languages and and we don't
have to fight about that because we're
always coming back to examining these
fundamental commitments and they will
also change I mean did they change the
way things changed now maybe by you know
the year these aren't even is it even
the spirituality we need so but these
stories that they want to liberate the
ability to tell many many stories and
story them from the same the same
spirituality I don't know that's what
you're going but that's how it overlaps
with stories for me well I I guess for
me it's like when you say that these far
like the the fundamental commitments
it's like there's a hierarchy and then
it's like story said a lower point of
the hierarchy and that is where the I
think the conflict arises for me because
I would I feel like the story also owns
me the story owns me so I I live in
stories like I cannot see outside of my
narratives
I feel so therefore I'm just I I cannot
separate a story from from the other
things now it's interesting context
so there's a tension between what I'm
getting at and that experience I would
say yes that's interesting I'm not I've
sort of missed the last little chunk of
conversation that you had because I was
in the chat and I'm what you were
talking about around will and that
experience and the the the meditation or
the practice that observes a will is
feeling it's hitting something I sort of
jokingly but not really wrote BDSM into
the chat and even before that I thought
of contact improvisation which is
something I did a for a long time
because it felt like there's something
really important there around like like
historically I healed it as humans have
been learned to repress our will our
even our awareness of our own will as a
way to control the masses and a lot of
that sement like you see that in the
depression of sexual energy and so these
practices like BDSM and keep in contact
improv which is not explicitly sexual is
really tracking those that what moves us
yeah so that that was Freud's argument
he said that all civilizations are based
are founded on the suppression of the
will so now we have an interesting
question if we are the council from you
know the other council from the advanced
world to create a new spirituality for
the humans right because now the
question is if we have a spirituality
can we have civilization
as we know it and I would say no I think
we need to let that whole trajectory die
and so that's an interesting question I
mean I kind of overstated made it a real
big thing but that that's that's what
you're sensing what do we mean by
civilization it's this long arc of the
expansion of Geo social space more and
more people under one cult object right
now the cult object is the market
finance capitalism so that's what we
mean by civilization it's grown so
there's more territory and more people
under one what George Herbert Mead
called cult an object or social object
or social imaginary whatever so yes so
this notion of not wanting people to
suffer but releasing the long arc of
civilization I think is is is is
interwoven in there somehow there's
something that's coming in for me about
the attentional system and these
practices that doesn't kind of like it
seems like I meant to obliterate it in
some way and I think about like the
attentional system helps us notice
what's happening and so if we obliterate
the attentional system then we don't
notice what's happening on earth we
don't notice what's happening like we it
feels like you can start to fail to
notice what's actually going on and that
we need to act and yeah I really I
relate to it Tanya said I'm also a
longtime practitioner of contact
improvisation and it has like changed
the way that I feel myself and the way
that I do my things
and so I really I gravitate a lot toward
this like intentionality that you're
talking about and like harnessing the
will and I I think there's this thing
happening with a lot of these forums
like this and other like podcasts and
stuff that I'm listening to that there's
so much like there's all this like this
like thought machine that's happening
around these things and then I'm in
these other places where I'm being
exposed to like the Indian cosmovision
and I'm just like wow these people
already have it mapped out like they got
a map and it is like I wish that I wish
to bridge the two and because it's like
there's like multiple multiple steps
ahead and ICS like referencing a lot of
European and Western thought and it's
like it feels like we're like grasping
at something that is already happening I
would say we're using the wrong system
for the route you know it's like a tool
the touchable system is one thing and
you're right it has we need that but
then there's the intentional system and
almost all our focus or the system we
bring online to solve these problems or
is more of the attentional system all
the discourse around the virtuality of
self and salience realization in
perspective this is all the attentional
system there's not the last thing that I
wanted to say is that as far as like an
intention goes a lot of traditions put
forward the intention of friendship and
the intention of being a learner and
always learning from your environment
how to be a better friend
so that just put
okay I know aunt Rae is trying to is
reminding us yeah it's a part of France
brentano's writing so he came up with
the concept of intentionality and then
when Martin Heidegger wrote being in
time he used intentionality is a core
part of the and Edmund Husserl did as
well and it's where a lot of our current
ontology stems from if you very before
that it would be Immanuel Kant there he
was bit more focused towards metaphysics
rather than a straight ontology yeah so
this was a rewarding work for me thank
you it was nice to have like a little
participation around some of these
questions and Peter what's coming up at
the stoa what's coming up at the stoah
is collective presencing in one hour
with right-back recommend that socratic
speed dating tonight
Darkstar same time as usual it's more we
vince horn is coming he was here
actually in the chat you just have to
leave though and he's doing a session on
social meditation and when is that
that's at 3 p.m. eastern time so you can
check that on the website okay so the
still is run by the gift economy your
presence here is already been a gift to
me
and to each other but if you wish to
stop it Freddie I'm trying to be serious
I just got to get through this if you
wish to contribute more you can do so at
the stoy dot CA /
gift thank you very much let's see
what's to see you next week