[Music]
my thinking on this was that I've been
doing all this music sampling people
talking about stuff and some of these
people are public intellectuals and some
of them are former Navy SEALs but it's
all people that I think have got
something a value to add to the
concurrent conversation of what's
important right now at this really
important point of development as a
species anyway so yeah I could be
thinking about all these people as kind
of characters and archetypes and what
have you you know this expanded almost
like a universe I started to think of it
like the Marvel Cinematic Universe it's
like the meaning way of the universe and
each person had a part to play and I
figured well Peterson who was the first
one I did was kind of like the Iron Man
figure who you know he's a kind of like
earthly science-based character he's not
too out there or too crazy or anything
you know people was talking about stuff
that was on an earthly level that people
could regular people could relate to and
stuff in the same way they launched the
Marvel Cinematic Universe with Iron Man
who was a guy who built a suit you could
imagine that being a true thing that
could happen you know and then it
expands and then he gets to like Doctor
Strange you like brings in the idea of
magic and then somehow you can do
anything and so I was thinking about the
characters in it like this then I was
thinking about the IDW was kind of being
like The Avengers who you know we're
sort of group of of powered individuals
who were gathered together for a
critical moment so as regards to each
one was I don't know I mean what but
before what what is your take on the IDW
anyway what is what does it mean to you
what is it really know well I think for
a little bit just go down the road
you're going down right let's say that
because I'm interested in finding that
out but I was noticing as this one is it
if I like the irony they have the fact
that at least one of the characters in
the story that you're telling Jordan
Peterson tells the story about how you
create mythologies of the mythologies
new abstract up and you're telling a
story which is embedding his story in
the context of the mythology of
storytelling
and I was noticing as you were talking I
sort of imagining how this shows up in
all the different kinds of mythologies
like are they actually Greek heroes or
are they like I have like a comic book
image that has a whole bunch of
different like shamanic heroes from a
bunch of different distinct lineages all
somehow being called into place but the
this notion of there being like a
reference to the myth of poetic layer
the reference to the to the archetype
layer and then each each of these
particular individual human beings for
their own reasons because of who they
are and how they show up in the world
has access to some portion of the myth
the poetic layer and we're in
mythopoetic times that's for sure the
mythopoetic layer you can also call the
architect or the archetypal yeah it's
two two words it's not ludicrous if you
imagine that the archetypes are always
existing and so the superheroes will
take of archetypal archetypal structures
yeah they've been out they've been out
gods for a while and they've introduced
those concepts to the past couple of
generations just as sort of religions
sort of died off in the West or like the
religion that we had bros Superman and
Wonder Woman and the x-men and all these
people sort of take these places so a
child who's born now who might not read
the Bible stories will certainly read
the superhero stories or L will see them
in movies and if if the the IDW are kind
of self-selecting they've been self
selected by the culture it would make
sense that they would also fill those
kind of archetypal holes that they'd be
required to fill those archetypal holes
oh well then we can use that to maybe
make sense of the question you asked me
some of the characteristics that seem to
be showing up in these individuals are
for example courage yeah they have the
archetypal virtue of courage which is
sort of notably absent from art yeah
there was someone asked me like why even
made some music with Peterson in the
first place of what I likes by him and
the first thing that came to mind was
courage was bravery yeah who is someone
standing up for something right whatever
that is in in the face you could imagine
that like a deep level like in our in
our bones or even in our like
reproductive organs the part of us that
has been all about how the hell do
tribes survive has a deep sense of when
there are when the
no courage were probably so when
when we feel an absence of courage and
then courage shows up we're like okay
that whatever that is it needs to happen
yeah right and so that's one one piece
and then the other piece that we also
see is well I guess I'm gonna break this
into two one is this notion of a an
unreasonable attraction to the truth all
right so a sense of a willingness to say
to take pain to like suffer in in
defense of what is perceived to be true
all right so rather than being able to
capitulate or to equivocate saying no
I'm just gonna kind of like come in and
say what I think is true and almost
almost blindly not like calculating when
I take the consequence I think it's a
good idea but for some reason I'm just
wired is one of these people who just
can't feel good about things not being
true and then the other aspect over here
is something about stepping out like a
bigger picture like zooming out and
taking a look at things that are not
right in front of us and trying to say
like wait a minute
something's going on and again look if
you think about this in terms of just
straight evolution you can imagine that
there's a situation where we've been
encamped in a valley for a long time and
it's worked out we've got a good way of
being and but we're noticing for example
that maybe the hunt isn't producing as
well as it used to where the watering
hole seems to be getting drier every
couple of years and most people still
are just kind of like that's not there
there's nothing thing and they're just
focused on what's going on but a couple
of folks they step back and like wait a
minute what's that mean like what's
happening here and something there whoa
hold on guys we may have to leave now
leaving the valley is dangerous as
going from where you are where things
working understand what's happening to a
new place is a really bad idea so it's
not gonna be well-received which is why
it takes a certain kind of courage to be
willing to step up and say it but
because we've had to do that a lot to be
humans and humans more than any other
animal
we're the only animal that is in fact
designed the ability to get up from a
whole niche like to leave the African
savannah and migrate to the to the
Arctic we're the only animal that has to
have some system that's able to be able
to detect when it's time to do that
alright so then this is the Buddhist
step back and try to figure out okay
what is the basis that we can actually
use to perceive a bigger pic
that allow us to make good choices in an
environment where something is wrong and
it's gonna be very subtle like you can't
what name it very well if it's at the
mythopoetic layer so maybe that's what I
think is that that's what's happening
it's showing up so it's also perhaps a
superpower to be able to detect that I
think it's a if we're using the word
superpower in its market typical sense
it is for sure superpower as we just
described it yeah and it's listened to
all the times summon the man or the
speaker or whatever they whoever's
required at that point in time always
seems just show up mm-hmm and now
whoever's showing God be showing up and
it's the Internet is allowing that to
happen it's kind of yeah well yeah yeah
this is I mean cuz it does spread I
still one of those things that people
don't I don't think people fully grasp
the enormity of it an idea as person and
say I think and it can just
reverberate throughout everything it's
all me well spoke about this before but
I feel the Joe Rogan is by far the most
influential broadcaster of the last
decade and it's probably more
influential than any broadcaster who
came before him at this point
a selection of guests on his show can
shift the course of culture completely
someone can go on there and introduce a
new concept and millions of people that
will then spread and people could adopt
that thing immediately whatever it is
with regards to the IDW as superheroes I
don't know where that puts Rogan didn't
you think Nick Fury
I like the Nick Fury feel ya know but
then I was like maybe I require steins
Nick Fury because it was Weinstein seems
to be kind of pulling things together a
bit and seems to see something coming
that requires these particular
individuals to be assembled this is a
generational thing and I connected Nick
Fury is Nick Fury and his Howling
Commandos yeah not Nick Fury agent of
shield yes there you go when his agent
of shield Eric won but I this is it yeah
I grew up with you know the first fury
be has been completely eclipsed by
samuel l.jackson fury and you're blind
yeah totally different guy like full
blank yes if you think about the guy
who's sort of like does this super spot
yeah there's two guys chomping
yeah the guy who can like - man that's
that's broken bad yeah if
you think what the guy who's like more
of the intelligence operative who is
able to figure out how to make things
happen inside large complex
bureaucracies where there's betrayers
here and there and kind of but can you
know really is at the end of the day at
his core the same guy right his essence
and can then bring people together on
the basis of hero right it called out
the hero essence when it's needed that's
much more Eric yeah that's exactly the
court call out the hero essence when
needed yeah yeah and that's where this
key thing and put is that we now have
that this is part of the whole sort of
internet versus old media thing it just
wasn't possible before in the same way
that was it Kirby wasn't Morrison anyway
I think Kirby or Morrison with you know
would say that comics is kind of the
ultimate art form because you can do
anything within it and you can tell the
story as long as you need to and you can
have any kind of special effects and you
know it's kind of doesn't have the
limitations of movies or television and
Internet has done that with idea
spreading and meme spreading it doesn't
have the limitations that television or
newspapers or any of these things had
you can spread the meme as trans McKenna
will talk about in it almost infinite
fashion you can take an idea and it can
disseminate as far as as far as it can
in a way that it just wasn't possible
before wasn't imaginable before let's
take it further than that because as you
as you were saying it I was trying to
feel into the like comics and then
Internet and I was noticing that I was
just to do it this way the thing that
happens in the Internet
when you're doing something on the
Internet I guess kinda like what we're
doing is that you're engaging in a what
the hell was that called a beautiful
corpse is that right we were that phrase
in art in in in broadcast in a mode like
say in the moment that the Beatles were
on The Ed Sullivan Show there's a huge
impression of an idea into the culture
but it goes one direction and it's
received and the ability for that to
them become generative creative on its
own basis is only out here right so a
bunch of kids of course for sure were
inspired by the Beatle
he generated rock and roll and moving
back out but on the internet what
happens is that if somebody watches this
perhaps to say a fabric that's trying to
be expressed and it's not our
responsibility or our power to express
all of it all we have responsibility for
is to move it a little bit further and
to participate a little bit our piece or
anybody else who happens to be
participating in this in any way
watching it commenting on or creating
their own video in response like
tomorrow obviously this is a virtual
tomorrow tomorrow after they watch it
they could create something else and
part of that fabric and they're
equivalently empowered to everybody else
to actually be participating in that so
what that does is that actually erases
remember like I think was Foucault who
did the birth of the author we're
talking about the death of the author
the end of the notion that the human
being is the agent of creativity and the
recovery of the notion there being some
kind of more collaborative sense where
you're generating and pulling in this
the source of creation is happening
outside of us entirely there's something
really interesting as well about the
kind of marriage of high and low culture
that we've got these incredible deep
ideas coming out into the culture and
then we're kind of you're turning it
into music you're turning into something
that's really accessible but it doesn't
feel because of the time we're in and
the way that the internet works it kind
of feels right like that those those
barriers between high and low culture
seem to have been kind of almost
completely if you're born after 1990
they don't exist you don't have a
concept of that really so this is this
is Joe Rogan I mean the idea that Joe
Rogan is kind of the the Herald of yeah
well it makes completely select all it
will reawaken of course it would be Joe
Rogan because Joe Rogan is kind of
honest with himself enough to know that
he doesn't know everything lots of smart
people aren't smart enough to know they
don't know everything he's inquisitive
and he's interested and he's also a
trippy individual there's something
about you talk about sovereignty quite a
lot by Rogan is someone with a huge
amount of sovereignty from the fighting
from the kind of deep embodied nature of
a lot of what he's doing which seems to
translate into the kind of having the
courage to go into the intellectual
realms and like you say kind of admit
that you don't know something was
there's a lot going on
I mean when we were only things that we
didn't just mention was he also he made
his living as a stand-up comedian yeah
that's the massive event
continues to a third yeah but he
continues it's not like that's a side
gig that's like his main passion and
that's a skill set right that's the
capacity to simultaneous to be able to
use your mind to think of and receive
things to convey through speech but to
read a room is the hardest thing reality
it's a level above deejaying on that
DJ's have no reading a room of working
out how to take people on a journey but
then making them laugh yeah it's
that's the hardest
that's why comedians don't get any good
until they've been doing it for about 20
years like no no young comedian is
actually very good they might say
something funny now and again they might
be good at Twitter but like they're no
good they're not good they're not good
on that level of true greatness that a
great comedian is so they've been doing
it for 20 years or something
till I don't give a till they don't
give a yeah yeah it doesn't that's
one of them well they have to be able to
be in that space that flow yes and have
the skill set to them be in that space
of flow yeah because you have to have
trained yourself to have the capacity
flow by itself is gonna get it done so
then what you say that his sovereignty
and talking about his sovereignty his
sovereignty in this in this environment
is very large but he has a capacity to
be able to perceive what's happening he
has a capacity to be able to notice the
way that it's being expressed in the
real environment of an actual dialogue
so that it will be heard with an
audience he can feel the audience and
understand how the audience is gonna be
able to respond what's happening he
himself and his body has already been
trained to be able to be punched in the
face and not shirk so as things are
happening to him that might actually be
pushing him that's not going to move him
at all
he's actually able to hold like a
particular location in the dialogue that
enables the dialogue to be able to be
whatever it can be and then increase his
capacity to be heard using his
skillfulness as a as a comedian that's
actually a it's one of these things
right we live in we live in a world
where we'll stay actually run back the
clock so a thousand years ago there were
like nine jobs and what your
great-grandfather did it's what you were
probably gonna do and you didn't need to
change it very much like stuck in a rock
on top of a rock once you kind of
figured out the basics was the way it
was gonna be thatching all right the
science of thatching is more or less
figured out it has not changed and then
you know as you fast-forward what ends
up happening is there's more and more
things that we have to have had to learn
how to do and they're changing
faster so you know it's funny it's an
odd thing to say but I think it's
actually quite true to say that if
you're trying to imagine like if I was
going to have a 15 year old kid come to
me and say well what kinds of things
might I want to study to be able to be
really capable in the world that's
happening say well perhaps you should
learn how to do mmm a stand-up comedy
and then maybe figure out how to create
your own public media and persona and if
what's funny is that all those are
available as you said like your son is
writing are doing roadblocks he's
already learning 19 fundamental skills
in that environment and his base skills
right that are core so yeah Scott Adams
has this idea of the talent stack like
if you're going to be successful in the
modern world and able to navigate having
a bunch of complementary skills like a
whole bunch of them so rather than being
 good at one thing like you're
the best in the world one thing but
that's all you've ever done that's a lot
of your success is going to rely on luck
at that point of being in the right
position to be able to execute with that
one thing you have a bunch of
complementary things this is what I've
done I realized I like just out of
forced necessity I've made music but I
then forced myself to learn graphic
design and video editing and social
media and marketing and all these other
things in order to complement that and I
have a bunch of these skills a
pretty high level they're all work
together to mean that I can function and
release music and videos and things like
three times a week speedily I can do all
these things yeah well I mean I think
that we talked about I know how this the
timeline works here so I know how to
reference or invokes but to me is in the
recent past which me in media world be
in the distant future but this notion of
there being an actual stack in terms of
like information knowledge skill
capacity there's a there's a basis there
so like you may have have learned
information about what was it was one of
the skills he just mentioned design so I
might read a book on design of just
absorbed information well I may have
knowledge meaning that I've now been
able to learn like I know it I know the
information well then a skill is very
different right I've actually practiced
it in somewhere I've learned how to
actually use it in some fashion more
than a capacities
deeper which is maybe the ability to
have to read and the ability to
understand how to build a skill as a
capacity and so you know as the world
becomes more complex and as things
change you have to go deeper on the
stack in the fact that I may know
something is irrelevant Google knows
everything better than I know anything
the photo in fact that I have a certain
amount of skill is relevant but it's
changing it needs to be glued together
so these capacities the deep capacitors
are the things that are invariant ryun's
that's the stuff that's at the depth
high bridge for a little bit though
because there's actually an interesting
point that I'm not sure if it's useful
it might I felt I felt deeply called to
actually channel Heather hang in the
high in low culture so she she
particularly calls out at least in my
experience I don't know what she's been
doing publicly is this notion of so high
culture is an evolutionary niche and low
culture is an evolutionary niche we
should to say that there's an audience
the rich or the aristocratic and there's
a producer artists of a certain sort who
over time learn how to figure out how to
explore that niche and so they realize
that creating music of a certain sort
appeals to the taste of this particular
subset and this particular subset
appreciates it it oftentimes largely
just so that they have the ability to
exclude other people and show that their
posh and smart right yeah high culture
is that direction low culture is a
different set of things you're trying to
appeal to right low culture doesn't
necessary have as much of a need or
value in trying to differentiate
themselves from other people but if they
could have a good laugh right if they
can actually feel a certain sense of
connection or a sense of uproar ease and
that's good rest of different values
well this is concepts in evolution
called hybrid vigor where as if the
niche if that if the niche between the
the aristocracy and the common people is
separate for a long time these skills
specialize here and these skills
specialize here and they're different
they're Twain right we have high and low
culture sconce EPS but when this thing
starts to break down when a new niche
emerges these skills need to reconnect
with these skills why you need to have
like a Joe Rogan you need to have a
sensibility of the low culture how do I
get to get a lap but then me like
Russell Brand you also have to
sensibility of okay what are these
things that kind of titillate
these sensibilities and build a
sharpness or capacity to confront and
you can combine them you have hyper
configure you have this new species
which has a vastly higher capability of
exploring a new space a novel
environment and I think it's reasonable
to say they were in a novel environment
I kind of get the sense with the IDW at
the moment that it's it's an initial
kind of stake in the ground for a new
kind of conversation it's sort of it's
almost like people gathering together to
say okay we need to be able to have
conversations about these certain topics
so I kind of sense that it's already
doing its job in terms of staking out
kind of an area to have that where do
you think that goes do you think we end
up with this kind of cinematic universe
getting more and more characters is this
something that's going to continue to
grow do you think once this thing has
happened once and it comes the bravery
aspect oh you can go out there and
talk about these things and you don't
die they don't kill you immediately you
don't care like you don't lose your job
melee or whatever some more people will
do it and anyway then there's more of an
appetite for it
is normalized to an extent so it doesn't
seem weird anymore like people are
running around with capes and we I
could do that too you know and then you
have people who only and then you've got
a world of the youngest younger people
who've only ever known a world of capes
that's completely normal then and then
you can have really big
conversations so it can it can only grow
and it can only get more interesting and
they extend this or take this as a as a
push which is if you think about the the
notion of sake counterculture if you
think about that what was the line say
hello to the new boss same as the old
boss if you think about what the IDW is
doing as being just a counterculture to
a centralized narrative structure I
think that's wrong that's not the point
and so you what I would say is what
happens next is what's happening right
here because on the one hand we're not
part of the IDW and there's no real
particular intent or notion of this
being like the IDW Junior League which
is endeavouring to figure out how to
become the IDW like are we using this to
become part of that no but on the other
hand we're we're presenting the same
process we're representing the same
field which is say okay how do we come
together and begin to have conversations
how do we actually practice this thing
that is about how we come together and
become more capable as individuals and
as groups at being able to think and to
be able to ultimately make better
choices and be able to do things in the
world and so what I would expect or hope
is kind of like a rhizomatic growth that
you'll begin to see a proliferation of
quite diverse and heterogeneous groups
like you said the West Coast Avengers
just pop up and they aren't about August
Hawkeye was but they weren't worried
about becoming a member of the Avengers
they were about doing their own thing
right and that's the idea right is that
it's because this playing field is in
fact perfectly flat it is smooth across
the board it's now more of a this is a
way to play a game there's a new kind of
game a new kind of way of playing it and
it is no longer at all about the old
boss it's actually about a completely
new dynamic I guess this is what
thinking looks like and now you've seen
what thinking looks like maybe you can
do it this is a superhero this is what a
superhero is this is what he does this
is what he stands for he's trying to
 wants to save the world
he's an emblem of the potential of
humanity and we're at this point where
we're about to as we've talked about but
it's either death and
destruction or glory and Wonder it's
either like everything squandered or the
potential realized like sort of now is
you know the time is now and only you
can save mankind which is this sort of
message of the superhero or whatever
which is the message of the superhero
isn't someone's gonna fly in and
save your ass it's like only you can
 save what needs saving and
that's what you need to do is become
your own personal life
yeah become that or whatever it happens
to be I mean you made you it may
actually be in a position where you're
helping save something some other
environment yeah you might actually save
the actual world yeah you might actually
might be that big yeah that's
possible that's potentiality at this
point but of course no I it's funny
because we now have this in the
environment I can I can say that but
also be mindful of part of the message
that Peterson is spreading which is it's
not necessarily the case that is your
particular responsibility to save the
world and not everybody needs to run out
of the costume and bang someone
round the head because like you'll get
 up if you're not ready if you
ain't done the training later you know
you can trigger a video go out there and
be Luke Cage if you don't know how to
punch it and I guess the other the other
superpower is the ability to have the
conversations which is what you were
talking about with courage the the
ability to get yourself into the space
where you can have a generative
conversation is in itself a kind of
superpower it's a bunch we talked about
outside the notion of curation as well
which is the same kind of skill set so
in a conversation there's a notion of me
listening to you in trying to out of the
thing that is being endeavoring to be
expressed how do I identify the highest
possible aspect of that because there
are many right and of course in
traditional debate or even the lowest
aspect in turn what you're saying into
some my effort is try to find
the highest SATs but can bring that out
and then send something back to you that
is honoring what you said I'm not
changing I'm just trying to listen and
bring it up well we can do that in a
conversation that's how you have a good
conversation right we actually oh and
that's neat that's interesting let me
add more of that it's there more here
but you can also do that in the meta
conversation and if you're watching this
video you're part of the conversation
but in a meta level you can curate it
you can up regulate it and share it or
you can add your own voice to it as
that's the ideas we can actually
recognize that the same set of skills to
be well honestly just to be in
relationship with yourself well just to
be able to speak and think clearly as an
individual in congruence and integrity
shows up as the set of skills to be able
to do it as a group and then as it turns
out to do it as a collection as a
community yeah unmask this is one of the
things that people don't necessarily
talk about with regards to the influence
of YouTube is that the the the way that
people act interact with the YouTube
video pretty much according to research
as they look at the video they start
watching it and then immediately scroll
down the comments almost immediately so
the the comments section people reacting
to the video is seen as much as the
actual thing itself like is as important
we were talking about this earlier in
regards to I think it was a dreadful
mistake for the conversations with
Peterson and Harris to not be broadcast
live yeah they should have been streamed
live people could be everyone would be
getting any information at the same time
and kind of like working on it together
at the same time and that there would
have been a vast conversation this
a big part of that it's Peterson talks
about how he likes to speak live and he
can see from the reactions of people out
there like how is things how it's going
down and that's the comment section now
you know YouTube comment sessions can be
full of morons but they're also full of
what's the opposite of a moron I don't
know whatever like I see some other
people who are watching this people in
my comment section my comment section is
like 99% like smart thinking humans so
you have something valuable to add well
it's funny I mean we we have this
Peterson in Admiral McRaven the guy who
said Peterson clean your room McRaven is
make your bed but we have this sort of
bite-sized ethical mandates you know
things to anybody where they are can do
and it's good it's gonna make a move so
here's an example make better comments
did you said it can be horrifying and it
can't be horrifying because for whatever
reason many people believe it's
appropriate to be irresponsible in their
cons hey but guess what there's also
personal responsibility on the part of
the curator at the comments section
which is the person who wears the
channel and some people think oh it's
it's anti-free speech to like delete
like a rude comment or something I
personally think this is my house you do
not come in my house and spread shits
over the walls and if you do i remediate
lee remove you from my house I
can do that it's sort of good modeling
yeah because it's what's that what's the
theory of like you go you know you go
into a neighborhood Brooklyn is ya the
broken window thing exactly I think it's
the same with that so anyone who runs a
YouTube channel has a huge
responsibility if you're gonna just let
your comment section turn into a ghastly
 show then that's that's what you're
putting out into the world and that's
what you're gonna propagate well maybe
because put a stake in the heart of with
the idea of free speech is because I
shock to me that we live in a moment
where that still isn't clear yeah so
what is this concept and I think we're
living in an environment now we can may
even be able to say it quite clearly
which is free speech is about the degree
to which one is able to provide high
quality high bandwidth signal that is
insightful
all right so free speech is that so if
you if I convey to you high quality
meaning that
the there's a clarity of expression high
fidelity meaning it is in fact actually
precisely what it is that I am
perceiving and endeavoring to express
I'm not lying or manipulating I'm not
trying to do anything with it other than
expressing it isn't high-bandwidth
meaning there's a whole lot to it and
deep inside which is the thing that's
being expressed is worthy of being
expressed at the level that's being
expressed right so those characteristics
are where free speech is now if you're
violating any one of those four
parameters then you're not engaging in
free speech all right so if I censor you
I'm doing something which is shutting
down at a minimum the bandwidth right if
I am misinterpreting you I'm shutting
down safe the fidelity of what's
happening if I'm manipulating you I'm
definitely should know that the fidelity
I mean I'm hijacking the communications
channel is we could have values
information theory which we probably
ought to it since we live in the
information age to redefine this
character this concept in a modern way
it actually makes much more clear the
thing we're dealing with and so it helps
clarify if I'm running a message board
and people are engaging in things that
are creating noise right they're not
actually generating either insight
they're not actually taking the time to
have something to say before they vomit
on the web webpage or of course they're
engaging in trolling which to say
they're engaging in expression that
pretends to be one thing but is in fact
something else these are all just forms
of noise and so we can it's not hard to
identify mister noise is very clear that
those are all know is great it may not
be obvious that a particular thing
happens to be noise but it's clear that
if it is trolling and not authentic
expression but it is noise when we could
eliminate it and then what ends up
happening is as you say then you've now
generated a venue where everybody's
beginning to see oh okay
I get what good action actually looks
like exactly this is a thing this
there's lacking it's this is such a new
thing is it such everything this is this
vast experiment and so you have a
situation where you can go in and just
say what you think immediately and it's
seen by lots of people that's very
exciting for people it's like this sort
of drug rush room I can go on that tweet
thread and all that famous person and
lots of people will see me say this
thing and I'm a hero
and there's not been enough time passed
for people to really work out hey the
repercussions of that on a big societal
level because it is big repercussions
the fact that you couldn't that
comment of whatever thing is is seen by
almost as many people as the main thing
and that top comment was first was that
we've kind of moved past that that would
that was late 2010 2012 you know that's
when people said and they were home I
will look and things like that seems
like such a bygone era the emergence of
high culture in our particular new
vernacular so this is this new new world
and the rules haven't quite been laid
down yet and people don't quite know how
to act yet but they're starting to I'm
seeing it's starting to happen I'm
seeing comment sections getting a lot
more useful and this is curation is a
big part of this and you said something
really interesting as well that a lot of
people who are commenting are actually
in broadcast mode rather than digital
mode that in some sense if you're
responding to someone at something as
yes I like this
no I don't like this that's actually
broadcast whereas digital is this is
what I like about this and this is what
I don't like about this as a
constructive there's a dialogue there's
an implicit dialogue in commenting on
digital that there isn't with broadcast
if you think about the the mental
metaphor of the former is I'm changing
the channel yeah and that's the best the
psychology of broadcast mode where I
have no authority or capacity or ability
to interact or express on my own the
only power I have is to change the
channel to remove my attention as all I
have right but in the interactive
environment I have the ability and
therefore how the duty of learning how
to wield that power well of curating
with detailed nuance up regulating and
down rigging but and then also adding I
can actually express into it so yeah I
think it's it's it's it's novel and the
environment we've exited has been one
that is very different so not only is it
a place where we're having to build new
skills but these new skills are quite
different to the old skills and yeah
you're especially like when you move
into the suburb when the suburbs extends
itself and people begin to grow lawns in
places that didn't used to have like
here in San Diego where's its desert you
get this very interesting experience at
actually watching an ecosystem develop
in the first season there are no bugs
because it was desert in the second
season the bugs have come the third
season the birds come and it's over
about
ten years you finally get an ecosystem
we're kind of doing that right in the
new home ho ho moon the first guys there
were bugs exploiting an opener it's
interesting as well yeah I think you've
just explained the moral rule that you
were saying with is that people who are
comment have power and with that comes
responsibility and that if we're yeah as
curators it's okay to to remove people
who are not exercising their power now
the people who noticed this first in the
Cardinal web part of the comic book
analogy this is but this is ties in with
the new where we're going but it was the
the smart trolls the ones who realized
that they did have a power and they had
a power to change things in a Chaos
magic type fashion they had a power to
sort of collectively push sort of ideas
and change people's perceptions of
people via sort of like meme
affiliations or outright falsehoods or
weird jokes or creepiness or whatever it
hits this was a thing that a generation
discovered they discovered they had a
huge sort of what would have been
previously called sort of chaos magical
power and now you have all sort of
generation who are aware of that as a
complete normal thing as in that's just
normal that's real it's not theoretical
it's not me jacking off over a sigil in
a room hoping I can find my car keys yes
it's that never worked for me by the way
thank you Grant Morrison didn't work but
it's the thing that you've seen as a
prize as practical really really works
you can sort of all gather together and
change the course of of discourse or
history or whatever by combined action
so the first people who discovered that
it's kind of like the way porn dictates
technological movements you know it
wasn't necessarily the sort of most
useful use of that power or the best use
of that power or the most heroic use of
that power or whatever but it's out
there now people know so now it's a
thing that can be harnessed for good and
can be harnessed for sort of heroic
super heroic means of like saving the
world and shifting the culture and all
that sort of thing there's like a whole
bunch of kids you just know that that
works they can do it it's completely
useful and usable so then it's like what
more
we do with that power today yeah so that
would be the the meaning of the IDW at
its depth it is re discovering and re
presenting the hero archetype in this
new environment and then inviting anyone
to become a hero do you actually say
okay this is what it feels like this is
what it looks like and as you said and
anybody can in fact in some sense
everybody both should and must man
exactly that's the thing they're
actually monsters yeah you must but it's
not easy and you have to put in lots of
work yeah this is you can't just put on
a cape and jump off a building and
expect a flight this is the calling so
Eric Weinstein is a very smart guy and
you're not likely if you're just sort of
a person out in the world to sort of
wake up one morning and have his level
of intelligence and dedication but we're
just people there's nothing about us
that makes us you when somebody could
decide to in comic books die ahead we do
to read comic books right there's not
I'm not a differential geometry but if
you just decide to enter into this kind
of conversation that's the beginning and
it's amazing how rapidly just the
process of learning from other people
listening learning how to listen
learning how when you're shutting people
down because for whatever reason your
fear or anger is causing you not to
listen and then learning right how
rapidly that just builds these skills
like it's it's not I'm gonna say it's
not hard it's actually hard yeah but
it's not the kind of thing that
effectively everybody couldn't do it's
the thing that everybody can do and this
is a thing that's been emerging recently
in the conversation is that for many
many years we were told we were stupid
and then we could only handle six
minutes of television and actually our
attention spans were getting shorter and
shorter and we were just absolute
 idiots we could only handle by
like tweet information and MTV or
whatever it was it turns out that was
completely untrue it turns out we can
sit down for like three hours and listen
to someone talking about something that
we know nothing about and that we're
very interested in it and it's not just
like a little niche section of the
population over here and everyone else
is stupid dumb staring at the TV is
actually way bigger than that and it's
probably most people it's looking like
now it's actually looking like most
people are really smart and most
people's capabilities
for handling these kinds of subjects and
expanding upon them we don't even know
what the limits are you look at the
Jordan Peterson phenomena it's like
someone's talking about Bible lectures
incredibly deep Bible that yeah it's
 Turing Studios stadiums
yeah which Jordan Peterson also came to
mind when you were discussing the nature
of that conversation because there's
something in the the sort of the
symbology of the Christ archetype is
that you die to yourself every moment
and there's something in allowing parts
of yourself to die off to be reborn like
things that were wrong so indulge in
engaging in these conversations where
you're allowing parts of yourself to die
off but maybe beliefs that you had
before or things that are stopping you
there's a sense of as he also says that
you have to allow your dead wood to be
burned burned off if the river stops
flowing then it stagnates and closes
ship rose in it well it's funny because
you know if we had been in I don't know
1880s or so this would not have been a
particularly notable insight I don't
know why but many people had the basic
insight of let the the the dead would
burn off that your job is to constantly
be renewing yourself in the context of a
particular situation back then it had
more of the basic sense of like being
tough like being honest being strong
being powerful in the world that you
have to learn and allow yourself to grow
now we can actually do it in thinking a
more fully realized way to and therefore
not have secret things that are sort of
embedding themselves and surrounding
themselves and ever allowing things to
burn off except for them then he
actually can be completely open to
whatever happens to be coming through
and build like a very deep sensitivity
what was his oh it was Nietzsche that
tuned to philosophize with a hammer and
the notion that it's a sculptors hammer
that's not a sledge hammer it's a thing
that knocks wood precisely that which
prevents the statue from revealing
itself and so do building to developing
a level of artistry with self so that
you can actually allow precisely that
which should go away like what is the
dead wood yeah it's not obvious getting
skillful at that is a powerful skill