hey welcome everyone to a nether
awakening from the meaning crisis
discord QA our guest today is layman
Pascal now normally I do a little intro
but layman isn't crazy but intro so I'm
not going to do one today and we are
going to go straight into asking I'm
gonna ask some introductory questions
like I usually do and and then we'll
open up questions to the audience again
if you could we've got the event
listening party text chat if you could
queue up your questions there that would
be great so thank you layman for being
here
terrific happy to be here Brett so so
you talked about meta modernism what
does that mean the modernism is partly a
movement and partly a concept it's in
many ways an attempt to replace and go
beyond the concept of post-modernism
essentially it's a way to embrace the al
use and the insights and the useful
cultural structures of utter and
postmodern and pre-modern Latrell
operating systems to think that we face
crises that have to be addressed by
harnessing energies the capacities the
value markers from all these different
phases of society our solutions need to
upon things that include all the great
stuff about modernity but also go beyond
that in terms of including the things it
thought it left behind that are actually
vital and also the validity of all the
new pluralistic and postmodern critiques
that have come along in the last hundred
so post-modernism is a pretty
controversial
philosophy I guess that's that's arisen
in the last number of years what what's
your general view on post-modernism I
because I come out of the integral
theory background I see it as the social
version of a kind of cognitive
developmental stage people go into
host formal reasoning structures oh I
mean the hallmark of post modernity
would just be that you have a critique
of modernity that you see it as if from
the outside that you even folded its
structures within a larger context of
some kind the general characteristics
that come out of that move along any
what line of intelligence or however we
want to describe the multiplicity nature
of the ways in which these insights can
develop the general hallmarks are a
contextualism activity pluralism an
attentiveness to foreground/background
switches includes things like ecological
sympathies you become aware of the
significance of backgrounds and I think
overall a very strong attunement to the
need to in old externalities if we look
at a a marginalized population group we
say well there's an social externality
that we need to fold back into the main
system that we're using look at negative
consequences of our business practices
on the ecosystem you know those are
externalities we need to fold back in if
we think ok I've been going along using
my mind as if I'm a rational citizen but
I have all these other subconscious and
somatic dimensions of myself they need
to be folded back into the main idea of
who I am so I think this general notion
of unfolding externalities is sort of at
the heart of postmodern movements
I'd like to specify that a lot of what
gets called post modernity probably
doesn't meet my definition of it you
mentioned integral philosophy and what
is so what is that what does that term
mean that's an interesting term it was
used originally by a developmentally
oriented Hindu mystic named Sri
Aurobindo but it describes a general
attempt over the course of history and
much more commonly recently an attempt
to bring all the different perspectives
and dimensions of our being together to
some kind of more functional
superstructure and was for a while in
the mid 20s
entry associated with a transpersonal
psychology movement that was trying to
bring different forms of psychology
together with spiritual practice but it
got a real boost from the writings of
the American philosopher Ken Wilber who
tried to give it a prehensile formal
structure
he'd several different moves in trying
to bring that all together and now
there's a sort of boost Wilber general
sometimes we call the Integrative
metatheory community but in general what
it has in common is affirmation of
several large chunks of types of
perspectives that have to be included in
your personal life and in your view of
society and in your philosophical
picture and if you don't include
something analogous to all these
mentions of existence then you're gonna
end up with an imbalanced view that will
have problems down the line one of the
things that's common in integral theory
is of this notion of the four quadrants
it's a standard it's a will barian way
of describing something more basic or
you have always subjective inter
subjective stomach and objective
dimensions of any moment of existence of
any situation and there's strong
parallels John for baekje and I have
talked about the parallels between that
and his four ways of knowing who end up
finding similar types of descriptive
structures across many different
thinkers wherever those thinkers are
trying to integrate a large number of
perspectives together they end up with
some comparable insight structures and
the total set of all those instance ID
structures is what we call internal in
general and then and then you talk about
non dual non dual theology how does that
what does that mean and how does that
work in dual theology is uh interesting
because sometimes non duality is
considered to be the sort of mystical
pinnacle of some of the great religious
traditions on duality meaning that
there's ultimately a transcendence of
the difference between difference and
non difference that you you and God are
both the same and not the same so to
speak that we use the concept of God
for that or not you in the world are
different and not different when you
look around as they do in the Zen
tradition you find this extremely
provocative paradoxical condition you
can't really I really say that something
is separate and you can't really say
that it's the same and when you
negotiate friction between those two
apparent logical opposites end up with
transcendental experience and insight of
various kinds it's that kind of approach
applied to the notion of the supreme
object entity yourself so the
theological part is extracting this kind
of this dimension of theology from
theological history focusing on this
apex phenomenon we might call divinity
in some contexts but also making sure
that it's deeply angered in what
mystical traditions refer to as non-dual
consciousness which is specifically
transcendental version not
transcendental merely in the sense of
being the opposite of the world of forms
and conditions that's even a thinkable
thing transcendence in the sense of
being beyond the apparent contradiction
between almost in form conditional and
unconditional just like that so just to
clarify I got the impression from from
your talk with John is it fair to say
that your you would classify yourself as
a non theist
in sort of John's way of non-theism is
that I mean it's somewhat fair i I don't
think of myself in those terms I'm very
comfortable with the notion of God but
I'm also not very comfortable with a lot
of people's definitions what that is me
there's a couple different ways to make
sense of what signifier like God points
toward on the one hand in interval
theory there's a very interesting notion
that you can legitimately apply for
second and third person lenses to any
phenomenon you could apply a second
person I've a lens who reality as a
whole and then it's something like a god
who can apply that same kind of lens the
notion that there is kilos like
convergence point that may be needed for
the information that structures reality
to feedback toward itself and that this
applies in our own lives as a moral
orienting force um that's a bit abstract
I think odds are produced
I'm not theistic in the literal
mythological sense but I'm comfortable
being theistic in the sense that odds
are very relevant to human experience
but that they are largely a way of
describing something that we do
something that we produce out of
ourselves a lot of regards so in that
context what would what would how would
you define spirituality well or what do
you mean by spirituality spirituality I
would mean a general set of practices
and results that involve individuals and
combining and harmonizing subjective
subsystems of their being subjective
subsystems I would mean things like mine
embody I would mean left and right brain
I would mean conscious and unconscious I
would mean perception of self and your
perception of other should have interior
your perception of the world things like
that we have a variety a set of ways
that we could analytically construct
functions within ourselves that we are
subjectively sensitive to and we harness
those together right yoga and religio
both imply a kind of harnessing and
combining and we can adequately
harmonize and balance those functions
get results that are a gestalt affecting
more than the sum of those parts we get
as kind of overflow or a surplus
coherent experience it can then feed
back into ourselves and become an
orienting factor whether we think of it
as a higher cell
for hire entity a higher energy can
establish a relationship with this extra
coherence we've produced that starts to
change our lives less meaning and in
many ways give us access to more
sophisticated capacities within our unit
that's all of that is what I would mean
by spirituality so I wonder so so that
was a great way of framing it but I
wonder what if we could concretize it or
maybe practical maybe you can give an
example of of can you give an example of
doing that and what it sort of maybe I
don't know described as you can what it
what it feels like there the
perspectival approach that you're
talking about there is is that um II
many people but in particular group the
Gurdjieff ian's are very interesting
spiritual sect in 20th century they're
very focused on the unification of heart
mind and body it's a very simple one to
get out and a lot we think of the
possibility as integral thinks of it as
of multiple developmental intelligences
in a sort of Howard Gardner kind of way
a heart mind body are kind of the most
basic traditional way of thinking
multiple audiences so if you were
engaged in a complete of practice or a
physical effort but let's talk about it
in terms of a contemplatively
and you are tracking what's going on in
terms of your absence or motor
um proprioception is of your feeling
holidays and in terms of what seems to
be going on in your mental cognition
available to all of those things maybe
you're moving back and forth between
them but your goal is to try to hold all
of them in a relatively equal balance
together in contact with each other a
long enough period of time that they
start to blend on their own and what you
end up with is this additional feeling
that isn't just of those three
subsystems but it's of a generalized
intensity of beingness we might call it
very hard to find the right words to put
on that you have a sense of
your own existence in an intensified
harmonized way that exceeds your normal
immediate experience of who you are now
you have this extra experience we might
call it spirit then you begin to relate
to this experiences you might even have
spontaneous internal way of thinking
about you might say this is my ill self
it might say this is the presence of the
Lord it might say this is a very
interesting energy I hope will flow in
me completely and change my life a
little but you begin to have you build
up through the harmonization of the
subsystems in various ways this on and
on and then you work with this
phenomenon and in terms of say John's
work on dialog he asked me to contribute
to this anthology he's got going a lot
of what I'm trying to do is this idea of
religion and spirituality as a
production into the notion of dialog
because a similar thing happens
interpersonally or if your having the
right kind of conversation it's like you
and the other interlocutor are the
subsystems and if you can get that flow
in that balance between those systems
going adequately will experience an
additional quality something it is as if
thing beyond the two of you starts to
emerge and you can also move into having
a relationship with that emergent
quality a sort of what spiritualizes
that exchange me it's the same
interpersonally roughly speaking as it
is intra personally
John and so you have two voices with
rebecky recordings but but it seems that
you've talked with him a few times that
you've talked with him outside of that
maybe you could tell us how how did how
did you come in contact with John and
and how do you how do you relate your
project with with his project of
awakening from the meeting crisis well
um be a year ago only I saw an
interesting video of a guy trying to use
the cognitive science of flow States to
describe what he thought she practices
like Chi energy um and I really liked a
lot of the things he was saying and I
was Chris about some of the things he
left out and he was in my mind so I
looked him up now he lives kind of down
the road from I tried to set up a
meeting with him when I was in Toronto
and work out but we started to have some
video chats and Chris a contributed and
article to the meta modernism anthology
that I'm the editor of and John and I
started cuz we had a good conversation
we started to try to do it monthly and
after whatever six months or something
like that he asked if we could record
them but we recorded the last two and
that's why I'm mrs. with verve a key and
I think on and I have a lot of personal
emotional sympathy for each other I like
him a lot as a person in terms of his
work this notion of mutuality and flow
and exchange and the an expanded
cognitive architecture of how
spiritually valuable experiences are
produced in individuals and how that
might have social correlates are morally
significant in terms of creating a
healthy and progressive society that's
something his work in my work have a
great my last general question so you I
think you know what you would a deep
interest in shamanism is that is that
it's correct yeah so how would how do
you think we should relate to shamanism
today
Ohman ISM and there's a distinction here
one of the key things in so-called
integral communities is to make what
they call the pre trans distinction you
don't want to confuse what's
preconventional and pre rational with
what's trans conventional and trans
rational so one of the things to look at
with shamanism is what should we leave
behind and what should we aspire to pick
a lot of oops skills that are found at
the beginnings of human culture and
religion we could continue to work with
going forward CLE if we're in a new and
confusing almost cultural wilderness
situation people can't rely on their
specific evolved cultural context as
much as they could before dim part
because all the cultural contexts are
colliding now we are in a similar sense
at the beginning of something II need to
bring forward a sick some ways motive
velop mental capacities need to bring
forward our ability to access
developmental flow States we need to do
this especially in connection with
ecology and the environment and
establishing a new relationship between
anthropology and ecology between people
in nature and we also need to have the
confidence and spiritual clarity that
comes from knowing that we can access
alternative states of consciousness I
think all of that is very important also
I think there's a spring in the notion
of the the primitive shaman not
necessarily soon you might meet today in
the Amazon who's officially described as
a shaman in terms of these primitive um
human sources of religious and spiritual
power and insight and developmental
technology there's something in terms of
how you actually get into these powers
States access to divinity or the sacred
are you bring that back into your life
into the community how you consecrate
things how do we create
how do we consecrate Our Lives how do we
assimilate or metabolize these higher
transcendental experiences in a way
that's compatible with the world it is
deeply in need of ecological and
embodied understanding I think shaman
has a lot to teach us in those regards
so do you see a role for for shamans a
modern-day shaman in Western culture
absolutely I see multiple types of roles
I'd like to specify that but I would
call a shaman the majority of what I
would call shamans are not people who
say they're shamans or are acknowledged
as shamans by others necessarily right
he officially described as something is
best a subset of the general phenomenon
the role of the shaman at different
levels of current society would be
things like hoping people to have um
psychedelic experiences helping people
to have sacred natural experiences which
are also health and healing appearances
shaman would be like many of our best
psychoanalysis and hypnotherapist
somebody who can bring you more deeply
into the experience of your own
unconscious and subconscious reality and
more than that almonds are like in a
very basic sense
I'm buddy who knows how to get into
states where they experience a and
Cendant phenomenology and to bring that
back into life and make life seem
meaningful and worthwhile which also
means thing us the energy to mobilize
out people fulfilling the shamanic role
in some dimension be a seemingly
religious dimension it could be a
seemingly political dimension without
those people it's very hard for us to
ill enough meaning and value to mobilize
on the things we already believe to be
true about the world when a probe into
a little more but I want to get to some
questions from others too we don't have
that many questions queued up guys so
just remember in the in the event
listening party text channel just just
up over over the voice channels here if
you could just queue up your questions
that's that's how we're doing it so I'm
not sure how to pronounce this hurt
would Jack revi how you have a question
yes can you hear me yes very good
so the question as I've quickly written
it there is how can meta modernism as a
philosophical orientation be translated
into concrete politics so you described
this very complex if I'd integral
theoretic way of understanding in the
world I would like to know how it could
be molded somehow into an ideological
position with popular appeal popular
political action seems to require an
ideological formulation in order to be
easily digested and marketed so without
that I don't understand how it can have
popular appeal and if there is no
popular appeal to be achieved with this
kind of meta modernism and very
complexified understanding of the world
which you as you mentioned have
mentioned thus far metabolizes
transcendental phenomenological states
and if still developmental folk states
and so on this can very easily in my
opinion deteriorate into a kind of
esoteric system that's it that is
absolutely incomprehensible to a normal
guy you know so yeah that's that's
that's my question
yeah the player you can understand it
well I'll say a few things and you let
me know if it addresses what your
question was okay um political dimension
of this is extremely significant on the
one hand there are a lot of people in
the meta modernism community who feel
like temporary progressive politics is
the tip of the spear so to speak we need
to be focusing on that it may not be the
complete embodiment of meta modern
principles but it's definitely a
movement towards the minimum
number of systemic upgrades that we have
to perform collectively in order to move
to a more meta modern friendly society
there's a bit of a disagreement about
how much Servat of and traditional
understanding should play a role in that
some people are Arab they believe very
strongly that progressive politics is
associated with meta modernism
however there's this idea that the alyou
systems that are spoken of in modern and
pre-modern society especially
traditional values have to be folded
into that somehow integral perspective
it's important to try to bring left and
right wing polarizations of anything
together in order to stimulate actual uh
need manifestation in the world which
includes politics there what we have is
a strong attunement to the issues and
insights of progressive politics
combined with a need to supplement that
by bringing in some of the basic healthy
conservative values and putting a meta
framework around that so that we're not
so identified with it that we can't
Edgeley adapt and reframe it to
different contexts if it turns out that
it's the packaging and the messaging
that's the problem oh it's a way I think
of of bringing in some conservative
populism combining it with a progressive
agenda and being able to frame or phrase
that in a number of different ways that
art I'm completely identified with the
particular embodiment of those politics
at the moment that's all sort of on the
political front but there's a second
part of that right I would call the
religious analogy to individual
spirituality is it in society you're not
bringing together subjective subsystems
of the individual bringing together
print genres of your culture those our
races those our genders those are
classes and those are also four
methodologies of knowledge a physics a
poetry two terraces Impala ticks all
these kind of thing
so our to build political spirit and
political will
she is crucially important even if you
have the right um
politics even if you know the things
that are going to be involved in Metta
framed upgrade of our current society
still have to mobilize everybody you
still have to develop something like
nation spirit something like political
will in every given zone that you're
trying to get that politics move forward
in the way you get that is by bringing
different types and different genres of
people together causing them to mix and
balance so that that similar kind of
excess quality is produced that can
mobilize them because unless people have
a a shared collective confidence in a
powerful sense of meaning that
transcends them they can see that
expressed in a variety of different
values that they might otherwise
disagree about then it's going to be
very hard for them to mobilize on any
political agenda alright that was a very
comprehensive answer thank you thank you
very much all right thank you and just
to remind her to just queue up your
questions in the in the the event
listening party chat
Tylar he'll have a question Hey yeah
thanks for doing this QA I have you I'm
not sure if you're familiar with me
Gilchrist's work I drove a he's done a
conversation with them and to brain
atmospheres yeah yeah exactly is that I
very much resonate with what you're
saying here and the patterns that I've
been seeing in the world and I'm I have
been seeing this lack of the ability to
to go than mythopoetic route right it
seems very much like we we do have to
engage in this kind of construction and
unveiling of this mythopoetic
language that makes sense of all the
chaos and complication in the world and
so it seems like the right hemispherical
capacity of the shaman to do all of that
deep work and then give language and
narrative like
Clos that the bones of the culture I
think I mean that sounds like like a
vital element and so maybe to bring
together with the point you just made it
would you say then that like the shaman
is in fact a vital element of politics
that there's something to the
coordination of our our governance that
has to do with the myth of polices
absolutely and for good or ill because
not every shaman is benevolent for her
as the villages needs are concerned
right you might even say that someone
like Trump is you know we could
mythologically characterize him as a
dark shaman where he seems to work with
irrational and nonlinear currents
operate outside of the reasonable and
systemic structures that we've set up oh
that is part of what every shaman has to
do to some degree they would go way back
we find this you know there's an odd
parallelism between the chief and the
shaman the chief seems to organize the
more upfront aspects of village life the
shaman has an ability to read and direct
Buehler spirit through aspects of human
psychology that are often irrational and
nonlinear which is where he specializes
those aspects are over the course of
history often the ones that move us the
percentage of our mind that is available
to us to inspect consciously as if it
were coherent um is certainly not the
greater part of our minds know what
percentage it really comprises there's
an enormous wealth of not only
unconscious information and insight in
person and in each group of people so
there's also this awareness we have out
of the 20th century in terms of
complexity and chaos science that vast
setage of the possible patterns thereof
computationally available in reality are
nonlinear patterns they wouldn't make
sense to us even if we inspected we need
to be able to work with those things
even if we can't see how they make sense
then ability shaman works on an ability
operate with nonlinear patterns they of
which are nested in that right brain
hammer and in what we call the
unconscious as to be able to upgrade
those work with them assimilate them
recognize them in people call out to
them if that's what empowers individuals
and groups of individuals in their lives
that's a primary area of concern for our
politics we can't can't fall into the
trap of thinking that what we
consciously recognize ourselves and in
the verbal statements of politicians is
strongly indicative what we really mean
and what's really going to happen
there's this whole other area most of
our understanding on our action that has
to come into play if we want to make any
real change and if a figure can't
demonstrate that they can tap into that
some ways to stand outside of or with
one foot in each of the conscious and
unconscious domains not only very hard
for them to access those energies it's
hard for people for the villagers for
all of us to trust that that person can
perform the miracle so to speak of
substantially upgrading the systems that
we're embedded in fantastic thank you
you mentioned
Trump as a negative modern-day shaman
who do you have an example of someone we
could look to who you would call a
positive modern-day Shem that we could
watch and key into well it would be
different in each different area of life
if we wanted to look just at politics we
find it off a lot of negative examples
but certainly the Bernie Sanders did
pretty well in sort of being a lightning
rod called out to a distributed
energetic interest in many people right
many people have this resonant feeling
about him still also some of the other
people associated with that ticket and
come now Cornel West gets close to it
sometimes one of the problems that we
faced is that very often most
sympathetic intelligence and well
intentioned and well reasoned people the
most difficulty in getting into these
dubious and nonlinear dimensions if you
for someone who doesn't actually care
very much and isn't actually that
rational a person may have an advantage
exploring these domains and exploiting
them someone who's very aware of what
needs to be done is a very cogent person
is very sympathetic in the right ways
that person may have a lot of energy
expenditures and a lot of personal
reluctance to go into the craziness as
necessary in order to tap some of these
archaic and on-demand I think we need to
generate a new spirit of requirement for
progressive political leaders we want
them to be pathetic we want them to be
reasonable but we also want them to be
something more than that with them to be
able to tap into but spiritual and
religious traditions have always tapped
into we want them to call out to its
formative and higher powers even if
those powers are unconscious they are
unreasonable to us on their face
and what about in the spiritual aspect
is there somebody you would point to as
a modern-day shaman
yeah I mean lots of them I just talked I
don't know if you know Jose Ferrer I can
Spanish the wrist of participatory
spirituality I spoke to him in Barcelona
a couple of weeks ago he really is only
theorizing but also trying to work with
an embody a lot of these different
practices that's really well to some
degree John for Vickie is fulfilling a
role like that it's not just being a
scholar and he's not just being a
Buddhist meditation teacher he's also
trying to bring forth embodied
distributed and also non conscious
dimensions of experience to see how they
could change people and maybe change the
society I think we see a lot of these
characters um Ming owed over half out of
academia we see a lot of them coming out
of our half out of traditional spiritual
dimensions of existence a lot of the
great and often controversial brews we
might call them in the 20th century look
at people like rash Nisha Nadi da and
chögyam trungpa and people like that
that there's not only a great wealth of
spiritual knowledge there but there's a
very motive controversial ambiguous
sense that they're trying to navigate a
range of other powers and bring them
forward into the social and of space
Astron has a question that I'm going to
read how does spiral dynamics and
politics play together with the big five
temperaments and the political
difference is that the personality
traits display it's a need question and
it's at the think leading edge of what
we understand at them spiral dynamics as
well as interval theory which borrows a
lot from that and also from jean gebser
Zwarte thinks in terms of these merge
and developmental um eases of cultural
complexity that in fold each other
forward and
one of the problems is that is the case
if there really are these emergent
developmental phases in culture that
parallel the emergent cognitive
developmental phases within individuals
we look at examples we have and we
exaggerate the degree to which the
examples we have represent the general
pattern so you say well yes there's a
development into a normal operational
cognition nationality that is hopefully
attained within the individual and that
might parallel development of modernity
of what spiral dynamics calls the orange
value mean whatever you only see the
version of it that happens in the
history that we happen to in oh you need
a more a very generalized notion what
the basic principles of that level are
in order to see the way in which all the
different permits instincts could fit
together so if you were to look at five
personality traits or if you were to
look at something like of the way
Jonathan Haight breaks down the
different moral instincts you would
expect ultimately is that all of them
would be present at every stage and
every stage would be pathetically more
competent in integrating and combining
all of those different stinks principles
dimensions of our existence it's
whatever we want to call them what we
see is particular way that our history
unfolded allows some of them to
emphasize particular qualities one of
the things is might associate being very
open-minded being very progressive and
very left or something like now it might
be the case that the current version
sting in the world of progressivism
consists of a lot of people who got
there because they were very open things
like blue pattern insights new critiques
of society expanded ranges of empathy
and things like that that doesn't mean
that there isn't a potential full range
of the open
trait every one of the other spiral
dynamic stages because we didn't see
that flourishing at time in principle
yeah the abstract definition of each of
those stages could encompass all of the
different weights thank you
could I has a question which I'm also
gonna read what do you think of the
potential for VR AR and things like
Pokemon for affording motivation for
ecological care and integral animism how
would you advise those interested in
ecological shamanism to develop in the
necessary capacities I think there's a
lot of potential for virtual and
augmented reality to reinvigorate a
shamanic approach to reality if there's
a lot of similarity between now sitting
down and putting the goggles on so to
speak and sitting around the visionary
fire you end up using some sacred tools
to project yourself into alternate
dimensions or modified versions of
experience of this world I have a
different relationship with your body
you're able to engage in different
apparent communicative acts with
different types of beings all of that
kind of magical theater of embody but
trans bodily existence in elms that are
adjacent to normal perception all of
that is shamanic theater and I think
when you reactivate the shamanic
circuitry of our brains we presumably
had Paleolithic lee in order to give
rise to shamanism in the first place
think you're in a very good position to
start looking around on those patterns
from the kind of circuitry that you boot
up those experiences and seeing eater in
a different way seeing your choices in a
different way having a different kind of
relationship to objects as well as
organisms those new forms of
relationship which are also archaic
forms of relationship in an updated
context think those are essential to
people really bodying and assimilating
and take
seriously the ecological needs thanks
hurt I think you had you had another
question yes thank you for letting me
ask it
so in this politics tateo very well
articulated here so far NASA as I've
understood it fits the conservative
temperament into more percent a
progressivism do you think that it is
compatible with techno capitalist
incentive structures so I would add here
that Marshall McLuhan I think you've
read him very thoroughly had this notion
of the medium being the message now I
think it's unquestionable that the
medium of our time for social
communication is social media and the
message very much seems to be furious
anger and political polarization which
has its roots in the technology capital
capitalist incentive structures so how
would you see this meta modern political
politics is it compatible with
technically tallest in incentive
structures in your opinion fundamentally
no I would say it's not compatible I
would say that the combination of the
clue and ask technology that we've used
for the last 150 or 200 years the the
authorial and newspaper and TV one-way
distribution of a consensus reality
system it has a lot of good but also has
come at a great price and then to start
to go beyond it now
and i think everybody who adapts to who
a more complicated social communication
tools such as the internet is available
to tap into an upset was simmering all
the time to the previous let's say
modern liberal on way communication
system that we have and which is still
largely in charge and which has a good
version it has a bad version for the
things about developmental psychology is
there's a healthy and and on how
version of everything right there's a
good and a bad version of archaic
culture the more in a less healthy
version of traditional culture it's the
same with modern culture and which gives
rise ultimately to this modernist techno
capitalism there's a healthy version
that does pretty good and an unhealthy
version it goes astray and leads to
degeneration problem is within that
system and within the incentive
structure that guides that system can't
tell whether it's on course or not
it checks itself it sees that it's still
doing what it always does
so it feels confirmed to keep doing what
it's doing you have to be outside of
that structure to be postmodern or meta
modern in order to reflect on that
structure and see that it has some ways
that it works better in some ways it
avoids worse I think what we see around
the world today is that the techno
capitalist buck incentive structure is
incentivizing a form of modernism you
know what all of those parts thwart each
other that we have so I wish you an
Rights which is a very modern concept
being thwarted by or at least which is a
very modern conservation robe
representation see very modern concept
being forwarded by corporate incentives
which is also a very modern we're in a
situation where the incentive structure
is allowed modern again kind of
deconstruct itself its parts are
thwarting its other parts it's gotten
pathological in a sense don't think you
can get out of that while still obeying
those same incentives you have to
operate from outside of that and in many
ways against that in order to
participate in healing it thank you very
much for answering my question again so
so I'm someone who I'm in my 40s now and
I sort of regret not playing around
parenting with psychedelics back in my
youth but now you know I wouldn't really
know how to go about it how to get it
how to know it was safe you know from
from a safe source how much to take and
so on what what would you advise
somebody in my position who would like
to experiment
with that to key into what people like
you have been talking about oh you
wanted to get into psychedelics your
your best bet is to I to find some
individuals or some communities that are
doing it regularly because they are
going to have access to sources these
substances that are pretty safe
otherwise they would have noticed
already it's toxic and so there you need
to have somebody vet this and verify
this for you to some degree otherwise
it's a kind of crapshoot just you're
gonna grow your own which is also a good
thing to do because a lot of this I mean
it's one thing to take a chemical it's
another thing to ingest plant which is
an organism brings along with the
chemistry all of the story and structure
and even potentially the subjectivity of
that organism hmm um I would and it
depends on how far into it you want to
go like most of my own experiences with
psychedelics were earlier in my life I
went at extremely high doses because I
wanted to have very transformative
experiences and because I'd read all
those books from the 60s people were
doing very high doses because they
thought it wanted it to be
transformative they didn't just want to
have a little a oh maybe you want to
have a little peak because you want to
be cautious or you just want to tip your
toe in so you have to be clear about the
goal that you have they have to find
some source that provide the safety of
what you're taking and you probably need
somebody around you who can anchor the
experience now whether that's a shaman
or whether that's a friend who's done
this a little more than you who you feel
you can emotionally trust it's it's
really it's often important to have
somebody there to run interface between
you and reality when you're in one of
these states also somebody who can give
you the confidence that you can relax
your stress about the situation and let
go and see what's there always gonna
surprise you and
you know it depends very much whether
you want to get totally beyond your mind
or not I experienced originally was that
I felt I needed to take extremely large
doses of things because I had this
imaginary or possibly real sense that my
mind was very strong and I needed to
blow it right open if you don't have
that sense and you don't have that goal
then by all means take a milder dose I
think the most important thing upfront
is to really engage in a relationship
with the substance that the Terence
Mckenna approach which is don't take the
mushroom and sit by yourself in the dark
how to talk to it try to see what it has
for you and we there's a danger of
limiting the experience by imagining
that it's just a a modification of your
own psychology if you can really enter
into this attitude of relationship and
communication and dialogue with the
substance especially if it's an organic
botanical substance and you have a much
greater chance of accessing the types of
experiential channels or common to the
Paleolithic shots excellent thank you
for that the strewn has a follow-up
question is integral theory and spiral
dynamics significant are they
significantly different things I was
using the term interchangeably um one of
them has a lot more the other is very
stripped down Oh Harold dynamics focus
is mostly on uh turn versions of clare
graves insight about mental stages and
there's something called spiral dynamics
integral SDI or wit that blur is the
line integral theory and the let's say
the armada of integrative metatheory z--
it's that notion of development and says
necessarily always happens in all the
different epistemological dimensions of
your existence and it occurs differently
along your different lines of
developments oh if you have that stuff
in mind when you think of spiraled I
know then they're very similar
I think you you might say from the
integral point of view viral dynamics
describes development along the axis of
I'll use and world views in the integral
model that's only one of many different
trajectories along which an analogous
development would occur might have a
very advanced worldview and be very
primitive in terms of your kinesthetic
capacities or your mathematical
capacities or your self sensing
capacities or like that in the integral
model there are all there's a manifold
of different directions in which this
development will take place they're not
even necessarily at a level oh they have
that in spiral dynamics where these are
levels in us not levels of us I think
the the thing that integral brings to it
is a much more expanded realm in which
you're talking about dimensions of
experience you're talking about states
of consciousness talking about these
multiple developmental trajectories or
intelligences cross-referencing all of
that to stage development right thank
you and screw and thanks you for your
your comprehensive answers so so in your
first voices with Verve a key
conversation you were talking to John
about the scale a bit of scalability of
something like the religion that's not a
religion and you made a really
interesting comment that John picked up
on because he picked up on things you
know instantly you know a lot faster he
picked up on things a lot faster than me
or or some of us but so I want to ask
you to break this statement down so you
said we need something whose objective
interpersonal sophistication parallels
parallels the intensity of the shared
mutual experience that we're trying to
get right can you elaborate on on what
that means or break that down and more
early for arms burn that's you know if
we use something like the basic integral
theory mandala which is these four
quadrants of subjective inter subjective
objective and systemic or inter
objective however we want to phrase that
and at the bottom of this bit of four
there's these two different dimensions
of collective
experience and one of them is the inter
subjective aspect what's mutual between
us what are our shared agreements what
kind of shared experience do we have and
if you're doing circling or if you're in
a love relationship or if you're
participating in a sense of nation
spirit and patriotism all these ways in
which people can together to share
feelings even feelings that are seem
transcendental and go beyond the
participants that's a very relevant
aspect of existence it's something we
need to seriously from a practical and
academic point of view in terms of
figuring out the tools and technologies
that produce that experience however
that's not the same as the degree of
sophistication in systems imagine that
you engine that you were a modern person
as a modern person you participated in
society that had a a 'part
presentational democracy or you do
majoritarian vote every four years this
is a pretty classic situation I'll
imagine you're that person and you get
involved in some kind of a unique
practice you have some friends or you're
going to raves or you're going to a
spiritual group you're in drugs you're
circling whatever it is and in this
experience you end up having a feeling
shared with other people of something
higher and more transformative and
deeper more colorful more necessary than
what you previously experienced as your
mutual looks of society you've got this
higher experience and when the vote
comes vote in the same old way and you
get the same old results hmm there's
there's something about the actual
objective sophistication of the
collective intelligence protocols it can
add enhance or undermine where we are
collectively know that there are ways of
Eiling interpersonal intelligence that
are successful even if people don't feel
very good about them whoever's
an episode of dr. house m.d. right that
was an example of a team that got really
good objective results without
necessarily feeling a lot of inter
objective Union the other hand you have
a lot of people who go into inter
subjective communion events come out of
it and not only is nothing really
changed in their life from that
experience because they continue to
participate in the same political and
economic and social and domestic systems
they basically operate exactly the same
as if that experience had not occurred
we know things like a secret ballot
right that's an objective measure to
increase collective intelligence because
we know if other people can see your
vote your brain cannot help but
calculate the social consequences the
risk and reward having people see your
vote that short-circuits your ability to
express your conscience very disturbing
in some ways that all our houses of
parliament all our legislators are done
with this jour terry and exposed vote we
know about voters that they have to have
a sense of privacy or they can't really
bring forth how they feel about that
vote isn't we installed this secret
ballot was because we understood
sabotage is a person's ability to add
their intelligence into the collective
intelligence but sabotage I mean you
could have a great time you could really
feel you're on the same page with
everybody and you'd still get relatively
less intelligent objective outcome of
that collective event if you didn't have
secret ballot and if you did have secret
ballot you'd get an objectively superior
outcome terms of being able to harness
more people's intelligence what we
should do there's one side of this is
occurring with the actual procedures of
how we elicit and combine our
intelligence other side of it is
tinkering with and advancing the
procedures by which we feel ourselves to
be in common with
either one of those can happen without
the other one we have to try to bring
them together but we have to be aware of
the fact that they can happen
independently one doesn't necessarily
give you the other so that's interesting
I was thinking about I think a related
subject the other day which is that by
participating in practices like circling
or we did this ecstatic dance party to
resume last week that it will it can
make you more comfortable showing
yourself to others to sharing integral
you know not being quite as as as shy
and you know as wanting to be hidden
maybe being more willing to show your
true self I'm wondering if if the
proliferation of these type of practices
would would make it less necessary to
have private votes that people would be
more willing to express themselves you
know their truth selves in public or or
this may just be a pipe dream but I
don't know what you think it's
impossible right
like he any one of these dimensions
which complexity meaning advance any one
of them could view the others you could
say that if people felt more confident
had more self-esteem had more
self-awareness were better with people
their tendency to skew and distort their
own expression in front of others would
decrease you could also say that if you
had a better voting system and you could
get better results out of people
regardless how they felt front of each
other each one of these zones has to be
treated quasi independently each one has
to be understood to be something that
can influence the others although
there's a lot of crossover excellent
so-so
hours just flown by I just like to ask
you do you so you are you're you're
involved with the foundation for
integral religion and spirituality and
the beyond interfaith project I was
wondering if you could just tell us a
little bit about that about those um oh
they're beyond interfaith project which
actually have been involved with for a
year or two now since I moved but it was
an attempt to set up in a variety of
different communities way of bringing
people together so that they could get a
collective read on what was going on
spiritually for them interfaith is
usually considered to be between people
of different faith traditions we called
it beyond interfaith because we wanted
to involve people who don't feel like
they're part of a faith tradition they
also wanted it to be a space of
emergence where people were ready to be
surprised by what was coming up for
themselves and others rather than
constrained into language and
anticipations of their faith traditions
foundation vertical religion and
spirituality was set up some years ago
to try to provide an integral
certification or religious officials
it's for example of different faiths
um and that organization was succeeded
for awhile and fell apart and that was
alderman who was the chairman of it
invited me to come in and be the
co-chair we've been trying to set up
events and sponsor things we've had a
particular emphasis on what he and I
both love which is post metaphysical
spirituality so we've been trying to
back and encourage people to write and
content on that subject
get different of things like the
interval review we got a special edition
of bats or into post metaphysical
spirituality it's become a little bit
more of a philosophical Enterprise than
it was a few years ago we're hosting
events and things like that
I'm also involved with Bruce's project
called the integral stage he's been
trying to move away from articles essays
and books and toward podcasts and videos
and things like that and we felt like
the action the real action is the
community real action I'd a specific
author or authority or somebody's
version of a philosophy that we want to
interact with that's important you want
to pick those things up but ill action
is everybody in the committee and what
are they working on and how do they get
to know each other
Bruce started doing a idea of themed
topics it what's an integral approach to
psychedelics which then which to UFOs
what's an integral approach to Satanism
what's an integral approach to Kris and
he and I would often contribute but
pretty soon I was asked to host a number
of series so I've been doing one on
integral and meta modern podcasters of
various kinds I've been doing one on
spiritual transmission talking to
different spiritual teachers and
psychologists on that subject is trying
to get a lot of really good higher-level
conversations going because we feel like
that's where the transformation is
coming for it and from any particular
expert so where can we find these these
conversations these at this podcast oh
well you can look it up on YouTube where
you can look it up on Facebook if you
just look up in Turtles you'll probably
find out of its tentacles somewhere sure
sorry you broke up there if you just if
you just look up entry hookup interval
stage on YouTube or Facebook you'll find
one of its tentacles like you find a
video that has nothing to do with me if
you follow who you follow the leads
you'll find a bunch of my stuff and a
bunch of other great stuff from other
people I think John has the interview on
our future phases of Spirit series as do
I so there's a lot of ones that I host
and there's a lot that I participate in
and there's a lot of other great content
as well oh and we just had one more
question pop-up did you have time for
one that sure go for it yes Garthim go
ahead yes hello um so and how familiar
sorry I have to have a follow-up
question how familiar are you with John
for Becky's project with the religion
that's not a religion I would say I'm
fairly familiar with it but in a kind of
colloquial way that most of my spear
of it is from talking with John other
than from officially involved in any
project or working on it so if you mean
something very specific not sure but I'm
pretty comfortable with John and my
discussions on that subject also with
Jordans passions with John on that topic
okay I think I should be able to still
ask this question so something that I've
been thinking about is the progressive
and the non progressive ways and how
they've been active nowadays so the like
the progressive perspective is that we
need to be moving forward it's it's
literally progressive but then some like
a basically a counter to that is like
well the part of the problem with being
progressive is that you fail to see the
humanity that's have been ever present
throughout history and so something I've
been thinking about is in the religion
that's not a religion how do you I guess
facilitate learning that humanity that
has always been present throughout
history so capturing that the that that
humanity question that I guess a lot of
more traditional people will tend to
argue I think there's there's -
immediately apparent edg's me and the
first one is heading into good
conversations with people who respect a
traditional values and mythopoetic
contents you know for all of his Matic
aspects Jordan Peterson has done a
really good job of trying to be a
champion of traditional and mythological
knowledge structures he's not alone
right Campbell and Jung and those people
were doing that back in the day it's
still going on and if you can listen to
or get into conversation with people who
are trying to bring and updated which is
to say philosophically and
scientifically progressive mindset - an
appreciation of the heuristic of the
nonlinear
nation value of these inherited
knowledge structures and you're in a
pretty good position to start bringing
in the other thing is you have to mix
with people who aren't like you you have
to go to churches you have to deal with
people you have to try to form some kind
of human relationship with people who do
value those things so that you can learn
how to bring them into yourself long as
you continually only speak with and have
lunch with and see people who are of
your type whatever that type is
socioeconomically racially
philosophically and be cut off from the
general mixture of human values that
need to be incorporated into anything
and that includes progressive politics
alright thank you very much I do you
appreciate that well thank you so much
layman this has been fantastic as is
really interesting I could go on forever
asking questions about shamanism but
thank you really appreciate you being
here we'd love to have you back
any time and would love you know
hopefully this community is we've been
growing this community it would love to
have you or your community integrating
to ours and and just wanted to really
thank you for this appreciate that I
like what you're working on and I can
see ways that this these different
communities could integrate and I would
love to come back and do this again
sometime well thank you so much so
everyone this so this will be put up on
YouTube I'll encourage you to go to
youtube and subscribe to our youtube
channel all of our Q&A s go up on on
youtube we may have other events up
there too so again thank you everyone
for being here thank you Tyler for
recording and again Thank You layman for
for joining us and thanks everyone we've
got we've got Andrew Sweeney coming up
on on Monday at 3 p.m. Eastern so I hope
everyone will will join us join us for
that and we're working on booking some
more interesting q and A's for next week
so hope hope everyone will stay with us
and thanks thanks thanks everyone have a
great day