so tomorrow the idea cafe is on conflict
resolution and how conflict resolution
should working game be in whoever shows
up opinion it's not like we're
influenced or anything but today I got
my own part two of my own conflict
resolution story so a year and a half
ago I was stayed in the same apartment
watching the same dog and this is my
community but I don't live here I've
been involved since the beginning I
helped get it created in my own small
way and I just wasn't able to move in
due to financial reasons of not being
able to rent or buy here but I have been
involved with this community for almost
eight years and a year and a half ago I
was dog City and one of the downstairs
neighbors freaked out on me because I
don't live here I didn't know that was a
regular occurrence for this woman um so
I went to kind of apologize right after
I was like oh I made this person mad I
better go in make amends and it
escalated and she said some very mean
spiteful hurtful things and I ended up
in tears for like two days and I had
this whole awaking of this anger in me
was that night or the next night that I
experienced anger towards my kid that I
hadn't experienced before and asked for
help from my community people I was
staying here I was feeling this anger
and I both had at feelings coach at the
time I have this parenting group on
Facebook and I have screen okay and I
was feeling a I was like oh this is the
one place I actually can't even go out
and like go for a walk around cuz I can
my kid can come out in the balcony and
yell at me if she needs to so I went for
a walk woman's pacing him one of the
first neighbors I ran into do you know
anything about anger management she's
like yeah I taught anger management for
20 years so she gave me some techniques
my feelings coach also gave me something
I shouldn't give it them to me right
away it was like everything came back to
me in exactly the right time it's like
it's because if she had and I wouldn't
have went for a walk and that the other
person gave me the information and it
just I don't even know it like awakened
this anger in my body that I'd never
happened before I don't know what to do
with this this is mine is this someone
else's and it's actually how I also
found till Swan is because I was looking
at methods for anger and then I'm to
remember the Vietnamese monk might've
Roberta's name is who has a book on
anger and I started reading that I don't
think I finished it but I could even
started yet it's pretty pretty big with
my reading the way it is right now so it
also was a great precursor or trailer
for the conflict that happens my sister
which because it's my sister was much
more a lot money a lot more emotions
happens like I don't know if I would
have been able to handle what happening
with my sister literally a year ago - oh
my god yep because today is family day
and the thing with my sister happened on
family day honestly honestly oh my god
why
I'll tell the sisters story a whole
other time or not but anyway so I stayed
here the whole thing is that she sleeps
during the day she naps during the day
and my kid is loud and so we we had
they're trying to have conflict
resolution before it didn't work because
the people who mediate the conflict
we're like this is not gonna work
because she just wants you to change and
she's not willing to listen to your side
and I literally did nothing wrong but
like I don't know how to get a
seven-year-old to not be loud there's
two kids who live here and there's tons
and tons of kids who are over here all
the time icky noise and my kid does
dance and prance around she just like I
here for 30 seconds I'm like walk softly
walk softly and so the neighbor today
after there was my daughter and her
friend over there swimming came over to
say that they were being loud and they
woke up from a nap it was like well you
know right now they're gone he could go
nap now and she freaked out on me
about how I don't care and I was like
I'm not having this conversation with
you
he can go through somebody else which is
what happened for six months I was like
not talking to her she needs to go
through someone else she lost the right
to talk to me and now she's back to that
anyway so she was stepping inside their
house she wouldn't leave I'm like you're
trespassers I know you're trespassing
you know I own here like I'm staying in
somebody's house you don't owe me an
our thing yeah anyway so I ended up
pushing her out the door which if anyone
who knows me I am very very nonviolent
even though I do get into fight flight
or freeze I go freeze then I go flight
then I get I get into fight and even
though I asked her to leave a dozen at
times and then I was like all right fine
I'm calling the people who live here
when it who's a lawyer anyway and but
they're an important family event I
don't want to disturb them so I need to
call him one of the other neighbors then
when the other different neighbors came
to sit with me well my adrenaline cooled
down but it's family day it's family day
I don't know the thing didn't happen
like the passive-aggressive thing with
my sister that started it happened on
family day a year ago and I even then
was like this this thing with this woman
was it was thank God it happened because
I it made me feel a part of this
community tonight like there was this
worry that I would get into conflict
with somebody and they got kicked out
that I wasn't like a true member like I
was a second-class citizen member kind
of um also consciously but definitely
subconsciously and after this conflict
it was like no actually I'm just as much
entitled to be here as you are even if
you do own your own your place but so
this is I'm gonna be sitting with this
feeling and I might pay this price
tomorrow because the whole thing like
adrenaline was coursing through my body
and my body adrenaline is poison for me
so I know I'm gonna be I'm obliged awake
right now I tried to have a nap it
didn't work so Karma she couldn't have
no I can't no but I'm on cooking tonight
so I'm gonna go meet my fellow shop soon
they'd post the work which I'm super
grateful for and I hope I have enough
energy to clean this place up tomorrow
but if I don't I guess there's a reason
I saved my spoons no the neighbor took
them all all of them but like what kind
of grown-ass woman can't you need to
leave you need to stop having this
conversation you need to leave you need
to leave now you need to leave now and
like will not leave will it just keeps
stepping forward I mean as a grown woman
maybe I shouldn't be pushing back but I
literally there was nothing else to do
at that point it's like you need to be
out of here this Adrenaline's not good
for my body it is life or death at this
point for me at least it feels like that
it's like which I guess you can't
control her anger but I don't have anger
it was just out of like
Sesa t for this to stop right now I
can't retreat she's reading into the
house
I can't freeze because this is not I
kind of didn't respond and then she just
kept coming at me and then last one is
fight and I don't know if she's gonna
tell the people in the community because
but I will because it's part of how I
process things last time we had this
conflict
I do boards and then they were like well
maybe just take two or three people to
tell so I'm gonna try just kids Steve
but telling talking about it to the same
two or three people that's before but
like it just happens I process with how
it comes up as it comes up and if you
don't want me telling people you're her
freaky bitch maybe don't be a Raging
Bitch maybe you learn to control
yourself but Ken me I don't know she's
in her 70s if she hasn't learned how to
control her anger and she's lived an
intentional community like her whole
life I don't understand this woman it's
like how can you be this angry she
really hates my seven year old clearly
it's like how can be this angry to kid
for not be able to control her feelings
and her like you want me to be able to
like what magic formula do you have to
get my kids to listen cuz I'm open I
don't want to get her to not prance on
the floor like I really don't and I was
trying I was like every 30 seconds we'd
be quiet quiet beat yesterday I had
friends over and she called and said
that they were being loud and I was like
oh yeah seven friends over um the two
older ones my kid and when it's a little
bit younger could go to the playroom but
the little guy can't like he's too young
to supervise so he'll still be here and
he might be screaming because if they
leave he's gonna have he's little
brother it's gonna be sad and it turns
out screeching upsets her les is like
fine they can go down there she was like
you can go and supervise them in the
playroom no no I can't I have guests
over this is not if I'm not your help
I'm not even the help of the people who
I'm babysitting for or dog-sitting for
like we're friends I'm doing them a
favor they're doing me a favor by
letting them stay here is this symbiotic
relationship not her though oh lady and
she just said are do you validate how
could the parasite is such a good movie
no no see the parallel just like a vegan
and she helps out these like poor
at-risk mothers constantly telling oh
she's doing it it's like anytime there's
a poor risk mother in here actually
Livie and the only two people I've known
that she's freaked out about one on one
it isolates to wait so she's alone no
one else is around then freaks out on
you you do know last time this didn't
like I didn't keep it to myself that's
not what I do don't know why but now I
can see it's like the anniversary my
sister it's like the night before I'm
leaving tomorrow which I think what
happened last I do it's like nearness
waited you just couldn't wait 24 hours
you just couldn't like it's already did
interrupted your nap today so if you're
not gonna go for a nap now there's no
point you could text it before the NAP
scene if I could have kept them quiet
nope one of the times I was here we
weren't talking I asked I was like well
when do you want them out of the
apartment I can figure out how to have
them out for an hour or two a day even
though that cost me my spoons it's like
I know we have different app times it's
like okay well I'm trying to accommodate
you here this is not working like you're
not as dumb as you appear are you as
you're pretending to be or something I'm
like this is not I am Who I am I am
brilliant in a lot of areas yeah I'm
absent-minded and don't have energy to
necessarily control my kid constantly
and my kids awesome and she's much more
sympathetic and a kinder person at 7
knows how to deal with her emotions and
her body more than you do because you're
stepping into that room I said she's the
other one who knows how to trigger me
know said to trigger me and keep coming
at me so thanks lady I guess you're
helping me get more patients or for the
one the person who does matter my kid
and there's something here cuz I can't
believe are you freaking kidding me this
same day as my other senators like these
three anchor incidents her last not this
like 2019 summer of 2018 summer then my
sister a year ago today
although the email but it ended it was
like three or four days after this event
but
this it's 11 minute video but the Hutt's
me but it's been great staying here
besides this besides say we don't you
only clean up tomorrow I'm happy to be
on cookie and and hopefully my hands
will work what they are it's also like
how do I explain what my hands won't
work
oh because I had tried playing Sarna
Hubert came and threatened me oh she
wouldn't leave because she consisted
having this conversation right now just
because you're grown up doesn't mean you
got your together just because you
own your own place funny hmm that's what
I learned last time is how much I was
kind of assuming from her because she
has disabilities because she's older
because she's richer she should help her
 together no your body being in pain
and changing can make you more bitter
not kinder and age doesn't necessarily
mean wisdom and money definitely doesn't
mean it's oh yeah I was so so grateful
for the experience I had with her before
and I'm honestly grateful for this one
too why like the day before the conflict
resolution the night before I leave and
a year to the day the thing happened
with my sister when I was out of spoons
I'm taking my daughter to a family day
event Oh universe you just need to be
obvious don't you don't give me the
obvious lesson though just give me the
thing I know is a lesson and I'll figure
it out or thanks little days
all right thanks