[Music]
all right so here we are with Daniel
schmuck Dan Berger good to see you did
good to see you my friend thanks for
having us into your home I look forward
to this conversation thanks for thanks
for coming yeah we're gonna we're gonna
go deep here my friend so I'm just gonna
jump right in a couple things that I've
learned about you from reading about you
and listening to you on other shows is
that you were homeschooled that's true
and at the same time you're a really
bright guy who is very knowledgeable and
articulate I would consider you and I
don't throw this term around but I would
consider you to be someone that's highly
intelligent to the point where you could
be called brilliant and I don't call
everyone brilliant you're a really smart
guy
so why did your parents elect to
home-school you and what impact does
that had on your yeah on your you know a
mental acuity so it was a educational
experiment my parents were interested in
and my dad particularly spent his life
thinking about educational philosophy
and human potential and how do we
actually actualize human potential
better and my mom had shared interests
in different skills and so they they
decided to take it on together and the
experiment was what happens if we give a
kid no curriculum at all no fixed
curriculum so I didn't have English and
social studies in mathematics and but
just expose them to everything possible
facilitate their interests and see what
happens and so that was the experiment
and having gone through the whole
experiment we could do it much better
now there were parts that learned along
the way but the effective parts that I
would say we're a successful experiment
is every kid has profound fascination
with life in their own ways and we
usually do a good job of breaking it and
we also usually do a good job of
training them not to think well so
little kids ask what is that what is
that what is that at first right it's
the first question they're getting the
anatomy of universe down and then why
why why and the depth of why run into
philosophically and physically
need questions that we usually don't
know how to answer and so we give them
we just don't answer them or give them
 answers
what made-up answers yes yeah but or
some less conscious parents who say
because I said so
yeah because it just is or God made it
that way or whatever so when ready to
asks why is the sky blue and most adults
realize they don't actually know
something that is that fundamental to
our experience every day right and all
human experience they either say I don't
know how do you spell cat right like to
move it into the domain of the gnome but
they move it from something that was
fundamental about the nature of universe
to something that wasn't and so if you
really want to explain why the sky is
blue you have to understand that our
upper atmosphere is made of nitrogen and
oxygen and the percentage of it and
nitrogen specifically as n2 and how
molecules work and how light coming from
the Sun works and the speed of light and
diffraction and understanding what
optics is and it like there's a lot of
deep things and then the wait that's why
it is that specific wavelength but why
do I subjectively experience it as blue
so now we're looking at the mind brain
interface right and the relationship
between consciousness and physics and
kids want to know that right they want
to know why is fire hot which again is a
 deep question and they're like
every kid asks these things and since we
don't know we don't facilitate what
they're naturally fascinated in that it
passed me by and we force them to be
interested in stuff that is totally not
interesting and in doing so we don't
teach them the interesting things we
don't teach them the things that are
foundational about life that actually
lead to the ability to understand
everything else and we actually break
their interest in life which is why then
they just want to veg out and watch TV
or you know the the whole welfare person
phenomena who yeah is actually I was
gonna say they become great taxpayers
but see those are broken people that's
the key insight is that everyone is born
fascinated interested and if you
facilitate that then not only are you
helping them learn a tremendous amount
and you're and they're gonna be fussing
about different things some more in the
direction of aesthetics or ethics or
fundamental science or athletics or but
there will be a unique genius
actualization if it's followed and so
that was the experiment and we could go
on about educational philosophy but one
of the key like insights there is that
we have an educational system in the US
right now and in most of the West it was
built in the industrial revolution to
make industrial pots brand it was there
thank you no I love going here I was
hoping I'd hoping we could get into this
so carry on please
and so as we started to look at building
industrial supply chains then we wanted
every assembly line worker before we had
automated that task to basically be
anatomica right they would do the exact
same thing and so anyone who had been
trained into doing that could be
replaceable
they were fungible for anyone else and
any MBA from a good business school was
replaceable for any other MBA any vp of
marketing and so we want to take unique
humans and collapse them into fungible
roles and so then we can just have an
org chart and say I'm looking for three
of these and four of these totally
replaceable in the process of doing that
when you collapse the uniqueness of a
human into a fungible role there's of
course the intrinsic motive to do that
is gone deep competition in comparison
because we're competing on being the
exact same role so we're competing on
the same metrics rather than any
uniqueness like there's no way to
compare Salvador Dali and MC Escher and
DaVinci because how the would you
do that right like there you can't
compare them on the same metrics and if
like if Dali hadn't done what he did
some other artists wouldn't have done
the same thing universe would just have
been less that was the uniqueness of
that being expressing in a totally
 unique way which is why all the
artists for history hadn't done that
thing and so so much of the jealousy and
the comparison competition also comes
from being collapsed to categories and
there were reasons why we did this as we
you know for all of human history until
not that long ago until the beginning of
what we call civilization ten thousand
years ago give or take for eight million
years of hominid history we never had
got more than 150 people and those
hundred and fifty person tribes every
one could be pretty unique and actually
get along well because they knew
everybody else and they could actually
keep track of it and as soon as you want
to go to start having very large numbers
we had to create some homogeneity
between everyone so we started making
them a lot more like termites or ants
which are animals that can do a lot of
them working together but within a class
a worker ant row
they're all fungible right they're all
replaceable for each other so this
system is very much like that in
education is the indoctrination and to
be going from a unique human to a
fungible boughten dude you just
described my hole in a very deeply
intellectual way my whole experience
subjectively with education and it the
whole time you're talking about caste
and this is why I do what I do because
I'm so curious and so fascinated by by
the way things work and what they the
questions of why right and so I was
always seeking truth even as a kid like
how does this work why does it work but
the system that I was put into and
literally physically the desks I was put
into we're like little torture chambers
and and my creativity was actually
discouraged and and was you know almost
forced you know forced to join the
basketball team because I was having
behavioral problems and their solution
was like cool make him conform to
something that makes him even more
insecure and feel like even more of an
outsider being the kid with the long
hair and refusing to wear the right
shoes so I wore my vans and slid around
the court and got made fun of and you
know harassed and picked on and stuff
like that and it's like once I turned
the day turned 18 I quit high school I
was marking it off on my calendar like a
prisoner you know putting notches on the
wall is like marking the calendar talk
tober 29th 1988 and that was the day of
freedom and from that moment on once I
left school then I became obsessed with
learning and so it's so interesting to
look from the standpoint of your
perspective because it wasn't that I
didn't want to learn it's that I didn't
want to learn that way that those topics
those topics and that way yes and so now
it's like you know here I'm 47 and I'm
like I'm like the most curious child
like energy I think there is I mean I
don't know anyone that's as curious is
me about the way things work and it's
such a gift to be able to interview
people yeah and and really learn about
this stuff so so that's so no note how
fortuitous that your parents you know
you were so situated that your parents
got that right you had an opportunity to
take
different paths now is because you
didn't actually identify you you didn't
actually succeed at school in that way
that you were able to actually do
something else
to the degree you succeed at it then
you're trapped by the continuation of
that curve forever so notice the smarter
the kids are smart meaning good at that
particular definition of smart the
earlier we push them in the
hyperspecialization
right we want to get them in AP classes
towards their specialty young and then
the further we push them in
specialization so by the time they do
their dissertation 10 people in the
world know what the they're talking
about so they know so much about such a
narrow area so they're not thinking
about big picture things or thing
interdisciplinary things at all that
means that the smartest people aren't
actually questioning macroeconomics and
questioning culture and questioning
governance questioning the foundational
axioms of how we do academia or science
because they're they're just doing one
tiny little thing so we're training them
to be very sharp cogs in the industrial
way yeah that's true and the only people
are usually left thinking about any big
picture things are people that didn't
have those types of proclivities and
that is that your way of taking things
that could be dangerous and making them
not only not dangerous but very good
tools of the continuation of a
particular system and so because you
didn't actually do that well at it then
you were able to say I don't want
to do something totally different right
well that that it's interesting it
reminds me of something I've talked
about on the show and there was this I
gotta find this freaking it was some
study or evaluation or paper or
something that I came across at one
point and it was talking about
entrepreneurship and how the top 10
people with the highest IQs in the world
all work for someone else and all the
great inventors and the you know
monumental colossal entrepreneurs in the
world dropped out of high school didn't
go to college I mean it's this universal
trend that the smartest people don't
think outside of the box and it's the
theory was that the people that you're
describing that are highly specialized
and that rise to the top of their class
intellectually that they're so smart
that they're able to over calculate the
risks involved in event
of creativity whereas if you have a more
of a visionary creative type that
doesn't fit within that box but also
obviously still has a certain degree of
intellectual prowess that they're smart
enough to have the idea and creative
enough to have the vision but just dumb
enough to not be able to calculate the
risk and be willing to go out and walk
the plank and lose it all for the sake
of so saying dumb enough is one way of
thinking of it another way of thinking
of it has to do with the way they're
trained in relationship to risk aversion
okay okay I like that cuz I I think of
myself as that and I tend to be
self-deprecating so I appreciate you
seeing in an NLP wave seen that word
dumb enough so what is really happening
think about this if the kid who gets a
4.0 one of the keys of getting a 4.0 is
making no mistakes right like that's how
you that's how you write that is that
you need everything right and everything
perfect now everything right means you
learned what had already been figured
out was the Orthodox truth and you were
able to repeat it effectively right and
then at a certain point once you
understand that system completely enough
you can extend it a little bit which you
know in the postdoc level you take the
current whatever the field is an
extended a tiny bit after proving that
you understood it you know perfectly
people who got a lot of praise and a lot
of success and identity around never
making any mistakes and getting
everything perfect are not oriented to
do things that have a very high risk of
failure that's great
so true so when when kids are praised
for getting things right you them
up because a number of things one so
think about this in general all the
praise that kids get is when they do
something that the authority wants them
to do and has already designated as
right and good and true right so whether
it's the teacher the preacher of the
parents they get praised for doing what
someone else wanted them to do they
almost always get punishment for doing
things that made sense to them that they
wanted to do so this is how you
conditioned people to be
well you know cogs within an
authoritarian system where we defer our
own agency our ability to assess the
world in our own agency to somebody that
knows better than us and the teacher the
preacher the parent right they all
represent that and then it becomes the
boss and the you know macroeconomy the
state the etc writ large and so if we
want people that actually can really be
innovative we can't train them that way
we have to train them to self assess and
self initiate and not actually get hits
of praise from getting something right
that others already figured out and when
we do that like oftentimes there's a kid
who becomes a Spelling Bee champion or
math genius because they just happen to
 figure out like how spelling
works or how math works and they got so
much praise for it and they weren't
getting enough unconditional love
otherwise that they were optimizing for
the extrinsic reward associated with the
math of getting the prey is even though
they might actually hate math or be not
terribly interested in that they just
happened to get it if you didn't do that
then you might find math is alright but
they're actually fascinated by art and
so then they can become very good at
something they have no passion for and
it's all based on extrinsic motive that
is damaging intrinsic motive why do you
have kids
I don't have kids like you get great dad
dude I was picturing your kid man
they're gonna be so well developed if
and when you have them I don't I don't I
don't either
and I think partially because I'm like
terrified of not doing a good job of it
because I still feel like I'm doing so
much work on myself but it's it's
interesting to think about a generation
of people close to our age that have an
understanding of things in this way that
can actually assure in the next
generation of human that is allowed to
express their full potential without
being confined into this system and and
most of the people that have the deepest
have have had the deepest exploration
about the nature of reality either
aren't having kids because they see
how much is wrong with the world and
they're applying that creative and
parental energy to trying to solve
problems in the world or they don't feel
secure enough in the world with nuclear
war looming again for the first time in
macroeconomic collapse and climate
change etc to want to bring kids in so
yep so ok so moving on into I mean I
there's so much I mean there's stuff
literally so much to unpack in any one
of these topics but there's so many
things I want to cover with you but the
education thing definitely piqued my
interest just learning that you were
homeschooled but you're a really bright
guy so where's the connection and that's
making sense now what about see I didn't
go to college to me higher education was
moved to Hollywood play in a band deal
drugs done I mean I had it figured out
so I thought then I went to LA CC for
like two weeks I took health and which
you know later I guess came to serve me
if I only made it two weeks and I took
health and classical guitar I was like
oh cool learn how to play rad guitar go
in there like oh we're gonna learn how
to read music I was like no that's math
I'm out but when I look at higher
education now just from what I see in
social media there's this just where we
are culturally is so interesting because
this millennial generation I read
something the other day for example that
they surveyed a bunch of Millennials and
50% of them indicated that they would
prefer communism over capitalism you
know and there's this whole
post-modernism and and Marxist ideas and
all this to me really crazy stuff that
this seemed to have seeped its way into
higher education and you have this
generation of kids that are in this
weird Orwellian 1984 thought police
political correct insanity like what's
the deal with with that right now and do
you know what I'm talking about and yeah
and do you think this has been
perpetuated intentionally or is this
just a natural progression of a plus B
equals C and how things have carried on
alright that's it like quite a few
really deep topics mixed together and
unwound yeah so post-modernism as one
topic in its relationship to higher
education
okay the trend of higher education writ
large and the other issue
beyond post-modernism looking at macro
economy and questioning capitalism and
looking at other macroeconomic systems
and generational dynamics that
millenials are expressing are all
important and they're somewhat tight but
they're also some different dynamics so
in my classic interview style I just
asked six questions under one umbrella
yeah so we'll take a stab at any part of
that to me I'm just you know I'm very
zoomed out and I'm looking at things
that I see like that like we kids don't
understand communism doesn't work how
did we get there you know it's just it's
so bizarre to me in this whole I don't
know the climate of so there's free
speech being crushed unless they people
agree with you like the sensitive
snowflake weird safeSpace whole College
thing okay so the issue as I see it is
actually quite nuanced and complex and
most of the reactionary simplistic takes
on it are part of the problem so let's
explore this nuance all right cool so
let's take em the issue of race okay
which is right at the heart of that
topic we can make it race we can look at
gender we can look at transgender LGBTQ
we can look at any of those dynamics
that are part of the the identity
politics part you're bringing up right
now this is related to post-modernism
and it derives some of its intellectual
basis from post-modernism but it's also
related to some other key things so if
we look at race and we look at black
lives matter or people of color movement
or etc we have not ever properly dealt
with the fact that this country was that
this land that we call this country was
fully inhabited by lots of nations of
people that would completely slaughtered
to make this land right it was we're
gonna we're getting taxation without
representation
in London we don't want to be here
anymore so we're gonna go somewhere else
and hey look there's a whole continent
that's totally free because we have
better military than equipment than they
do so we can kill all those people and
take the whole land there's a real moral
 problem - having your moral
legitimacy as the United States of
America
beautiful Constitution Declaration of
Independence being based on genocide and
we're pretty happy to acknowledge like
after Germany's genocide they're
up right there's a whole cultural thing
but our genocide was not that long
before and it was more people there was
a lot more people wow that's interesting
and it was the genocide of the Native
American people employing the slavery of
the Africans and we mean real
slavery like captured the people by
military force killed lots of them
tortured and killed lots of them
lynching etc and we like we don't want
to really acknowledge that this country
was built with that it was built with a
pretty decent amount of Chinese slavery
a lot of African slavery and one major
genocide alright so then we've got you
know we have to fight a war to finally
get rid of slavery not that long ago
like really not that long ago where
there are old people alive today that
still remember elements of slavery
dynamics right like that's a big deal to
get but then ok so we abolish slavery
without abolishing the mindset that was
associated with it so a lot of people
didn't want to gone so then we've got
Jim Crow and segregation and all that
and then we kind of overturn that kinda
right but slaves actually economically
work really well it's kind of nice to be
able to have people do all the work
and not get paid and be able to
concentrate the profit margins and as
soon as you don't want to do that with
the slaves now people got to take you
know other people have to take the
jobs and who wants to jobs and now
you have to dilute the profit margin to
pay minimum wages so there's a lot of
people that didn't like that right for
legitimate understandable reasons and
they could justify making another group
of people different enough that slavery
was better than their own sacrifice in
that zero sum game dynamic right or near
zero-sum games anyway and then we have
okay so now it's not full segregation
legally but that mindset still there and
the people who are coming out of
segregation have generations of trauma
and no education and no inheritance
right as opposed to people who are
coming from generations of education in
hair
and not the same types of trauma so we
have the ghetto phenomena and what that
means and we we know how epigenetic
trauma works now generationally right we
know how mimetic trauma works and so
then we look at do we still have a
system of systemic injustice yes we
still have a system of systemic
injustice and anyway person who wouldn't
just train to be black recognizes that
the ethics of the pie slice theorem
aren't in place right pie slice theorem
is if it's just there is a cemetry right
between you and I which is all kite the
slice of pie and you get a pic which
side but I don't get a cut and pick
right if I cut and pick there's
something up or you can cut and
I'll pick but anyone who says I wouldn't
want to trade positions with the other
person but they should be fine with it
there's a problem and that's that's the
dynamic here so there is a real response
to unresolved trauma that is still
affecting things now that said the
response is coming from a place that is
largely influenced by trauma rather than
clear strategy and trauma usually
perpetuates itself and so if a bunch of
people with black lives matter is saying
hey there are real issues where where
there are a lot of black people who are
getting killed by police for reasons
that are totally unfounded and then not
getting prosecuted in the same way not
getting attention in the same way like
that's a real deal and how does anyone
go about trying to go to school and feel
safe when you can be going to school
doing all the right things and and have
that kind of dynamic occur all right so
then they go shut down a freeway out of
like upset and anger whatever and then
while that's trying to get attention for
something that is real it is
strategically problematic right because
then you have the alt-right largely
arising as a response to those type of
dynamics saying look our way of life
that we care about is being threatened
and look these people are rioting and
causing chaos and whatever they're
validating our ideas about them not
being strategic good thinkers etc and so
and because of a postmodern dynamic that
in general the progressive left has it
makes it harder for them to cohere
because they want to validate everyone's
perspective because they're suffering
they're still in response
to the pain of imperialism or one in
perspective is imposed on everyone so
part of the response is to say hey
everybody actually has a perspective and
the perspective that you're saying is
just true because it's science or
whatever a lot of our social science
that arose at the same time as our
physical science was actually just
imperialism and so post-modernism
emerged amongst I'm radically
simplifying here post-modernism emerged
with a partial meaningful truth which
was to say this is just objectively true
this is science we did the right
epistemology subjectively true and it's
true for everybody doesn't acknowledge
that especially as we get into the
social sciences there's a ton of
bias right and so we you know we went
looking for monogamy and pair-bonding in
the animal kingdom because of Victorian
age ideas that actually made us do
zoology badly right and so we'd like we
see that kind of thing everywhere so
post Martin said actually different
perspectives on reality running
different experiments end up yielding
different kind of insights and we still
know that are you healthiest on a vegan
diet or a paleo diet I can show you just
as much research on both of
those that look at different metrics
right and so whether I'm looking at pH
or I'm looking at insulin levels or I'm
looking at telomere levels like I'll get
different answers and also which
populations but when I try and reduce
health to some finite set of metrics and
there's a million metrics that
we can't calculate I can get a lot of
partial answers that seem like the whole
answer and seem like complete science
because I'm studying a very complex
system in a very simplistic way so bias
is very easy when you trying to set a
complex system in a simple way because
your metrics look really clear
that they just don't happen to be all
the metrics that matter and so
post-modernism acknowledged that and
said hey all the perspectives actually
have to be factored now there was a kind
of virulent version of that that didn't
acknowledge there all the perspectives
should be acknowledged but they're not
all going to be equally true some of
them can have distortion in them so we
need to be able to bet for distortion
and all the perspectives are going to be
less different in simpler systems so in
chemistry the epistemology is more
straightforward than it is in social
sciences and some of the virulent
version of
post-modernism to start rejecting truth
writ large right like any claim of truth
as a clip is an imperialist claim and
nobody can claim truth and all
perspectives are equally true and but we
can see that that was a virulent version
of an appropriate response or a to Abram
period is 'm capitalism along with
fucking's like you know colonialism like
all kind of Co emerged and trying to
untangle those was like part of the goal
there so if you actually read Foucault
or dare at all
there's meaningful good thinking in
there most of what you see happening
that tries to intellectually reify
itself with those people is not actually
being done very well but that's because
trauma is influencing a lot of it but
then on the other side we've never
actually taken responsibility to deal
with that that trauma was created so
when I say it's nuanced it is and it's a
really big deal because if we look at
the all the alt-right and the control
left they have moved to a level of
polarization and radicalization that is
very hard to imagine how that reconciles
and with a tremendous amount of fear on
both sides and trauma on both sides and
associated with that the desire for
secession from the nation the desire for
whatever that leads to war in a world
where military technology assets that we
don't get to make it through wars the
way we did in the past and so the idea
hey look we fought a war with the
British to come get this area and it
worked well yeah we had muskets
right and as the military technology
goes up it becomes more and more
problematic and when we get to the level
where you have decentralized exponential
technology which is where we're at right
now we don't get to make it through Wars
anymore and humanity has always had
different dynamics that led us to
polarization and radicalization and then
war and we have to actually learn how to
 deal with that and part of it is
we have to be able to understand how to
take multiple perspectives
they have partial truth that they're not
successful parts you know find the
successful parts and figure out how to
do dialectic how to do synthesis and be
able to find a solution that doesn't
just solve for some things well
journalizing harm to something else it's
effective but actually sold for the
whole set okay so that's just the
post-modernism snowflake part that makes
perfect sense because to me looking from
the outside I'm like I I see the trauma
and I see that these young people that
are wrapped up in that ideology I see
them as victims you know and but I
didn't think about the past I'm just
like your victims of a perspective that
you've adopted and I guess because there
was trauma and I'm just like god it
feels so bad that this kid thinks the
communism works it's just like okay so
now I want to address this part yeah
when in the depression there were people
openly on the streets discussing
socialism Marxism lazy fair capitalism
because the system was failed right you
in a failed state people are open to
like look at any possibility we are very
near a failed state and we're actually
very near a failed civilization globally
so when you look at climate change and
the fact that we can't get it
right right like we can't get it right
we we keep driving ourselves towards the
point of self induced catastrophe and
possibly extinction and despite the fact
that the Club of Rome identified this
over shooting limits in this 60s right
and and limits of growth in the world
through model the spoon despite the fact
that it's been called that we're
following the model we keep progressing
on the model right the
Paris Accord was not enough for us to
make it we would have everything would
have been if we did the Paris
Accord and we couldn't even do that
right and so and that's driven mostly by
our current structure of capitalism
because if I over fished the ocean right
if I use a mile long drift net and I
take all these fish out of the
ocean that's more money for my fishing
company this quarter and leaving them in
the ocean is worth nothing to me
economically now it's worth something in
the future but the other guy is going to
fish them out if I don't fish them out
so it's not like I can leave them there
for the future so it is a competitive
race for near-term wins
mortgaging the future so we make
thirteen species a day extinct on
average
we've fished out 90% of the large fish
species from the ocean on a 3/4 water
planet that took 3 billion years to get
all that life and in a hundred
years of industrialized fishing we
fished out 90% of the large fish species
extincted many of them 80% of the
old-growth trees gone that's capitalism
working really great not working really
great right we're on the verge of a very
realistic AI apocalypse where we should
be developing the area very slowly we
should be very intelligently looking at
what it because unlike you know when
when Edison's working on a light bulb
and light bulb fails it just doesn't
work maybe it blows up no big deal you
do it inside of a container you work on
AI and it fails and sometimes it doesn't
work and sometimes it kills everything
because it is an autopoietic tech it is
a self-organizing self authoring tech
light bulb isn't it works or it doesn't
work but it's built on the outside but
but biotech right where you make a new
 life-form and now it replicates
and it does its own mutation that is a
self-replicating tech where if you get
it wrong you don't get a stop it
and nuclear wasn't right nuclear is a
reaction and then it stops it's really
bad but nanotech biotech and AI are
autopoietic self-replicating tech that
might be depending upon how we do them
in commensurate with biological life as
we understand it with faster feedback
loops than us now we should develop that
as slow as possible because the
upsides are awesome but we should do it
in highly controlled safe to fail
environments but all of the fiscal
incentive is getting to market first
that's a capitalist incentive who gets
to market first where we're in a race
towards the cliff and the arms race is
the same thing why do we have when Carl
Sagan showed us in the early 80s that it
only took four 100-megaton bombs to kill
all life on Earth with a nuclear winter
why do we have 600 times that many like
why the do you keep making nukes
after you have enough to kill everything
down to viruses because if you have a
for-profit military-industrial complex
where you have a source of supply where
you need to manufacture more demand to
keep your supply going it's not like
supply and demand is a real thing
there's an initial demand you create a
supply but now you you have supply and
you manufacture artificial demand which
is why we buy all kinds of that
doesn't make us happy that we think will
make us happy because marketing creates
artificial bland
so capitalism is actually broken
existentially so there are people who
learned that okay
Marxism had some nice ideas and there
were some good ideas it didn't actually
end up working out that well no of
course if we really go study if we never
implemented Marxism just like we've
never implemented lazy faire capitalism
we've implemented weird models of
capitalism and by the time the USSR came
around it was nothing like Marxism for a
bunch of reasons but Marxism doesn't
actually work at scale it it works that
kind of model works at a hundred and
fifty person tribal model it doesn't
extend beyond it capitalism did seem to
work but of the cost of radical
externality that externality when you
get to this many people in this much
tech actually self implodes so what has
worked up to this point worked worked
epic at but you when we say it worked up
to this point we have been utilizing
unknowable resources moving towards the
point of criticality the whole time and
it has required war right and it has led
to diseases we didn't have before
because of environmental devastation and
etc and we have a world war today almost
everyone has low-grade mental illness
like Luba quit Asst addiction ubiquitous
low-grade anxiety existential angst
fairly decent low-grade depression right
these are not natural to the human
condition tribal people don't have this
 in the same way so we say it works
define work this is optimizing for some
metrics at the expense of others in a
complex system so the fact that there
are people questioning is there a
 better system than this because
we're not fixing climate change in the
system where it's still more profitable
to do the up thing with a
perverse incentive is ubiquitous in
health care why do we do biohacking
stuff like why doesn't health care
prevent diseases because there's no
 money in preventing diseases
there's a lot of money in treating them
there's no there's not that much in
curing them but there's a lot in
treating them forever so what is gonna
get researched when the money goes in
has to have ROI back out of the
capitalist system so the fact that
people are recognizing that in
questioning is a very good thing now the
fact they try to find other things that
didn't work as the answer is just a
basic basically hopelessness and a lack
of knowing how to go about solving
something so hard so one of the
core foe
of my life is what is the macroeconomy
of the future what are the governance
system sort of the civilization systems
they can allow us to actually human
together well without needing to go to
war and unknowable use of resource and
producing a bit with this mental and
physical illness that's unnecessary and
etc and it's not any system that has
ever happened so we can get into that if
you want to or we can go to other
directions but also most of the young
people who say communism what they're
really saying is Denmark looks better
than here
like that's a social kind of dynamic
where better access to medicine don't
have a lot of homeless people masters to
PhD is average level of education
largely secular because of that like the
Nordic countries just look better they
are they're just better there's
more socialized dynamics now are they
better on every metric no if you look
here we have a tremendous amount of
innovation here because of certain types
of freedoms and a tremendous amount of
damage and our bell curve is very spread
out and so for everyone who's not
winning at the system to say nobody is
losing as bad in Denmark as they are
here and there's a lot less of them and
they're not ruining the environment as
fast they're actually figuring their
trash problem out maybe let's actually
think about this and I'm actually not
proposing Denmark as a solution I am
saying there are a lot of things that
are actually evidentially better on
meaningful metrics and things that are
adequate to the scope of what do we do
with almost 8 billion people and
distributed exponential technology don't
yet exist oh my god
that's amazing that is a lot to unpack
and it's funny because I've never
actually talked about any of these
issues on the show it's always very much
about meditation or mindfulness
spirituality or just full-on health
stuff but I know that you have a systems
approach so kind of zooming out and
looking at like whoa what's even beyond
hey am i optimizing my sleep or take you
know how does my blood work look this
year I mean this is stuff that goes way
above and beyond that and where we
from here which is interesting I just
think it you know I earned the question
because I I knew that you'd be someone
that could answer it in a way that
encouraged more questioning but it's
such an interesting time to be alive
that's like sometimes it's hard for me
not to deviate from my format and the
basic topics and get way off into this
stuff because I'm watching things happen
that have never happened before as we
all are right it's just such a trippy
time on earth and there's so many
positive things going on and I feel that
there's this massive awakening thanks to
people like you and shows like this and
just the proliferation of information
through social media through the
internet but at the same time it's so
dark and we are on this you know as you
said about to go over the waterfall I
mean we are at the precipice of absolute
destruction while at the same time
there's this light that's really I think
we're in this sort of spiritual
evolution at the same time it's just so
interesting so let's just for a minute
yeah on the are we talking about
biohacking meditation spirituality
individual optimization are we talking
about interpersonal collective optimist
well nor that's what I'm saying normally
on the show it's more just subjective
each person optimizing and then that
rippling out into the community at large
right but we've sort of like zoomed out
and are coming back in from the other
direction so there's a stomach model
here's what we have to think about them
together if we work on increasing our
cognitive capacity and our energy and
etc so that we can do more of what's
killing the world then we go extinct
faster because of it all right amazing
ourselves to like integrate into a
system that is not working and that's
most of it right like that's interesting
we watched as we started you know neuro
hacker we were looking at the amount of
smart drug sales going up and smart
drugs that increased hyper competing
increased motivation and drive
well decreasing empathy decreasing
creativity and making hyper competing
Psychopaths like modafinil that's like
adderall adder okay but modafinil can do
things in that direction and that's
different I just came to I don't do
adderall but i do min to have an
elephant
and when I'm on modafinil I don't think
I've become a bad person but I
definitely am NOT interested in
interfacing with other humans at all I'm
like very task-oriented and locked into
whatever I'm doing which has its place
but it's definitely not like hey man I
should go out and give some hugs right
now like get out of my way don't
interrupt me I'm focused so how did you
this is the key thing is like let's
learn how to win at the game that is
killing the world right no let's not do
that right let's learn how to have the
capacity to create a new game and that's
I mean like that's really the thing that
I want to emphasize here and even the
people who are winning at the current
game are not living happy meaningful
lives for the most part when we look at
hyper normal stimuli right why it's so
easy to get addicted to sugar because in
an evolutionary environment we just
didn't have sugar right we had a little
bit of fruit and the fruit was not
hybridized so so there was a major
involved opening reaction to get it
because the caloric density offered
increased ability to survive a famine
now we have so much sugar but we
still the same dopamine response that
that's a dangerous phenomenon I burn
almost simulating and then we find that
of course social media is a hyper normal
stimuli cuz everybody's pictures are
prettier than they actually are
and everybody's liking you in you're
liking them and you don't have to face
like real difficulties of interaction
and it can be a huge number of people in
a short amount of time
and porn is a hyper normal stimuli and
there's a whole generation of kids
becoming adults who don't know how to
relate to women who don't know how to
have sex properly who have issues
erectile and etc because they have
oversaturated a certain kind of stimuli
and normal stimuli are actually they're
insensitive to it right and video games
are hyper normal sense so we've had a
world that's just all hyper normals and
I which is addiction which always
corresponds with less fulfillment right
because it's desensitizing you to
actually getting pleasure from life and
so you need the hyper normal stimuli to
get the hit and so you need the whatever
it is however many likes that your thing
gets her and the hyper normal stimuli
proliferate sin the presence of hypo
normal stimuli which is we don't live in
a tribe which is our
evolutionary environment where we
actually have real
authentic interactions with lots of
humans regularly and to imagine in a
tribe where you're dancing around the
campfire regularly most people find that
when they go camping with friends they
aren't checking their phone as much
right after the first day or two in the
addiction kind of chills and of the
presence of more authentic fulfillment
there is less emptiness pushing some hip
and so the society we've optimized for
is a hyper hypo normal stimuli to
everything meaningful we're we're
everybody's lonely and has some
sense of meaninglessness and a lot of
pressure you know together and so then
in that in that place addiction is going
to run rampant and most people have 30
to 50 different addictive behaviors
meaning compulsive they know isn't
good for them they keep doing totally
that's really interesting because in the
model of the 12 steps which has been
them the most effective single thing in
removing deadly addictions from my life
the model there is what I think people
from the outside of that model think is
that oh you go there and you quit
drinking or you go there and you quit
sex or overeating or whatever it is you
go to some 12-step group and that that's
what your problem is but that you get
there as subjectively one gets there and
you go oh that was actually the
symptom right so I'm addicted to heroin
well why because of everything you just
described so is this just a set of
principles then going to just take that
addiction away know what it's going to
do is it's going to give me a framework
to live by spiritual principles
ineffable laws right that I can apply to
my life to become more fulfilled and
then the need for that thing that I was
using goes away and it's the straight I
mean I've experienced this again and
again and again using that model of
getting the human connection and a
spiritual connection and like living by
those principles that kind of keep your
mind and emotions in check then that
problem is removed and when the the
principles represent a pretty small
percent and human
represents a pretty large person like
the group dynamic and the group support
I guess that's not tribe we're missing
right you walk into a room and there's
25 people in there that you might not
know but they you understand one another
on a deep level because you've both
suffered in the same way think about it
how many people get the blue book read
on their own apply the principles and
quit their addiction no nobody that's
now that's funny whether they join that
group or they be joining the Christian
group where they join whatever
it's mostly the fact that we are
actually social primates right involved
in a travel environment and so when in
the 12-step thing what's happening is
the main thing happening in those rooms
is you have people having authentic
sharing about things they don't normally
get to share about so they feel seen
they see other people in there's real
intimacy right and most the time again
the world praised us for certain very
narrow things and we're optimizing for a
lie all the time
now just because this is adjacent to a
topic I want to discuss this is one of
the things that is most gruesome about
social media and I'll say most gruesome
about the topic of personal branding and
I'm using the word gruesome you know
acknowledging is probably I struggle
with this a lot so I'm looking forward
to what you have to say when someone
creates a brand as a business but even
if not they're just social media and
there's a persona right but let's take
the brand as a very clear example
they're now a life coach there are yoga
teacher they're an Instagram model but
whatever the it is right which has
become radically easier there used to be
a few people too that would based on the
media tech now everybody gets it to some
degree of this then what happens is I
have a feed background an analytics
mechanism of how much people like my
persona which is how many likes the
thing gets and how many clicks and
impressions and purchases whatever you
know thing and so I'm going to now split
test optimize my persona based on what
people are responding to and they're
gonna respond the hyper normal stimuli
and so the brand is going to get based
on the financial driver based on the
analytics is going to evolve in the
direction of
it's maximum engagement it's gonna get
further and further from who I actually
am there will be whole areas of who I am
that I definitely don't share because
they will actually be anti-correlated to
what gets the like it and the more
people are liking that thing now that I
feel different than the more depressed I
feel right the more addictive desire I
have in that depression let's go ready
hit right and put out another
thing that's gonna get a likes and the
more I feel like a fraud and a phony and
that if anyone really saw me they
wouldn't love me and I'm really
unlovable and etc right so in the
12-step room the opposite of that's
happening right someone is actually
saying I'm a up I just did
all this dumb me like I get it me
too
yeah whoa a real human interaction just
occurred yeah and which is rare yeah
which is really rare and this starts to
be the basis it's not sufficient right
but it starts to be the basis of a human
life that doesn't drive addiction as a
way to deal with the emptiness right
remove the emptiness and then the need
to run from it goes away it's
interesting though as you were talking
about the social media persona and the
profile because I've owned a company for
nine years and it's it's a company and
has its own identity and then myself and
my partner were the drivers or the face
of that company at a certain point but
then we sort of phased out as we've gone
in our own separate career paths and
things and mind's gone away from fashion
so I I really enjoy the process of
building a brand and a personality and
you know coming up with your core values
in the mission and like it's a thing
it's a living entity which has been
amazing but I really struggled when I
started the podcast and decided to get
out of you know having this identity as
a fashion stylist and a musician and all
the things that I was so identified with
before that I don't just ran their
course or weren't my true hearts passion
and so I decided to do this podcast and
make this brand called Luke story you
know I have this thing the life stylist
and you know I really had a hard time
with launching it there's about two
years ago because I didn't know how real
I wanted to be or that I would have the
courage to be and how forth coming and
just transparent and authentic I wanted
to be about my past and my struggles
with addiction and just current
struggles and everything and
so I I kind of paused for a moment
before I put anything out until I really
was sure that I was willing to accept a
possible rejection or other consequences
of just being me and I've done this
social experiment now for about a year
and a half where I've just pushed my my
own boundaries of transparency and
authenticity just to see what would
happen if I am in fact disliked or
rejected or abandoned or ostracized by
the world at large or what we call a
following or a fan base or listeners or
whatever and it's been so Buzard I've
been talking about this a lot it's the
more goofy and real and just true I can
be like treating social media and my
outward facing persona and brand like
I'm in a 12-step meeting and just like
hey this is the I'm going through
it's a certain degree of you know
prudence I guess you know I don't you
don't want to be lose your tact you know
what I mean but I'm finding this
spiritual explosion of growth and just
allowing myself to finally be seen and
to really accept myself and love myself
and what's so weird about it and this is
just this cosmic joke that I'm just
constantly giggling that is that I
actually get more approval from showing
these aspects of myself that I've always
hidden because I was embarrassed about
or you know my insecurities my struggles
it's like actually people liked me more
for the things that I've been afraid for
them to see in my whole entire life it's
like this strange paradox which on the
other side of it I've lived that that
will decide you were describing is like
oh I'm going to present things in a
certain way so that I'm like I'm sure
that's there to some degree but I've
kind of flipped that on its head and
just like alright how myself can I be
and what point at which do people go
alright you're too much we're abandoning
you we actually don't like you what does
that sort of you know primal egoic fear
and I'm just having such a great time
like using social media actually as a
tool to make myself uncomfortably
vulnerable yeah and then to find that it
was a boogeyman
it's
like a phantom fear who gives a if
they like you or not it's like if you
have that self-worth which I'm really
starting to cultivate more actively than
I don't know even the response doesn't
matter but it's fascinating when the
response is positive two things that I
would think like oh god now people are
really gonna think I'm an idiot or
whatever you know just letting that be
seen on a on a macro more public level
and then it's give me the ability to do
that more as you mentioned the word
intimacy you know just my friends but
okay I just want to be real I think it's
one of my goals in life is to you know
to some day pass on and if anyone could
say anything just be like at least he
wasn't phony yeah you know it's
like just to be authentic and real
despite whatever false one might have so
so in the world where we have Ubiquiti
loneliness and liquidus depression and
without talking about it everybody knows
that there is a longing for authenticity
right and a longing for intimacy and so
people will respond to that and so
that's awesome right and I love that
you're having that experience with
people and sharing that experience of
people and anyone who wants to share
themselves where there will be a
personal brand that's the only way to go
it doesn't make their life sock and
actually propagate in the world now
there will still be times where there is
something that is less authentic that
sells better and this is where you have
to say okay choosing between two masters
where I don't really write it's a tricky
one sometimes but it's one to just have
continuous awareness of and vigilance of
so so at a certain point when I guess
you hit a threshold perhaps where you
really have to start looking at things
from scalability and from having a brand
that's sustainable are you saying that
at a certain point you are faced with
the decision on editing the level of
authenticity in order to our analytics
say this particular market will like
this part of your message but not this
part if you gear it like this your
scales
right right and understand this
particular hypo normal hyper normal
stimuli will get a lot of people to
respond because addiction actually sells
right so now come back to capitalism for
a minute again in the problem of it yeah
the more addicted people are the better
capitalism works GDP goes up with more
addiction right because this is why
there are not salad bars that have the
scale of McDonald's is because if we
make that is addictive as
because we just exploit the hyper normal
stimuli button people will buy it and
have to keep buying it and we do that
with cigarettes we do it and you know a
social media this is like you know when
Tristan Harris left Google and started
talking about this and people started
waking up to social media Facebook you
know or platforms of any kind Google
they get paid by how much time I how
many eyeballs been how much time on site
because the marketers are you know the
advertisers are gonna pay for that so
the goal is keep you have as many people
spend as much time on site as possible
now what's actually good for you in your
life is to get the off of the
screen and go interact with people right
right but since we're gonna get paid
more by more time on site then we're
gonna figure out the most addictive
things to do with the newsfeed that will
keep you clicking and you know paying
attention right as much as possible and
then justify why it's a good thing
because we have to have to do that right
and so then if you look at keep just you
just described a rift in so many of my
relationships you know the woman classic
like what do you oh you have to be on
Instagram like all day I'm like hey this
is my work like that's always my excuse
part of my job and you know it's a it's
an interesting thing because the studies
keep rolling out of the more time people
spend on screens the more depressed they
are and for a gazillion reasons right
right is there for the most part there
isn't any real intimacy authenticity etc
and those interactions if so it's the
tiniest fragment of the total time spent
and even to the degree there is the real
kinesthetic feedback of intimacy with
another person is not happening it
doesn't mean there aren't good sides of
course the ability to have people
with people in other parts of the world
and be able to have messages that are
valuable be shared has value those will
be the parts that we solely focus on if
we have a profit stream associated with
it because we need to justify that right
so this is where it becomes important to
really look at what is meaningful now
come back for a moment to the individual
optimization right biohacking individual
concision we're interested in people
optimizing as individuals so that they
have more capacity to actually do things
that are meaningful because when people
look at climate change and they look at
species extinction and they look at
refugee issues and etc they're like
I don't know what to do with that go
back on Facebook let's go back to work
list but fit and again back to education
they're waiting for somebody to tell
them what to do and do a good job at it
as opposed to be able to self assess in
a very complex scenario what might
actually be effective because if anybody
knew it'd be happening right to
self assess what needs to be done and
then to actually start to initiate and
and do that and self author so
individual optimization for that purpose
is meaningful but it's interesting how
the pursuit of happiness is core to the
mission statement of our country right
and the pursuit of happiness is a is an
oxymoron it's a misnomer because when
one is pursuing happiness they will
definitely not be happy yeah you're
inherently dissatisfied if you're
seeking yeah they're affirming their
emptiness lack of happiness and they're
in a fundamentally narcissistic pursuit
and happiness occurs when you let the
narcissism go and actually connect
manfully to the world right and
happiness is mostly this direction not
this direction right mostly you know
yeah and that also that also impacts
another piece of the of addiction
recovery is once one has enough
stability I mean kind of the whole point
of this doing go help the next person
that comes along that is struggling in
ways in which you have and then that's
that's where the magic happens right
that's when the lights turn on when you
make a difference right yeah and it's
not just because now you're affirming
the principles to yourself until you
want to live them it's that but it's
also because now your life actually has
a sense of meaning exactly where it
doesn't need a hit from something else
as much yeah exactly
yeah and I think yeah I figured that out
pretty early on into my recovery which
was almost 21 years ago like the first
time I was even just together enough to
have a car and give some kid a ride you
know and just be of service and that was
like God I was experiencing the helpers
high and then even know it and now to
have the ability to do that on a on a
more broad scale of having a podcast and
making these videos and talking to
people like you and and and getting
feedback although it's not you know a
true connection but like a direct
message or a Facebook message like oh my
god I've struggled with X Y & Z and I've
been listening to your shadow and now
I'm getting over it I mean it's like
well okay my life has meaning and
purpose finally and not to say that
being a plumber or working construction
or working at a gas station or whatever
wouldn't as well because you know
there's people needed in all of these
different areas but to do the thing that
I really love to do it's been so
fulfilling and it directly helps people
on a on a really deep level so god man
that's funny I was just gonna like touch
on like just sprinkle on a couple of
things that we went into and yeah I have
a feeling weird up I'm gonna have to be
coming down a lot of fuel and if you'll
have me because there's many
conversations that need to need to
happen but I definitely want to get into
you know neuro hacker collective what
you guys are doing qualia just getting
now that we sort of created a framework
and a reason that someone would want to
optimize themselves as other than just
like coal now I can get more stuff for
myself and be happier for myself but to
actually you know be a piece of biology
and consciousness that can go out into
the world and have some discernment in
terms of what I want to put my energy
into or not so how did neuro hacker
collective come to be and what are you
guys all about for those that are
unfamiliar yeah so there's a few
founders and they all had interesting
different stories that kind of came
together all I'll share mine here's so I
was running a think-tank that was
working on the types of issues were
talking about social issues how do we
actually have civilization self organize
well and so one of the things we know
that's pretty easy
you know this is that all the problems
we want to solve our problems that are
caused by human action whether we're
looking at species extinction or climate
change or female genital mutilation or
war like this or human behavior mod
topics right and so how do we get how do
we support humans to behave in ways that
are good for themselves and good for the
whole simultaneously without directly or
indirectly custom harm so then it's the
question is what are all the things that
influence in behavior obviously we
talked about economics if a particular
action is incentive it's pretty hard to
prevent it right so how do we create an
economic system where the whale is not
worth more dead than it is live if we
don't want to have any whales that's
where topic right how do we create you
know social systems and tech influences
our behavior our environment influence
our behavior our psychology our
worldview our definition of what is
fundamentally meaningful does but our
biology also influences our behavior and
everybody who has ever had a you know a
pretty significant sickness or even just
have their hormones out of balance or a
hangover knows that your physiology can
go into a state that affects your
psychology and your cognitive capacity
and disposition significantly where if
your neurotransmitters are off or your
hormones are off or etc in a particular
way accessing gratitude or happiness or
hope it might be very very hard and
staying out of anger frustration etc
might be very hard and that's gonna
affect behavioral not only their own
suffering but also behavioral
predispositions same with complex
thinking I've actually got to be able to
have a decent working memory to be able
to hold multiple perspectives at once
and synthesize them if I don't have
enough working memory to hold multiple
perspectives at the same time I'll
default into a simplistic perspective so
right which is why I'm malnourished
people are so easy to brainwash right
that is a part of it and so the you know
the thing we started looking at there is
how does physiology affect human
predisposition not just their own
experience but how likely they are to
behave violently or
behave charitably psychopathy empathy
you know types of dynamics and also the
ability to understand complex
things the emotional resilience to hang
in with in difficult times and
understanding more about mind brain
interface there is a bi-directional
interface both influenced each other as
we're looking at the way the brain and
the physiology affect the mind right the
emotion and the cognitive dimensions we
it's not just a genetic like oh you're
you have a genetic predisposition for
psychopathy therefore you're a
psychopath
typically the genetic predispositions
for a psychiatric thing are our genes
that do something like process a
specific nutrient right like well we'll
look at psychiatric issues from genes
that process the methylation of a B
vitamin or the excretion of a mineral
like copper and zinc or something and so
if those nutrients are necessary for a
specific type of brain function like
empathy or impulse control and they're
not being processed well then you might
not be able to have impulse control and
what with what we actually can do about
it is without changing your genome just
actually say oh the gene that would code
for the transform of this vitamin isn't
happening we can just give the post
transform version of the vitamin and
that mental illness is actually better
so this is the kind of field of
Integrative Psychiatry
psychopharmacology and I started seeing
how many of the dynamics that address
the world have a physiologic component
to them and started to look at could we
up regulate the neural networks that
mediate empathy that mediate impulse
control to mediate emotional resilience
that mediate complex thinking that
mediate a sense of agency so the human
bio Hardware was not only predisposed to
feel better but also predisposed to have
increased capacity and behave in ways
that are fundamentally more you know
pro-social which just does correspond
with healthier - right it's interesting
because we grow evolving in a social
environment healthy people are
pro-social right think about a
psychopath in a tribe doesn't make it
very well right they're gonna get killed
or taken out of the tribe or they're
gonna get better but they don't actually
get to be in a social deep social
environment without pro-social behavior
and work and so neural hackers started
for me with a deep exploration into
understanding how we can affect human
physiology in ways that decreases
suffering increases capacity
positive disposition the first product
we launched qualia was one of minion
this next year a bunch of the additional
ones are coming out in very cool oh I'm
excited and I want to get into the
quality thing because people I get a lot
of inquiries about it and I'm I'm so
into it but well we'll go into that side
a little of the framework but I
definitely want to cover that cuz it's
exciting so in a world where we have so
much distraction from all of the things
going off from social media and on the
phone and etc with so much hyper
competitive pressure to try and produce
almost everyone has a pretty strong
sense of pressure to want to be able to
focus better and to be able to have more
sustained attention and gets it done
well having a pretty significant
challenge doing that and not only the
you know focus issues like from
distraction but insufficient nutrients
that are necessary certain kinds of
toxic exposure that affects the brain
you know etc so so we see this ramp in
energy drinks so more and more caffeine
and in smart drug usage and and so with
smart drugs in particular which in
Contra distinction to brain nutrients or
things you would just get from a normal
healthy diet but we probably don't get
enough because of depleted topsoil and
whatever else right and those are just
nutrients it in our evolutionary
environment we're necessary for brain
function no we also didn't try to do 12
hours of productive work that was
cognitive per to him and evolution
environments we're using nutrients
differently so we might have increased
nutrient need of obviously got radically
decreased topsoil density interesting
right so going on and collecting acorns
for a couple hours that they are hunting
for rabbits or whatever it's quite
different from sitting down and solving
the complex problems that we are in this
technological age so interesting you
know deficiencies pretty rampant
different kinds of toxicity like you
know just volatile organic compounds in
this paint and this carpet are you know
there's hundreds of VOCs in the air that
were breathing just normal stuff right
little own industrial pollution in the
atmosphere and glyphosate in agriculture
whatever else and they're almost all
either percentage
neurotoxins or endocrine disruptors and
like it's a significant issue so we've
basically as as tool builders we've
built a world that we're not adapted for
and so how do how do we deal with that
we were looking at the cognitive issues
one of the first ones or many we looked
at you know issues related to anxiety
and depression and pain and addiction
and sleep and those are all things we'll
talk about but you know we saw this
meteoric rise of energy drinks so
they're doing 15 billion dollars
domestically pretty young you know 300
milligrams of caffeine at a time and God
knows what else man
anytime I see someone drinking one of
those things I'm just like me cuz you
every once a while the 7-eleven I'll
just pick something up not like I'm
gonna buy of it I just read the
ingredients out of just morbid curiosity
I'm like oh my god it's like so toxic
man so you know the artificial flavors
sweeteners colors are not adding to
brain health dude and in just the water
you think when you go buy a drink is the
water it's fluoridated tap water in most
cases that's really the bulk of what
you're getting when you buy a 12 ounce
whatever drink you're drinking a bunch
of tap water so you've you've got you
know that kind of rise then you see with
smart drugs obviously we have a lot of
people on prescription adderall
wellbutrin by vans modafinil for
psychiatric disorders for cognitive
disorders and there's a pretty big
question about what percentage of those
actual prescription cases are good for
people I'm stating that conservatively
but then we have all the people on
off-label right use which is not even
prescribed they're just black market you
know universities midterm and final at
all sales everywhere right and even well
be trimmed up or know lots of different
things and so estimate is something like
15 billion dollars a year
also in off-label smart drug sales
something like 5 billion in that role
and they work right like they work for a
very narrow set of metrics so if I want
to focus get my midterm done or my tech
start up or whatever it is the
dopaminergic dynamics from the adderall
are gonna make me focus better and have
more motivation and more Drive now some
of the interesting things that we find
is because it's just modifying dopamine
and not looking at acetylcholine and
what how it's involved in memory not
looking at glutamate not looking at all
of the rest of neuro chemistry and not
even looking at all of the dopamine
process just typically one small part
that one synthetic molecules can
override you get certain effects on
certain side effects and certain missing
effects right so we get increased focus
but we don't get increased memory man
she get decreased memory of certain
kinds that all decrease creativity and
then decreased empathy increased anxiety
aggressiveness sometimes
depersonalization D realization
decreased task switching you know etc
these are really important thing so and
because even insofar as we're affecting
dopamine we're just overriding a
regulatory system providing a whole
bunch of an insane chemical not actually
saying how does this system regulate its
own dopamine and how can we support it
to do that then we're gonna create
dependence and addiction and so these
were the things that I saw was a scaling
amount of dependence and addiction and
very narrow positives with a lot of the
positives that were necessary missing
and meaningful side-effects so the
question in that space we worked with
people in a in an integrative medical
clinical environment - when we had their
genomics we had their blood labs we had
brain scans to customize chemistry that
helped them tremendously so we knew we
can do that and then question was can we
do that at scale without personalization
which I didn't know because
personalization is a big deal and we're
working towards methods to build a
personalized there are some things that
I just won't do widely cuz they have to
be personalized they're so different
person-to-person so alright right we
don't have any type of folate or folic
acid because whether someone should be
on a methylated or nonmetal label it
makes such a really big difference there
right we just don't with that
access if we can't personalize that yeah
but there are a lot of axes that
everyone who is self selecting into a
particular kind of thing like something
for cognitive enhancement do pretty well
across the whole board so you know high
success and well tolerated so what we
wanted to do with quality was say can we
make an alternative so that people don't
have to go to just a tremendous amount
caffeine or off-label smart drugs or
just suffer without the ability to focus
they will actually help them in what
they're looking for
with enough subjective effect that they
actually feel it and that will actually
have a much wider host of positive
effects that we're getting focusing
concentration and drive but also
emotional resilience and task switching
and creativity and analysis and
synthesis and you know so we we started
by doing a a kind of cognitive map of
what are all of the states and all of
the capacities that people are looking
for when they were they wanting to do
productive work and then saying what are
the underlying physiologic pathways that
mediate those that we know about from
the various neuro scientific and
bioscience fields and then can we
understand how those systems work so how
does the body regulate dopamine so you
know as you start to look at you say
alright so protein comes in dietarily
gets broken down to amino acids
phenylalanine converts into tyrosine
converts to n acetyl tyrosine converts
to l-dopa crosses the blood-brain
barrier converts to dopamine and a
presynaptic neuron transport a protein
down an axon crosses a synapse has to
get by synaptic enzymes that will break
it down in different ways hydroxylase
and they may OB and CMT and etc and then
goes into one of a few dopamine
receptors
there's inter cellular dynamics that are
involved so you just start to look at
that and say how does the body do this
thing on its own and are there
deficiencies in any of those key
nutrients or transform factors or things
that are oftentimes under fully
supported that we can support and that
would be just looking at dopamine right
then you do that with acetylcholine when
you look at glutamate then you look at
functions like neurogenesis but is
continuously developing new neurons are
there things that actually support
increased neurogenesis or neuro etaf
that gee killing old neurons better so
you don't have senescence so we looked
at what are the host of things people
are looking for there are healthy states
and capacities what is the underlying
physiology involved how does that
physiology naturally regulate and what
what what might we be able to do to
support the natural regulatory systems
so that people both have a more complete
positive state and that rather than
create dependence right there on it for
a while
overrode their regulatory system and now
there's addiction that it actually is
supporting the robustness of the
regulatory system so that when they get
off it
there is elevation from baseline that
lasts right the exact opposite side
effect in the exact opposite of
dependence so that was our goal and so
we did hundreds of iterations bunch of
testing you know after doing full litter
to review database of five hundred no
tropic chemicals and looking at the
pathways of them and then looking at
positive synergies negative synergies
delivery mechanisms and we ended up
getting to this formula
you know that's there right now which
over a large enough number of people
over a large enough amount of time
tested well enough that we were actually
really happy with it and so that's that
first product and that the goal there
was to be able to support people having
increased productive capacity rate
increased cognitive clarity and the
associated emotional states like
resilience and and drive that was
actually not bad for people and good for
people now I can't claim that we know
that because we haven't done long enough
term trials with enough metrics with
enough controls to claim all that but
you know we've done preclinical trials
with pre and post brain scans and
biometrics and seen you know really
meaningful statistical correlations and
we've had I don't forty thousand people
over three years we're collecting data
from what their experience is really so
we we're very happy about that and
that's the first car that didn't you
know what it kind of is is a complex
approach because her brain is a complex
system embodies a complex system so
rather than here's one molecule to
override it it's how does it
self-regulate and can we support it
self-regulation across many related axes
now if we were gonna approach anxiety we
would do it the same way if we were
gonna approach pain rather than you know
just some end set or opiate we do it the
same way how does the body naturally
produce its own opiates how does it
naturally deal with inflammation
and can we support those dynamics if
we're gonna work with sleep we go to the
same way so those are things I like I
can't wait to see what you guys are
coming up with next so there's a couple
of things in there that I really like is
that you guys really were very
thoughtful about the synergy between the
different compounds I think there's a
lot of cowboys and Indians right now in
the nootropic spaces I'm sure you're
aware where you see the same kind of
formulations on 10 different products
and it's like one guy just looked at
what the next guys doing on a label oh
yeah here that's good for short-term
memory focus cognition whatever blah
blah and they just kind of throw those
stacks out there without necessarily for
thought as to how those interact with
one another right so you have one
molecule and it does one thing and let's
just even say that that that effect of
that molecule is universal and you're
choosing ones that are kind of
universally affecting people in the same
way but then you combine that with other
molecules another one's another ones and
now you have something totally different
you have a third party compound now
right and so that can go well or not
based on self experimentation there's
been times where I've you know taken too
many different things at the same time
and too much of them and I'm having the
opposite effect where I can't focus and
I'm actually feel like I'm freaking nuts
because I took too many smart drugs or
whatever I overdosed on yohimbe wants
for example just random like don't do
that kids at home you know pay attention
to the the dosage and stuff but I think
what's cool about qualia is that you
really looked at how things relate to
one another
that you're not putting anything in
there that's gonna cause your body to
down regulate its own production we're
to the point where there's a dependency
and oh my god now I can't make this
neurotransmitter or whatever because
I've it's been done for me for so long
and then also I did the whole basis of
it is coming from what I like about the
company itself is that it's coming from
this intention that we're trying to
create people with biology that runs
better so they'll be better people I
mean to me that makes total sense I had
to flew a couple of months ago and I was
in Colorado and I had to speak at two
events and they were pretty substantial
for me and I was so
and I didn't I could not make myself be
in a good mood like I literally just
couldn't be happy you know it's just I
was just depressed and even though my
mind was right and I wasn't fighting it
I wasn't like caught in some sort of
negative spiral I wasn't actually
negative at all it just wasn't in a good
mood that it's well happy like I do
right now
so I wasn't firing on all cylinders you
know so I really think that you do have
to approach your own development from
all sides in other words I can't be
eating you know glyphosate and aspartame
and all this evil things that they put
in food and just think I can meditate my
way into a higher consciousness while
I'm destroying my biology in the same
way I can't become obsessed with herbs
and superfoods and your tropics and then
be running around flipping people off in
traffic caught in my trauma issues you
know it's like you have to kind of
approach it from all angles so I like
that you're not like hey guys let's make
a cool vitamin that makes people better
at computer work it's like now we have a
larger scope of vision which is really
cool now back to the qualia it's been
interesting to observe the friends that
I've turned on to it and you know
listeners of the show and stuff like
that is that I haven't I've yet to have
anyone say that they had a negative
experience as a result where with a lot
of other nootropics people say that it's
too stimulating or it made them tired
made them like this made them like that
so I've had no one report back like oh
my god I felt horrible and only a couple
people that were like man I don't really
notice anything yeah so the majority of
people that I've interacted with that
have tried are like oh my god this is
the best thing ever like what where has
this been my whole life like an
overwhelmingly positive experience and
that's what it's been like for me too
which is one of the reasons I wanted to
track you down and I found out there was
so much more to your story than just
being like you know a guy that knows
about nootropics but for me what's been
interesting
speaking of especially the the
down-regulation piece is that when I
started I took the full dose I think it
was three of number one and six of
number two and I did that a lot and it
kind of just brought me up to a nice
base level and then at a certain point
that became a little
to stimulating and now I'm like I take
one number one to number two and I'm
like I feel great there's no need to
even push it beyond that so it actually
has the opposite effect of building up a
tolerance a right that was intended yeah
so good job on that because with most
other things you take it and you take it
in you build the tolerance you need more
and more and then your body forgets how
to make it and you end up in this
imbalance but I think that there's just
something really cool about what you've
done I'm gonna come back to the problems
of capitalism for a minute yeah every
MBA student learns one of the first
principles of businesses maximize
lifetime revenue of a customer so you
guys are blowing it cuz now I'm like I
need to I was on auto-ship of quality
because I was pounding so much of it and
now I'm like actually I'm getting too
many shipments I had to stop that and
just order when I run out cuz I'm gonna
run out it's so you guys aren't your
business model is going against that
theory so it going so you think about it
from say I'm a pharma company and there
are MBAs that are looking at the
financial instruments and making
decisions right I mean at the financial
metrics and spreadsheets and and saying
okay maximize lifetime revenue of a
customer the things that treat symptoms
forever so we say depression is not
curable you have a biochemical imbalance
which is like some magic term
biochemical miles with a bucket cause of
it right genetic it's just just a magic
term for we don't know where we haven't
bothered to look at it and in depth and
so we have to simply treat that forever
heart disease automatically treat that
forever cholesterol we're gonna treat it
 all right so that's very good
from a lifetime revenue point of view
and if it creates side effects did need
other drugs to resolve them that's
called a cross seller and a perfect and
then if to maximize lifetime value I
want to start them as young as possible
so we make up new diseases like a TD
after we put two ritalin shitty
desks and so they still make those desks
like they have my seventies this little
wooden prisons so we get them started as
early as possible on an iatrogenic cycle
right so pretty much everything that
in medicine we wanted to do the opposite
if it causes addiction we want to create
a long-term benefit because the side
effects you want the side effects to be
comprehensively positive if the people
have to stay on it we want them to get
off of it right that like that's the
goal
and so really theory of market should
not apply to medicine because people
really can't choose to not participate
with something that will make them
better if they're sick and since they
really can't choose not to do that
theory of markets as a up thing
just like there shouldn't be for-profit
prisons right and so this was hard for
us because and is why we started with
supplement as opposed to bigger things
we could have done is because I didn't
want to take capital from any financial
service places that would then bind us
to doing things were unethical so like
our right our cost of goods to make
qualia is more expensive than most
Metroplex retail and it's because if you
want to use the right form right you use
the phosphorylated version of this and
the methylated version of this and etc
and with the right concentration of the
dose you knows you take nine
capsules yeah but and that's not filler
it's because it just takes that much of
those things it's just expensive no and
also the fact that you guys aren't using
excipient sand binders and all that
weird stuff which I always notice right
away I'm like I go to the end of the
label and a suddenly I got that there it
is which means that you can't work with
almost any manufacturers because that's
what they need to make it work in their
machine it's a magnesium stearate and
and all this stuff right yeah so all all
of that like doing the integrity thing
is just a hard thing to make work
fiscally but like you have found with
your podcast if you do there will be
people that are attracted to that thing
and it can grow so that's what we're
trying to do that's cool yeah the real
deal so in terms of the other things
that people typically use I want to just
run run a couple of these by you because
I take my qualia I guess about five days
a week and as I said it's been strange
that my dosage has gone down it must be
fixing me that's the way I look at it
like it's it's connecting synapses or
something that were off and other
they're getting more in alignment so
what I look at it but there's other
things to that depending on where I'm
going what I'm doing I find to be useful
so today for example I knew that I was
gonna have a very social day I'm going
to be talking to you I'm being interview
the way back home after this so I did a
number of different things one of them
being phenibut for example which I'll
maybe do once a week or something like
that and I just find it's just a really
great social lubricant and then I also
took some piracetam because I find that
it really helps me with speech so some
of these other things I'll do but I
could give Joe here piracetam and it'll
give him anxiety or he won't notice
anything or I give someone else I gave a
girlfriend once phenibut and she
probably took a little bit too much but
she got deathly ill you know andand what
I would take for this it's like a
sprinkle to me to her she was a bit
smaller and just had this huge adverse
reaction same thing I modafinil is
another one that I really like and for
me I take an eighth a dose of modafinil
for me is an eighth of one tablet right
so it's like a 200 milligram tablet once
I took a half I was like oh my god I
feel like I'm on crystal meth
not fun a quarter if I'm really really
tired set me straight but if I just want
to have a productive day and be
relatively alert just a tiny tiny little
piece which is about an eighth of a
tablet does me I've given it to friends
I'd say man be careful this is a this is
a drug this is not an herb like go easy
they take a half like I didn't feel
anything they take another half they're
like man I didn't notice anything like
oh my god if I took a whole modafinil I
would be like you know scrubbing the
freaking bathroom floor with the
toothbrush I mean I would be tweaking so
hard so what's up with some of those
there you mentioned Deborah I was on
like low dose Deborah no for a while and
I have tried a lot of different things
outside of the safe and more plant-based
stuff that you guys work with in qualia
what are some of the other ones or even
micro dosing on psilocybin like that
whole other world of smart drugs and
nootropics what do you got to say about
any of that
sure okay so let's let's make some
categories here so we've got
the smart drugs as a category which are
pharmaceuticals that are usually being
used for an off-label purpose they're
oftentimes psych meds like wellbutrin or
adderall or they are narcolepsy meds
like modafinil or they are sometimes
anti Parkinson's meds Deborah now yeah
right
I remember I was taking that stuff
someone's like what is it I just no big
deal it's for Parkinson's
I'm just micro dosing it now all of
those are dopaminergic right so for
different purposes they don't manage
jigs you'll have some like for
Alzheimer's don't have to sell that work
with this is that all those urges mean
they raised over me okay no wonder I
like all of those yes so you've got you
know various types of smart drugs is one
category most of the time those are
gonna have a pretty strong effect and a
pretty decent chance of side-effect if
used improperly there's really nothing
that is gonna be all that dangerous if
used properly but properly is the big
thing right like whether we're talking I
mean you can use heroin not dangerously
if you if you use it properly but that's
like not how people use use heroin and
specifically adderall is amphetamine
right it's a DM feta mean you add a
methyl group to it you have
methamphetamine methamphetamine used to
be a pharmaceutical and so like the
distinction between pharmaceuticals and
illegal drugs is where the legal
categorization of the minute happens to
be based on lobbying now based on much
else so you've got smart drugs as a
category and in general people should
explore there if they are well educated
it's like if they really educate
themselves well about the topic and they
and they're really paying attention in a
quantified self kind of way to the
results and they should not be looking
at doing that super regularly now there
are exceptions so Debra know for
instance works through mao-b inhibition
so mao-b
is a enzyme in this
apps that breaks down certain
neurotransmitters like dopamine like
other catecholamines like phenyl fo me
so if you inhibit the mao-b those
neurotransmitters will get across the
sentence more into the postsynaptic
neuron this can be very dangerous
because if you take that with anything
that is also increasing mono aunt means
going those types of neurotransmitters
going into the synapse specifically ones
it should be broken down by mao-b they
can get to to high level so one wants to
be careful with that and so what would
be some things that you with Debra know
for example that you wouldn't want to
combine with that at all
interesting and that doesn't mean nobody
does it and has a good experience what
about my daffodil same right so if if
you are now they're different modafinil
we don't know all the mechanisms of
modafinil that well it is the least
symptomatic dopaminergic for the most
part for most people it seems like it
works through transporter proteins
largely which is gonna be a little bit
less tricky than many of the other
mechanisms but if if you are flooding
the synapse with dopamine and not
breaking it down you can get to
dangerously high levels right and not
everyone has too high
Mao beat genetically some people's mao-b
is too low they actually feel anxious
because they have too many of those
excitatory neurotransmitters and never
know what makes them feel terrible but
there are a lot of people who are
genetically / producers of mao-b
and they will have certain kinds of
depression tendencies because their
transmitters are just not getting across
the synapse that well and if they take
something that's just increasing the
level of dopamine they might feel better
but it's actually not doing the right
part of the mechanism right in the right
part of the pathway what's going on for
them if they actually break down the
excessive levels of mao be that they're
genetically producing and there's other
things that can cause a male bee to go
up other than just genetics it's
inducible and so as people age mao-b
goes up dopamine goes down it's a part
of Aging which is why Debra knows one of
the few drugs it is actually correlated
to be a life extension agent and there
are people who in their young
wouldn't do well with it when they're
older they would because there may o be
levels one from a healthy place where it
would imbalance them to being excessive
and no balances them
so Deborah no can actually be
therapeutic for some people for other
people it'll be an enhancement that they
shouldn't do regularly so to the degree
you're getting into stronger tools you
should have more education just like in
any field right like playing with the
skill soft rather than the handsaw you
kind of need to learn a little bit more
because there's more the consequence but
you can also do cooler stuff with it
so for us empowered responsibilities and
self education is a really key thing
because we want people to be empowered
in their own health and not just feel
like a victim and waiting for someone to
tell them what to do who has no way of
knowing what their own experiences are
spending enough time even if it's a
well-educated doctor they wear their
fiscal structure only allows them has
been five minutes of time like they just
can't apply what they write that well
right so smart drugs is one category
research chemicals is another category
well you have a bunch of chemicals that
are not actually categorized as a drug
they're also not categorized as a
nutraceutical they are for research
purposes only and they live in that kind
of regulatory Bardo and that's most of
the know tropics they like the rasa
Tam's and women the rasa temps are in
that category and the AMPA Keens those
are the kind of two primary categories
that people get into but then also the
NSI 189 the p21 the cerebral ice and the
lots of the phenibut right they live in
that research chemical category and some
of those are basically smart drugs that
just didn't go through approval but and
then some of them are more what we call
a formal no tropic which is something
that can increase cognitive some aspect
of cognitive performance without
meaningful side effect most mark drugs
will have some side effect unless it
happens to be one that's therapeutic for
you so and then we've also got brain
nutrients which are just the amino acids
fatty acids vitamins minerals that the
brain needs to function well that are
often deficient and then you've got the
tentacles and you know plants that
modulate different things in different
botanicals can be very powerful right
you can you can get l-dopa from mucuna
which is a parkinson's man
in different dos right it's not the same
kind of dos but you can get very potent
botanicals so all those categories of
things to play with and of course as
people really get into biohacking and
they're all hacking and become
well-educated you've got different
delivery mechanisms people do them so
cute Aeneas or I am or IV or snort stuff
intranasal or you know whatever right
so there's a big interesting field and
some of them can also be not just
cognitive enhancing for the normal
well-being but very therapeutic if
someone is dealing with post they're
dealing with a post TBI situation
something that is neurogenic that
enhances development of new neurons
after they had some micro brain damage
can be very helpful there's a whole lot
to learn so one of the things we're
working on is really competent education
and you know community space so that
people can learn as well right now it's
forums on reddit and you know places
like that where people can really have
to sort at the end yes good or not yeah
it's it's funny now too with the
algorithms online search results are
very skewed oftentimes like I was
looking for something a couple days ago
that was some good political news a
little bit conspiratorial I think I was
researching the number of times CNN has
been busted for lying and producing fake
news and I googled like how much how
many times the CNN been caught doing
fake news in 2007 something like that
and I phrased it a few different ways
and nothing came up you know you can't
find an article if you use Google to
find that for example and it's the same
way when you start looking for some of
this stuff you'll read something on a
forum and you're like okay this guy says
this about modafinil or phenibut or
whatever and then literally you get to
the next ten sites and it's the same
exact copy know that some other Schmo
has like copy and pasted into his blog
or some other forum you're like wait
they're all getting the same you know
five talking points from the same place
so even if you are a good researcher
sometimes it's hard to come up with
original valid data just because it
doesn't exist you know like you said
with some of these things that are in
that gray zone in terms of their
categorization it's it's sometimes it's
difficult to even educate yourself
because you don't know what's true false
classic
but we had a we had a you know scenario
where people had questions about central
phenoxy safe and because even on some
very good no tropic sites it says
central phenoxy mike hot burst damage
birth defects and because and trophy
rocks and converts a dmae
is a which is a cholinergic coating
donor and there were some studies that
showed dmae causing birth defects and
rats now people do their research to say
well you should avoid that you know in
that scenario now it's I should get into
it if we get out of if we really look at
the rat studies and we say what kind of
dosage to what administration is it
relevant to normal dosage know the it's
nothing in a normal oral dosage range
was there at all it was it was even
close DMA he actually became approved as
a drug without that being a concern in
many different countries and then
central Phenix seen never had any birth
defects studies and so yet that's all
over the web central don't do it because
of birth thank you right now we pulled
every single study ever done on central
moccasin that we can 586 studies most of
which weren't online we had to go to
medical libraries find them in other
countries and other languages right
because they they were started the
research further than the fifty so they
just would never put online translate
them all and then we had a few PhDs in
neural chemistry
neuroanatomy etc do a structured
literature review meta-analysis of all
that for us to come up talk with our
opinion on central you know there's not
a trivial thing to do but it matters if
you really don't know what's going on
so I like the wild west of the space
because people are starting to take more
responsibility rather than just with the
doctor tell them what to do and they get
mad at the doctor when it doesn't work
yeah when the doctor couldn't possibly
spend enough time with them or keep
up-to-date with all the research
happening but I really do long for
higher quality control and it's one of
the things we're working on and we can
only work on as fast as we can afford
without moving into fiscal models that
suck which is the the tricky part but
like neuro tech you know we were talking
about different devices that we have
around the house in pmf and etc
it's pretty easy to say this seems
compelling let's share it well what
we're working to do right now is with
all the types of neuro tech whether
we're talking about low-level laser
therapy and transcranial intranasal
lasers or we're talking about PMF or TMS
or you know whatever right for us it's a
process of doing the full letter to
review on everything that's known about
this where who what things does it
affect what things does it not affect
safe etcetera and then doing full
research on the actual products and say
does this product have the
specifications that the literature shows
are useful and then curate those things
so we're building a platform to do that
it's just a non-trivial process and the
same with just curating knowledge on
nootropics is in the forum you've got
like some real gems and then a bunch of
 and it's not gonna say obvious
which ones are the gems in the same
like if you look in the bodybuilder
world you go to the steroid forums some
of the smartest endocrinologist anywhere
are in there and then there's just so
much done bro science um it's like but
if you don't know the field well they're
all same you don't know right so
this is something that we're really
working to do is to have a moderation
process where everything that goes there
is better now that's cool man that's
cool that's that's a really valuable
resource because I that's excite you
know another positive thing about right
now is that I think more people are
waking up to the fact that they don't
actually have to rely on the allopathic
medical system like I have episodes and
I call them things like learning to
become your own doctor you know it's
like you really can do a lot on your own
and then if you're if you are tied into
someone good and functional medicine and
they're able to kind of you know be a
step above you in terms of their body
and knowledge but like with my
relationship to medicine is I do a lot
of my own research and footwork and
order my own labs and geek out in like
which labs are the best and most updated
because even my functional medicine
doctor they're still in the labs that
were the best GI test last year I'm like
no man and the biohacking community
there's new labs with you know new
parameters and things like that and I
really feel the sense of power and
autonomy because I'm you know I know my
limitations in terms of my body of
knowledge and what I may have been
capable of
understanding or care to take the time
to learn when it comes to my biology but
I know what I know and then I go to the
experts that are higher of the food
chain and in their area of special
specialization right so it's really cool
that that you guys are thinking that far
ahead and enabling people to help
themselves
one of the parts I'm most excited about
is a integrative medical functional
medical program so we've got a number of
doctors who are kind of the best
integrative psychiatrists that I'm aware
of
yeah well psychiatrists or just
functional medicine that does second or
pharmacology and so you know we're not
allowed to provide medical information
prescribe diagnose treat anything like
that right so if people and if someone
is on has psych conditions or on psych
meds you don't use our stuff because
there's there's real interactions that
need to be factored but we don't want to
just say go to your doctor if your
doctor doesn't know anything we want to
provide better resources so go to your
doctor and here are doctors that
actually know that field really well
they can run a qejy on you they can run
neural hormones they can run your Walsh
metabolic labs they can run your gut
brain access they can look at your
genomics etc and actually do the the
best of what functional brain chemistry
optimization currently looks like and so
that's something that we'll be rolling
out in this next year and then we've
been already working with another that's
amazing that's amazing
yeah because you do need that that
middleman you know you're just a freakin
genius and you have the time and energy
to devote to yourself but I think each
one of us can only take it to a certain
level and we need you know we need that
help but it's like how do you find a
good one I always get the question of
who's the best functional medicine
doctor and I'm just I just made it easy
on myself after working with a number of
them individually and I just joined
parsley health which is like a you know
sort of I think of it as the uber of
functional medicine just a a modern
interface and a membership model rather
than paying per visit and and I find it
to be really effective because they can
deal with my insurance in the billing
and they know how to code the labs and
stuff but it's still very much
self-directed like I could just follow
their
program probably be healthy but I'm
always digging deeper so I'll do you
know three different tests for metals
where they might just order me the pre
and post challenged your intestine like
oh that gives me a certain metric but
just hair analysis there's blood there's
other ways you can dive into that but
it's helpful to have someone you trust
that'll go along with what you're doing
he's back in the Western medicine model
I go into the general practitioner and
be like hey I have X Y & Z wrong they
send me out to a number of specialists
that are their cronies and it's like you
get stuck in that whole thing and I'm
going in there telling them about some
new supplement or technology and the
doctors like what I don't even know
about that you know like I was having
some problems with like vertigo and
dizziness and I you know went up the the
ladder in LA medical system which i
think is probably a pretty good place to
live if you want some you know
high-level medical care and I got sent
to did you know the world's best EMT
that people travel from all over the
world I go sit down with this guy said
yeah man I don't know man I have you
know I have a little hearing loss over
here that's about 20% I'm well aware of
that but I have this thing where I'm
getting dizzy all the time and I always
feel carsick and he ran some tests for
me I came in again he goes yeah I think
you probably should just not drink
coffee I think it's the the caffeine can
do that like really this is what you
guys this the best you guys can do is
that the caffeine is making me you know
it was just like oh my god
I could have done a much better job of
being my own doctor and of course I you
know finding finding the root of that
but it's a cool time to be alive where
those of us that are waking up and have
access to information like you guys are
providing can really take responsibility
well no and not become this dependent
infant on the teat of Western medicine
and all the inherent expenses and things
that come along with that
and it's really important to keep the
Pareto principle in mind which is it
does get complex quickly and to be able
to synthesize that complexity is a
really deep topic and the foundations
are still 80% of it and the foundations
are not that hard right I mean they
might be hard to do from a discipline
point of view in the life that is
conditioned otherwise but if someone is
not sleeping enough sleeping well and
sleeping enough
everything else they'll do is just tiny
diminishing returns in comparison and
sleeping enough right right and if
someone is not exercising and if they're
not generally eating well and if they're
not doing some kinds of stress
management and mental processes then the
you know biohacking is actually a way to
support living shittily right trying to
like symptom manage the fact that their
life actually sucks right and that's
just not the way to go right and so if
someone really just does the
foundational stuff it's amazing how much
of it that addresses and even like I say
we look at heavy metals so I can do a
pre and post provocation test and I can
test with the MPs or DMS a or EDTA and
I'm gonna get different specific
findings and I can look at hair labs
which will give me a different time
scale of what's being excreted and I can
look at you know metal antibody stands
ND and then what I'm gonna find is okay
there are specific chelation or binders
that I'm going to use differentially if
it's lead versus mercury right or
gadolinium or whatever it is that's a
lot to figure out it's a lot of expense
and if I just put the person in a sauna
every day and I gave them chlorella in
the morning that would be 80% as good
right yeah and so it's just kind of
important like one of the things we want
people to know is that there are
foundational things that if they don't
have the time money proclivity will
really help them be radically healthier
and and then optimization on top of that
it's nice right
right yeah that's that's well stated
sometimes they'll find myself taking a
50 pills in the morning trying to turn
my brain on and then I realized maybe if
I hadn't gone to bed at 2:00 a.m. and
woken up at 7:30 you know so that's
that's very true some of those things
are just basic lifestyle choices if you
eat if you think about it if you're
gonna eat food in its measured in pounds
and it's all nutrients right that's all
stalks in our nutrient and then you're
gonna take supplements that are measured
in grey
the supplement the word supplement means
to supplement that what you're getting
from right-right like getting the pounds
right is a big deal right
and similarly was sleep like when you
exercise all that torn muscle that it
needs repair is gonna be repairing
during sleep during Delta's they can
particular and all those nutrients that
need to go into new tissues are gonna do
that during sleep and so if you're not
sleeping enough like all the other stuff
just kind of doesn't matter that much
and so this is one of the places where I
want to empower people in the face of
the complexity to know that there is a
simplicity that is most of it which is
if you live a life that is relatively
closer to an evolutionary environment in
evolutionary life you'll just do a lot
better and then all the other stuff if
you're sick you definitely want to go
find good functional practitioners and
if you really want to optimize you want
to go yeah well said well said I love it
man
well I've got about one not even a
quarter through the questions that I
have in mind for you but in the interest
of time we're right around the two-hour
mark which is I try to cap any
conversation off and no matter how much
more there is to do but I have my notes
for part two I'd love to uh sit down and
have another talk with you I mean every
time every like every time you have an
answer to a question twenty more
questions populated just like a stifling
more that have come about so we're
definitely gonna have to talk again but
I really appreciate your perspective I
was again this is fun and yeah it's just
fascinating dude you just you're you're
so full of information I mean you really
are just the fascinating guy was all
pumping people up on the Instagram on
the way don't have like this guy's
really smart you guys you know you know
I'm not stroking her ego it's just you
are it's the thing that you and I were
talking about is that people are are
actually fascinated by life without
being broken right right and they can
restore that if they were broken and if
you just spend your life following
things that you're fascinated about you
will tend to learn things right I want
to know what's up next with neuro hacker
collected you mentioned the functional
medicine kind of interfacing
can you reveal yet what your next
supplement or product is going to be
we've got we've got about ten products
that have already tested well in the
prototype phase of different types that
we'll be going through you know final
refinement and trials like that before
being released where up she actually
hiring right now for additional
formulators and VP of Product and etc
and researchers to come help because as
we're scaling it needs more work to be
able to do it as at the speed we want to
so things - we will not produce any
product that is to treat any medical
condition can't mom do that right that's
a medical thing but things that support
sleep things that support healthy
sensory process meaning if there are
sources of chronic pain that chronic
pain is not loving people things that
help support I'm looking forward to that
one things that help support natural
calmness which is not saying that
anxiety thing what is it yeah I think
our audience is able to read between the
lines all of those I I find that I dance
around terminology so much on this show
in the interest of protecting my guests
that happen to produce a different
product or service movement so those are
things that will be coming soon we have
a new version of qualia also that is
just a single step less total pills oh
wow and right now is testing as
effectively so we spend a year refining
early this next year so even a handful
of new products in the nutraceutical
mind brain health space then curating
neuro tech across those platforms I mean
all types of neuro tech with a proper
scientific reading creation platform and
then the doctor program are the things
that I'm really excited
so when you say neuro tract tech are you
talking about lasers and light devices
and magnetism and all this kind of stuff
oh cool that's interesting what are some
you know zyv those of you listening that
aren't seeing the video as I walked into
Daniels home here
it's a beautiful of its jack
kantak house a lot of big rooms it's
lovely but in every everywhere I look I
see some biohacking tool or something
there's big amethyst crystals everywhere
there's a tsamina bed right in front of
me and a bulletproof sleep induction mat
and earth pulse essential oils in the
air I mean it's like it's just so in
alignment with my lifestyle what are
some of the neuro enhancing or just life
enhancing technologies that you're
digging right now personally mm-hmm
some of the ones that I appreciate a lot
that are like consumer neuro tech
they're not still in RD I I'm a big fan
like everybody else's of red light and
so companies like juve and buy light and
other ones they yakking on intranasal
trans clay transcranial whole-body near
infrared and visible infrared and we
wouldn't need that if we just been a fan
of Sun right but if you don't spend
enough time in the Sun it is removed
from normal indoor lighting because it's
the part that makes it expensive it yeah
it uses that more energy to make warm
light right so rather than do the whole
house you just do your body with your
clothes off and right now it'd be you
know we photosynthesize molecules like
plants do not as many as plants plants
or all surface area of photosynthesis
were not that much surface area but we
it's a meaningful part so we know that
the blue water and UV into the spectrum
helps us with vitamin D and the way that
it does vitamin D synthesis is different
than all really supplementing vitamin D
so there's meaningfulness there but
nitric oxide is also photo synthesized
from exposure to light and ATP
specifically is up regulated
mitochondria output of ATP is up
regulated from the red end of the
spectrum and so up regulating ATP output
is kind of just good for everything
right this generates increased cellular
energy to do whatever the cells are
doing so that's a that's what I like and
I do like transcranial and intranasal
applications especially where there is
TBI or tinnitus or things there where
you don't quite know how to address it
specifically but you know interesting
because I do the nay
the v-lite the 810 nanometers
near-infrared it's invisible right I
used that when I used to have the one
that was six something it was very read
it lit up the whole front of her face
which I just like that for a fact I
don't know which one does what and then
I do the jus and I love both of those as
well like seriously I mean but here's
the thing I also get a lot of Sun my
vitamin D levels are off the chart I
still supplement with it here's one
thing that I wanted to get your opinion
and I always say okay it's the end of
the interview and that it goes on for
another hour but in all seriousness with
the spectrum of light because I I do
sungazing have been doing that for years
grounding all on the Sun gazing when the
Sun rises or goes down I get full naked
Sun as much as possible so I'm getting a
lot of the natural spectrums I limit
blue light at night like pretty hardcore
in the home when it gets dark outside it
also gets amber and red inside like I'm
dialing that in my sleeps great
circadian rhythm but when it comes to
the spectrums of sunlight you know
different people might have different
opinions on this but based on being a 47
year old guy and knowing what the sky
looks like normally with planes in it or
planes not in it there is unequivocally
some geoengineering going on on the
planet and I think anyone that doesn't
acknowledge that to some degree like has
serious psychological issues having you
know looked up in the sky and not seen
weird clouds and the formations and
stuff we have now there's definitely
something going on which is of course a
different conversation but with with the
weather manipulation of what's being
going on in the sky I often wonder
because it does have a parent Lee
something to do with reflecting the
sun's you know radiation back out into
space to pull the planet wherever the
fuck's going on but the the temperature
of the light and the spectrum of light
is being altered in an unnatural way
from whatever's being done in our skies
do you think that that's having you know
an effect on our biology just aside from
whatever toxins might we might be
breathing in with just the actual nature
of light itself of course very short
answer to a long question
so geoengineering is
an approach to us recognizing that we're
very close to positive feedback loops on
certain climate change dynamics and
people freak out and write a freakout
says well we need to actually get the
temperature down because even before the
acid is killing the coral from ocean
acidification from co2 diffusing into
the water as carbonic acid even before
the trophic cascades are killing the
coral from the large fish dying off from
overfishing the temperature is the main
thing driving them into bleaching and
hypometabolism they can't stay in that
place very long most of the
photosynthesis of the world happens in
the oceans and a lot of it depends on
the coral so how do we get the and and
the positive feedback loop on that on
the albedo cycle at the caps like so
it's like whoa we need to get
temperature down so the idea of let's
just reflect 20% in sunlight by putting
particles never atmosphere that will
reflect 20% sunlight is the same exact
approach as our cholesterol high use a
statin mmm it is right it's addressing
the symptom in a way that will then have
effects that are negative for other
parts of it because we're scared of the
symptom without understanding what
caused it and addressing it at a college
level so of course what we should be
focused on is how do we just increase
photosynthesis for sequesteration and
decrease emissions and what has to
happen to be able to do that at what
scale in time but yeah well it's very
interesting allopathic medicine is
looking at individual metrics that we've
correlated to something and how do we
exogenously override that individual
metric without looking at what brought
it about to be that way and so complex
multifactorial dynamics we suck out
which is why we don't have a single cure
for any chronic illness we can cut
cancers out radiate amount poison out we
can't make them stop growing and
understand why they grow in terms of
current medicine same with psych
psychiatric illnesses same with neuro
degenerative same with autoimmune
because they don't have a single college
we're actually awesome at acute cause
issues right right right
if it's an acute injury or an acute
infection
or an acute toxicity that's really
straightforward and we know how to treat
that thing but if it is anything other
than a cute single cause then we kind of
suck at it right now because it requires
a different approach to science of this
complexity approach which also requires
a different fiscal model and a different
IP structure and a whole bunch of things
we approach the world the same way our
approach to climate change to starvation
to whatever is to tweak something to
affect that thing here without
addressing the underlying bang so
geoengineering is like allopathic
medicine is that into the environment
yeah that's that's funnier and and
definitely it's affecting the light
going back to like your you know your
top devices a lot of the stuff that's
coming out now they think that's really
effective is ways to sort of use
technology to mimic nature in a sense
and that's how I think about an infrared
sauna or cryotherapy I mean any of the
things that I do is quote unquote bio
hacks are grounding you know using
earthing technology pmf all this stuff
it's all really just trying to create
that homeostatic experience of being the
sentient being on planet earth in its
natural state but we're not in a natural
state including the light spectrum
that's coming in at us from the Sun like
you can't even get what you would have
gotten a hundred years ago true our main
bio hacks are actually just putting us
back in something closer to an
evolutionary environment so our air
filter right it's not making special air
it's just making right I saw that you
have one over there too yeah and our
water filters are also still not as good
as spring water right do you have a
pristine hydro filter you don't have a
purse okay they're there in Laguna Beach
you know not far from here but I've done
a lot of research on the filters and I'm
gonna interview that guy but I think if
I had to have a filter he'd probably be
the guy he vortexes the water he puts
magnesium bicarbonate silica back in it
I mean he's like he's like making spring
water out of municipal water it's crazy
but anyway but you know whether we're
changing our weather we're pulling
toxins out of the environment or like
you know it's mentioning the BOC here
actually it's not releasing much because
I used the AFM safe coat okay and safe
coats another
I think is awesome if you have a place
that's new carpet new paint or you're
going to paint or install things the
non-toxic products that if it makes a
religion no away cool that is going in
the show notes but yeah I mean so much
of it is just recreating evolutionary
environments there's like so many people
who are ill go like move to or visit
some more rural natural place and think
you better right and so that's a lot of
it and then there's a course advance
shed that is not just doing that yeah
what are the weather kind of tricks you
got up your sleeve that I haven't been
observed walking by tech tech wise
well qejy based neurofeedback is awesome
mmm and whether you're doing alpha-theta
training or SMR training or Delta
training should be based off your qejy
and someone knows how knows how to do
that well I don't know if you've ever
went to peak brain since you look I go
there all the time yeah but Andrews good
yeah Andrew is good I interviewed him
here on the show and I was on his show -
yeah brilliant guy so that's a great
therapy right now
I mean TMS is actually interesting it's
it's early but it's interesting for many
things
well it's TMS transcranial magnetic
stimulation is profoundly interesting in
the early studies at University of
Arizona and some Japanese universities
in curing Alzheimer's I'm through their
novel proposed mechanism involving
microtubules so but it's too early to
really know what it's doing so there's a
number of high-tech methods that are
really cool and specifically there's
also but some of the most high-tech ones
are are actually still evolutionary
Merriman ones like the cutting edge of
microbial mix is mostly that the vaginal
flora and the breast milk of indigenous
people who were never exposed to
chlorinated water and
antibiotics and glyphosate have a whole
bunch of bacteria that we just don't
have in probiotics anywhere else that
are actually part of our evolutionary
virus ignition for epigenetic modulation
or genome so that's a very cutting edge
right understanding about the genetics
and microbiome acts right and it is also
saying oh evolution actually kind of
makes sense okay or fecal implants from
clean you know they're clean source so
to speak so we have a chunk of which in
like robotics were working on right now
there oh I'm we're not that close yet
cuz that's what we want to do but I'm
excited about it cool awesome man okay
so yeah I will say obviously we didn't
get into psychedelics and entheogens no
I have a whole section on that yeah and
we didn't get into any of the
psycho-emotional psycho-spiritual worker
all right but on the jist evolutionary
environment I will make a thought and
closing is just like a statin is
optimizing for one thing right lower
your cholesterol without looking at hey
is the cholesterol maybe protecting the
arterial system from oxidative damage
and that's not a good idea or what's the
whole rest of the story going on when we
optimize for something that is affecting
a lot of other things we're not paying
attention we get externality rate which
is also a cold side effect we built the
entire world the human built world for a
few purposes and ways that affected a
lot of other things so we build a house
to protect us from the elements and give
us a you know a safe place to be and
then maybe for a certain aspects of
aesthetics but we didn't pay attention
to oh well there's actually chemistry
that's in the paint that is affecting us
and oh you have the fungicides that are
in there that are making fungicide
resistant funguses that are why we have
an issue with mold we never did before
oh that that actually it's important
thing like in the drywall paints out in
the paint in the 70s started having
fungicides added resist mold and then
the mold became super MRSA mold oh god
that's so the reason everyone has mold
issues when we lived with mold forever
we're in an environment that's because
this is me anymore oh my god so but even
Suns like you know the color and angle
right all of these end up affecting the
the psyche this field of environmental
cycling right if you're in an if you're
in an area where there's graffiti and
trash on the ground and the walls this
kind of environmental psych studies been
done many times if if you just paint
over the graffiti and clean up the trash
violent crime drops like thirty to fifty
percent
Wow and it's because you think about
what the environments transmitting from
your there is one this is a wasteland
and I'm in survival mode and to this is
a place where law doesn't operate
mmm-hmm right cuz yeah a bit broken and
they're not right rectified right and
right as soon as you fix those things
how violent human beings are is being
changed at the like fifty percent level
by an environmental psych right I've
heard David Hawkins talk about that he
called it the broken window theory you
know you have the building in the ghetto
and it gets ignored and then someone
breaks the window and then someone comes
along breaks another window then comes
the graffiti then the drug dealers on
the corner and Everett I never thought
about the kind of mechanics of it that's
very interesting it's I guess the it's
like the level of consciousness of
anything could you say would you frame
it in that way I would say that's a way
of reducing the complexity of it right
um which is kind of my thing I interview
people like you and go to squish that
down into a bite-sized thought but I
mean so if you go into a cathedral
they're doing environmental psych and so
the sound and the smell and the visual
and every aspect of the sensory process
is designed to uplift and exulting but
then specifically that it's narrow and
very high has a certain effect that's
different than if it was wide and high
or if it was not high right which is
you're very focused on up
and so then you feel very small and you
can both have a sense of feeling you
know and then the priest is halfway
between you and where Jesus is up there
right and where God is
and so both if you want to look at the
cynical side of the this is how you make
a good authority rien
dynamic where everybody feels small an
authority up there but also the
beautiful the mystical side of people
feeling a sense of all an exaltation
right the environmental psychology of
how those buildings are done induced
state right just like Burning Man
induces state because of the environment
even if you don't period so what we are
realizing is that we have built a world
that we are not well adapted to all
right and it's affecting us in a lot of
ways that we didn't pay attention to
that are mostly not good for us and so
there is this task that you and it's not
good for the planet right and it's not
good for us so there's this task of how
do we rebuild the entire physical built
world in a way where the goal the
primary goal is not in you know it being
an expensive or fast or aesthetically
beautiful those are all partial goals
the primary goal is that it is
enlightening the humans that are
inhabiting it how do you create a built
world that makes the healthiest most
enlightened most pro-social human beings
that are inhabiting it and how do we
rebuild the entire world of that in mind
in in relationship to you know harmony
with the ecosystem so that's the biohack
that is most interesting to me that's
amazing dude I love that really good way
to sum it up alright so closing question
who have been three teachers or
teachings that have influenced your work
where we might be able to go find more
from them like who have you learned from
that we might go up and learn from as
well specifically more related to
individual health or just anything
anything totally broad could be a book
teacher philosophy relative i'm
preferably something that one could go
look up or we can put in the show notes
you know meister fuller whatever
you know but mr. fuller would definitely
be at the top of the list and either
operating manual for spaceship earth or
critical path being the most
approachable books on understanding
state of the world and how to think and
how to design so that would be very high
on the list and then i ordering three is
impossible for me so I'm sorry the ones
that came to mind first yeah yeah that's
the idea
finite and infinite games by James cars'
is a great book that is it's a book that
will help you understand both the future
of economics the future of worldview and
very deep spiritual principles together
from a game theoretic perspective and
it's a small easy read Wow cool is a
great one and then the next one came to
mind was Anthony de Mello who's actually
a Jesuit priest but was someone who
studied all the world religions and
traditions and spent most his time in
India a little book called the way to
love and tiny little book and principles
of sovereignty what does it mean to
actually be whole and to be able to love
from a place of wholeness rather than
this commodities exchange we usually
call love of what do I have to give
someone to get the security and
reassurance and validation I'm looking
for and how will I punish them if they
don't do what I want but because there
there is really no such thing as being
able to really love someone which means
to see them and want for them if you
need them to be something because you
can't see them if you need them to be
something else right and you can't walk
for them if what's in their highest good
isn't been meeting your needs so loving
from a place of wholeness it's a great
little bow to him that sounds awesome
I'll just a good alright great thank you
so much wow that's a know so much more
research to do now well thank you so
much for joining where would you like to
send people in terms of website social
media any of that yeah two things as if
if people are interested to learn more
about what neural hackers doing easy you
know no hacker comm if people are
interested more in some of the you know
larger social topics the economics
education etc I have a blog at
civilization emerging calm and you can
go check stuff out there awesome great
we'll put those those links in the show
notes for those of you listening and you
want the show notes for every episode
please remember you can go to Luke's
tour com forward slash newsletter and to
your email and we'll send them to you so
thank you so much for joining me dude I
look forward to doing it again
you