good morning welcome to meditating with
John Breaux Viki I'm a cognitive
psychologist and a cognitive scientist
at the University of Toronto there I
teach do research on topics like
mindfulness as well as related topics
like Insight flow mystical experiment is
taqwa' strands transformative experience
higher states of consciousness the
cultivation of whispered wisdom and the
aspiration to enlightenment this is a
progressive course if you joined us for
the first time you're welcome
but with every other Monday I teach
principles and practices that build on
previous principles and practices if you
go to the links in this description the
fine links to the previous lessons and
you can catch up and join us back up
again when you're back in sync with the
group so I've been meditating and doing
Tai Chi Chuan and called the plate of
practice for next to 29 years teaching
that for close to 20 years and I've
learned a lot and I want to share this
with as many people as I can this set of
practices this ecology practices because
I believe well I think it's always
helpful for human beings to overcome
self-deception and cultivate wisdom but
especially in this time it can give us a
depth of resiliency in that activity
that we need as our culture in fact our
world seems to be going through a major
transition so you could help me by
liking this video stream that will raise
its visibility on the YouTube algorithm
and more people will get to see it and
hopefully benefit from it every other
Monday has engined is a Dharma day and
I will be teaching a technique of
practice of principle that we built on
previous ones every day is a sit and at
the end of every day Monday through
Friday
there is a QA please keep any questions
you might have for those q and a's to
this discourse concerning this course
for more encompassing questions please
come to the YouTube livestream
general Q&A due every third Friday at 3
p.m. Eastern Time
also a reminder that for this coming
Monday which will be a derma Monday
weird I'm going to be teaching you
Alexio Divina a way of weeding not for
information but meeting for
transformation it's a way of practicing
Dharma so that you remember if you want
to do the Buddha the Dharma the sign-up
Jason pointed out to me that I didn't
fold the books that's probably close
enough last on these aren't these are
not mandatory they're just to give you
an idea or the kind of thing you need
it's a good idea if you can get a book
of sacred poetry like this one by Steven
Mitchell but there are many out there
and a book of sacred prose again there
are many out there Jason is going to for
poetry he's going to use the poet Yeats
booklet poems by Yeats and for his
sacred prose he is going to do either
marcus aurelius or epictetus so you know
if you have a particular religious
background in which texts are sacred to
you of course try and find prose or
poetry you know the Bible has both prose
and poetry in a guitar part HN etc what
do I mean by sacred sacred is has these
characteristics you do not read it just
for information just for entertainment
you read it because you're seeking
transformation and you can return to it
you can read it get some insight some
transformation you go to live your life
for a bit and then when you return to it
again you see something new and I think
you didn't see before and then it
enables you to see something
world you see that I'm showing you that
it actually enables reciprocal opening
and it's a continual fount of
inspiration insight intelligibility for
you so try and come up with at least two
of those texts for Friday that would be
very very helpful I will use the text in
the practice to show you how to do it
because those are the texts I use and
then of course when you practice on your
own you want to use your text and of
course come with come up with questions
for the rest of the week so we can learn
how to do this practice together
all right I think that's everything I
need to mention before we begin please
set your phones to do not disturb get
yourself into your basic posture and
hope your mind stay together begin
you
you
[Music]
so they began to come out of your
practice trying as best you can to
integrate with your cultivated in your
practice with your everyday
consciousness and cognition
perhaps by reciting the five promises to
yourself
so only take one or two questions today
as I remember this remember Tuesdays and
Thursdays we have a heart stopped a
number later that 10 o'clock
Toby Korhonen asked what should be
happening when I'm deepening Metta when
you're deepening Metta you should be
getting a sense of opening not to just
to people but to all sentient beings and
then perhaps to all beings and then
something that is no kind of being
itself but the ground of being the
principle source from which being
emanates opening towards the deepest
mystery of participation
just like in in the past 'no you're
moving into the deepest mystery of
individuation and the two are
inseparably bound together the more
nests participation and the suchness of
individuation so opening up to that
ultimate ground of being
any other questions could take one more
maybe
looks like we're going to hold off the
rest until tomorrow we'll be able to do
a longer Q&A then a little bit longer be
able to go about ten ten I want to thank
you all for joining and I guess I'm very
grateful for the Sangha that is taking
shape around this practice and the way
you're all nurturing each other and
supporting each other and affording each
other that's priceless I want to thank
my good friend at techno mage Mar for
all of his works but while were lying
the scenes my beloved son Jason please
subscribe to the channel to be notified
of the next video on the channel you
also find awakening from the meaning
crisis was a lecture series voices with
Rob a key which is the discussions here
is both of them exploring many of the
topics we're practicing today and in
this course and it sets it into a
brighter a broader deeper context the
cultivation of wisdom deep meaning in
life response to the meeting crisis I
hope you'll have to find those extra
resources helpful to you invite others
who might be benefit by sharing this
series as I said from the beginning I'm
doing this for free I want to help
people as much as I can
I fully suspect as we start to come out
of the lockdown and we face economic
depression and we face the challenges
that have been posed to our sense of
connections to ourselves and each other
in the world we're also gonna face a lot
of psychological depression and so
trying to get these resources out to
people as soon and as comprehensively in
high quality as we can I do think is
very important so I'm very grateful for
your help please help me as much as you
can join the discord server pleasure of
doubt Brett is joins us from the
meditation there's people on the discord
sir who follow the meditation course you
can go there afterwards to discuss the
meditation class and that
of course you can also study this
customer broad-ranging work that I'm
doing and waiting from the meeting
crisis voices of baekje and related
issues and topic so please go there to
find a bridge inning and brilliant
community reminder that we're doing this
every weekday morning 9:30 Eastern Time
please remember that continuity of
practice is much more important than a
quantity of practice there's no enemy
worse than your own mind and body but
there's no end you know a lot greater
than in my body see you all more take
care