[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
from an anthropological perspective our
civilization has posited three major
transformations the Neolithic Revolution
some 12,000 years ago and hence the dawn
of Agriculture the Industrial Revolution
of 18th century introduced mechanization
rapidly advancing productivity and of
course the post caste revolution that we
now know as the great transition which
began at the turn of the 22nd century
I would describe the pre-transition
period as great a race between human
wisdom and complete societal catastrophe
which is what happens when a
technologically advanced culture isn't
mature enough to understand the nature
of its own power it's easy for us to
look back and wonder how the insanity of
that time went on for as long as it did
I mean here we were making sitting on
that scientific potential keep those
threats to public health and micrometer
their habitats and yet our cultural
baggage is so great loyalties to vocal
political religious and economic
philosophies so strong that we barely
made it to the most banal round today
and how did we get to this great
transition well it was quite the drama
the traditional avenues of that world
so-called democracy friendly climate
it would take the rise above kind of and
political subculture a subculture
existing far outside of the dominant
step to help guide our civilization in
the right direction and I must say it is
quite the story
they call themselves Concordia after the
ancient Roman god of Harmony the pro
revolution practices group world famous
after a decade of subversion suffered a
major blow this week with the capture of
leader John Taylor Simon why are you a
scientist or this really necessary
yeah I'm afraid so it was just last year
they breached the accounts of the
world's richest CEOs extracting some 1.6
trillion dollars moving that money into
virtually traceless charity donations
worldwide I assume you know why you're
here and not in some vassal state being
tortured right Beatrix so what exactly
is this place feel like I'm on a badly
rendered site by living on a spaceship
only spaceship a year before that they
jammed both chinese and american defense
systems during the saudi annex crisis
disabling thousands of warheads and
moved which some on the left frame might
have saved the world from world war 3
and in 2045 they leaked emails revealing
how major Wall Street investment firm
lobbied the CIA Assad and mi6 to help
secure monopoly control of where earth
metals in Asia
I think we agree this is unprecedented
to have a designated terrorist group
having a pop culture fascination with
public support of their anti-government
and anti corporate actions they're
published manifesto has been downloaded
hundreds of million times thousands of
supporting groups out there in social
media
[Music]
[Music]
you
[Music]