during this pandemic our individual
choices are drastically impacting each
other and that has always been the case
but this pandemic is showing showing
everything at showing our beauty at
showing our cracks at showing all of it
it's all out for the world to see and
it's going to get more more of the worst
and more of the good all of it it's
gonna get more intense and so I want to
talk about why people aren't following
the guidelines to stay in and stay
physically distanced from each other to
help flatten curve and I think I had
these four things are a big reason why
and there are four things that we can
actually solve together so that the next
thing coming down the pipeline is a
catastrophe doesn't have as negative an
impact of individuals not not listening
to the advice that's gonna help us off
one is that people don't have access to
resources people are in poverty people
are living paycheck to paycheck and you
make different decisions when you're
worried about your financial future or
your financial present if you don't know
how you're gonna pay rent in a few days
if you don't know how you're gonna pay
rent in two months if you think this
thing is gonna go on longer that's
stress you just you can't think clearly
and so even even consciously you're
gonna think this thing is less and less
of a big deal than it is because you
can't allow it to be as big of a deal as
it is for you in the economy and your
for your own personal financial
situation and so the more were able to
actually get our physical needs met get
fed get house get clothes without it
needing to be tied to a job the more
were able to weather this pandemic and
the pandemics that are coming down the
line because of climate change and you
know that were biological beans the
second so besides resources there's also
trust our trust in our media and in our
elected officials has been devastatingly
eroded over the last decades
and we understandably don't trust the 1%
owned media to tell us what's up we
don't trust our elected officials who
constantly are shown to lie and have no
no ramifications for it we need to
create a system that we trust that we
can go to for information and then it
doesn't matter what the media does we
need to be able to to create a
information source that the vast
majority of us trust and then invite the
world connection people are disconnected
they're lonely they feel abandoned by
society on the daily it's why social
media is is doing what it's currently
doing in people or just like sad and
scared and disconnected and during this
pandemic it becomes even more showcase
because you're basically locked inside
with your immediate family right with
the people that you live with and so you
might live alone and that becomes more
of a more apparent you might be in a bad
marriage or bad relationship or bad
roommate situation and that becomes more
apparent you might have a beautiful
family and still all of the fractures
are going are going to show like anyone
who gets through this like yelling at
each other please tell the rest of us
because I've been doing this for six
years and I can tell you that I do and
yelling at my kids and and losing my
 on a regular basis but I get better
on it as it continues to happen I get
more capacity for patience and an
understanding as I allow it to be what
it currently is but the fact that we are
disconnected and lonely is the reason
people one or like well I'm healthy I
you know I don't care I'm in it for me
me me me me but also people are scared
to stay inside by themselves for this
amount of time when they don't have
don't understand that they can have
video conversations they're not tapped
into all of the the art and creativity
and innovation that is currently
happening online and I can only imagine
this is a scary enough time for me when
I'm used to staying at home
as well as I am tapped into that I have
tons of amazing conversations online on
video I'm connected to all of these
groups that are working on making
respirators and figuring out how we work
together to get problem solved
I'm hosting conversations on how to do
solution raisings I mean there are place
to go which means it's the fourth point
which is people's purpose their sense of
self is tied to their profession is tied
to what they do for a living or just
that they do something for a living and
they don't have to rely on government
handouts and we're all about to need to
rely on government handouts or a
collective solution to our resources
that we can create together and so if we
can figure out how to give people a
purpose without needing a job that gives
them money to pay for the resources and
we can figure out how to get people the
resources so nobody's living in lack if
we can figure out how to create an
information system that we can trust and
we can make sure that everyone has the
highest level access to connection that
we've created the infrastructure so
nobody is left by themselves if
physically by themselves they're not
emotionally and spiritually by
themselves then we can weather this
storm and so many more to come
and all of those solutions access to
resources access to information we trust
access to other human beings who who
resonate with us and can see us and like
us for who we are an access to our
unique purpose and gifts and talents and
challenges in the world can all happen
together with the technology / solutions
cooperative one that we own together
that focuses on these things instead of
the uber competitive for-profit system
that has led to all of this complexity
that we're now seeing unravel and so
join me here on this channel where I
will be in a couple days I will be going
live every night at 6 p.m. Pacific
Standard Time and we will be talking
about just that how do we create a world
of abundance and peace for everybody how
do we go back how do we never go back to
the world as it was and how do we create
something so much more beautiful and
iliyan so that everyone's needs are met
so please like and subscribe and hit the
bell and you can see me every day during
the during the pandemic once I am back
in Vancouver flying out tomorrow thank
you