when I was in Jerusalem walking around
at night in the old city and down around
the old city everywhere I looked at
Jerusalem granite it was like oh cloud
mushrooms turned to the side stops but
everywhere in where the carved stone was
it was like being on suicide because
with a buddy of mine who Stefan suicide
before had no effect my son all the son
was also with me he didn't notice
anything
so my first thought was okay there's no
Jerusalem Granath isn't actually a
granite I think like an order of ischial
I install on okay there's got to be high
quartz content here's something to do
with specularity effect or whatever but
the fact that other people weren't
seeing it seems like it wasn't strictly
an optic phenomenon and could be a topic
which is they could be what Antarctic
and Arctic hmm basically the eye is
perceiving four nama phenomena is a
visual stimulus because it's not able to
parse it in any other manner
see so you seem to Adele very deep and
esoteric States and well yes after the
pronounced work with Denis I got into
what it like this call three mainstream
Freemasonry
so I went through every regular body of
York right the craft Lodge boy large
cryptic great preceptory York great
sovereign College allied Masonic degrees
so Leroy alert thanks Templar crease all
told about 20 degrees and orders ok well
it's something I know I know zero about
absolutely nothing about masonry despite
the fact that the liturgy is anchored in
the Old Testament it has more in common
with Buddhism that it does with
Christianity and the fact that it treats
its mystery tradition in its essence
anchored around the ease of the object
lesson
the structure I mean if it was someone's
model of a hierarchy Freemasonry is not
too bad one to look at really the basis
of the organization is the principle of
acting of your own free will in a court
they're definitely people who like to
coalesce around corrupted power issues
with that kind of an attitude up until I
think 1967 you could be excommunicated
from the Catholic Church
all right you know yeah I know this very
conservative Catholic and he he has the
view that Freemasonry is really the
devil right it's just it's just he has
this book that's he has this whole
conspiracy theory that is you know you
know there's almost there's an element
of anti-semitism in it and you know I am
this guy I know it's funny because
before he was a Stalinist right he was
he was a really hardcore communist since
he you know you really thought that he
really and then and then he converted to
this very strong form of Catholicism and
and so you know basically he thinks
there's this global you know Freemasonry
conspiracy of some kind that that's you
know bringing people up destroying the
world and you know it's a good joke well
the only Masonic conspiracy I saw who
was sending me to a district office in
Chapter did to what the district office
yeah so that the chair or the office is
called the grand superintendent it's the
equivalent to the deputy Grand Master in
craft Lodge so it's your responsibility
act as the representative of the grand
first principal to visit all the
chapters in the district for their
installations and inspects the work of a
degree so it's very secretive right like
how much can you speak about it like
we've all got websites now yeah okay
like organization I know has a public
website I see okay bye-bye just my
curiosity as like you know what is the
work that you do like much of the work
is really the work of
an organization so as you go through the
different chairs and any of the Masonic
bodies they have some little roles and
responsibilities so you basically go
from door to the master of the lodge and
learning different sets of Skittles to
go through our skills and
responsibilities as we go through each
one of those chairs and then that
organist local organization instead
mimicked up this at the district level
and then once again the grant so and so
what's the so so it's it's a
developmental path is somewhat or I mean
there was self developmental and then
developmental of the society as well yep
I mean it's the pram or the phrasing
that they use to make it meant better so
good men better okay yeah so the way I
see it is you're exercising discipline
principally through the memory work that
you have to do for ritual so there's two
main things that go on at a lodge you've
got the business of running your
organization mmm minutes a regular
agenda stress is running by Robert's
Rules of Order all that kind of stuff
and then on top of that you have the
ritual work so those two pieces come
together and then a ritual space you're
basically taking a candidate putting
them into a narrative in a specific
position so they can experience that
story for themselves
mm-hmm and then from the craft Lodge and
the two principal figures three figures
solemn king of Israel higher up higher
and higher so slow down man I I'm not
following solomon king of israel yeah
being of Tyre and Hiram Abiff or the
three principal characters within
freemason so the two kings are very
obvious Hiram Abiff is considered in
Freemasonry to be master architect or a
master builder of salts temple is just
before the completion of the temple
he's accosted by three ruffians who want
to
for the secret so him and rather than
give up the secret see boy that's ok
deep Lessman integrity they're people
with a pretty deep lesson and integrity
there uh-huh right yeah yeah I imagine
it's about integrity and some deep sense
right and it was interesting watching
some Peterson look lectures because
there's stuff out of there that's right
out of my sonic ritual for example the
one passage in the beginning was the
word and the Word was with God and the
Word was God
that's significant to the Royal Arch
there's a few other things in there that
yeah something that digs into the deeper
mysteries of the degree so there's a lot
of stuff I can talk about easily that's
public domain mm-hmm
any of the science secrets and stuff
like that that I'm under obligation so
so what what I guess I guess we're
talking because we've kind of right
we've sort of run into each other in
circles in our in discussions about
about Jordan Peterson know on some level
how do we get to talking to each other I
can't I think it was something through
Twitter I'd followed a rather rebel
wisdom stuff for a while and I think
thought that you were tagged writing
stuff rebel wisdom that's some of the
best stuff I see coming out around the
dark web like you've got a core group of
people who were talking in and around on
the proven report and I need God's no
virus like all the way under plate a few
others but rebel roast and I think is a
really solid space I've seen alignment
of interests yeah yeah I agree and I
kind of I kind of you know I was
blogging and
I went I went to London and did one of
their men's groups and they've got a
very solid organization with a lot of
telogen things going on I think yeah and
I think well you know I was I wrote
several essays about Peterson mostly in
response well you know it was I think
just a developmental practice of trying
to try to you know work out his thinking
in my own mind and and and also as a
defence against people who were
attacking him in some kind of way so you
know I kind of jumped into that and I
noticed that there was there's a lot of
people you know who who a lot of people
who are you know very hostile towards
them who I knew or on the progressive
side of the you know and I had a lot of
progressive friends and they find it
strange that I would be writing about
about about Jordan Peterson some sense
and so so there seems to be something
very compelling going on there what do
you think about that what's going on
there's the cognitive dissonance going
on I mean you've got part of the fun
fact or the fear uncertainty doubt
that's constantly being pumped out by
the media fear uncertainty doubt yeah
okay so there's an observation that
stress can drop like a cube by 30 points
the way stress can drop like you by 30
points relatively like sighs I think in
a lot of ways people are just getting
dumbed down so you've got massive
amounts of complexity which people are
very poorly adapted you deal in the
first place
yeah that's constantly ramping up and
then you've got this an introduction of
ideology in a social discourse which I
think kind of roots back to Steinem
respecters rude back roots back to wait
who Gloria Steinem gray Steinem okay the
concept of the patriarchy mmm-hmm I mean
is
the archetype will emit in the
transactional analysis sense I mean he
says about like patriarchy you cannot
have an adult conversation about
anything in that domain after that point
yeah what's going on with that not that
might be a good thing to talk about
actually you actually it's kind of what
I've been writing about recently it's
like this word patriarchy it's like it's
it's a misnomer almost in every way it's
like doesn't describe historical reality
you know kind of meet up yes really yeah
I mean rest a two-degree where there is
a criticism about hierarchy but I mean
answer logically we don't talk about
patriarchy used to be talking about
patrilineal matrilineal this reinvention
words or you know salting the lexical
field so we can't use the word
discrimination anymore because it's
automatically associated with race
discrimination you can't have a power of
discernment yeah like a weird double
thing going on with the whole I think
the two concepts that patriarchy and the
whole idea that the personal is
political as basically static context
people so you think those two things the
fact that the patriarchy and that the
person is political the person was
political I think those political
mmm-hmm those are two seeds that kind of
set up for trouble I mean people don't
really look you know twenty thirty
thousand iterations down how that that's
gonna go if you set up the basis for
conversation where you can't have an
adult conversation and then you start
making it okay for people to just kind
of dump their unfiltered personal
in a public space yeah a recipe for a
lot of social problems just no way
around it yeah maybe one thing one thing
that Peterson says is he calls this or I
guess it comes from Newman or fro
is devouring mother pathology right yeah
so it's like when when you when you in
the postmodern age when you when you
destroy the notion of you know
patriarchy I'd make sure I keep both in
fact you know because when I'm when I
was growing up I had no concept of
masculinity or femininity both those
things were unimportant to me right it's
just I in fact I I think femininity was
more important than me I grew my hair
long and I copied women and so both
those things in the past modern age get
kind of destroyed right and then they
kind of become subliminal and
underground and then the pathology both
side of those arises so you get the
tyrannical father and and you get the
devouring mother there's this aspect of
the a horrid a historicity as well so
mm-hmm we're in an age where we need 72
words to describe gender yet nobody's
able to use the word androgynous I mean
these concepts of androgyny go right
back at least as far back as mythology
well Adam was was not a man well he was
androgynous wasn't he I mean had the
original who the original Adam in a
biblical sense
was androgynous and what am I correct
about that he was let's say both male
and female and then and then and then
that split in two and then God split man
into male and female and in some sort of
certain sense that that you know and
every every person is sort of you know
every person is is you know I you know
every person has masculine and feminine
qualities obviously and then this split
in young in terms of split is like the
anima animus develops in the in the in
the female you know and the anima
develops in the mail you know this
repressed masculine the repressed
repressed feminine and and you know
that's I think that's what we're seeing
right now is is that
polarities have become unconcious and
then the repressed aspects of those
polarities are coming to the surface
does that make sense to you know that's
kind of the problem I always had with
Catholicism or I guess Christianity in
general I mean in the University of my
nickel it was the Antichrist so it's
interesting coming into this space with
Peterson because I feel like we've done
this cut ashes on inverse angles coming
at it and then I ended up pretty much in
the same thing space so I mean I do have
some criticisms some of the stuff that
he's got into like the whole the
dominance hierarchy the way and then
omits the dominance hierarchy yeah I
don't think the concept is remotely
robust enough to actually cover that
didn't he change that in a sense and
didn't you sort of say oh you know I
should be the competence hierarchy then
I think that's enough so let's look at
it as influence hierarchies these
influence hierarchies are structure on
different aspects of social capital
dominance being the most lowest possible
resolution one Commons higher resolution
communication I mean there's all these
different things if you start looking at
it as influence hierarchy it's not
explicitly meiling it's not completely a
male domain there's a means of
accounting for other things within
Turkey and start to address some of the
issues of production concept like an
influence hierarchy has a lot more work
ability to think the criticism Peterson
seems really soft on this criticism of
the economy business and how the
hierarchy all ties into this
I think the interview did with Pinker
that maker cut took him to task on that
a little bit it's like you know this
isn't all bed of roses he appear at the
economy
corruption place a lot of incompetence
all over the place
mm-hmm having worked in IT for 20 years
I'm with some of the biggest businesses
around and we're you know done jobs
report vastly underwhelmed in terms of
the degree of confidence at that level
mm-hmm vastly vastly over overwhelmed or
underwhelmed underwhelmed underwhelmed
by the level of confidence that's of
being late very little confident
competence just a lot of power and
little competence yeah well I mean
anytime you get the accretion of
organization then you start to deal with
the bureaucratic stuff and too much
bureaucracy and people just start
building little fiefdoms of power around
the mens they're not there for the
organization they're their protector
structure I mean there's no other link
Peterson hasn't talked about with the
hierarchies the whole idea of the Peter
Principle which comes from the military
so someone gets promoted just past their
degree of competence and then they're
basically stuck there in that position
uh-huh so they're not only stuck there
the organization is stuck around
[Music]
so where to which what do you think he's
right about oh okay let maybe way oh
yeah so you said you said that the idea
of competence hierarchies is not a
robust and not a robust I have to think
about that a little bit not a robust
concept it should be the influence
hierarchy that that would be more
accurate right why do you have any other
like major criticisms of his ideas of
his principle ideas of the core ideas I
mean there's not really meant that much
there's it's a nuance here and there the
other thing when I went to see him in
Toronto a couple of weeks ago with my
sons
there was a one thing I wrote down mid
lecture he was talking about Young's
criticism of Boyd in each he and the
basically being impossible to create
values so I see a lot since he seems to
have placed the subs or the context
here's the individual here's the
biological substrate where are all the
layers in between here yeah you can't
recreate this layer that's Ryoga so
you've got a couple of million years
worth of evolutionary pushing around
that no you're not going to recreate
that level but let's dig a little bit
deeper into the cultural level here I
think something that the Weinstein
brothers got into when you have to
develop your own model then you start
engaging with the world in a different
manner that's more towards getting
towards this flow state okay I'm not
sure if okay can you refine that or make
it a little bit more clear for me to
understand I'm sure I'm not sure if I
get it okay yeah I think you you
basically do have to create your whole
value system not you're not creating it
from scratch but you're testing
everything in your toolbox if you
haven't actually tested it and actually
mastered it then it's not really your
toolset well maybe there's maybe both
things are true you you create values
but you also you draw in archetypes at
the same time like yes those things
simultaneously in Freemasonry there's a
metaphor of
digging into the foundations of the old
temple any kind of rebuilding from there
I think he's also got an aspect of that
in his philosophy where you're yeah
everything's kind of blowing apart but
you're going back digging into the
foundations we building from the
archetypes and kind of reinvigorating
the whole thing miss that's that burning
off of the Deadwood process that has to
happen regularly in the more you defer
it well or aspire to get out of control
yeah but what about the value what about
creating values how do we create values
I mean it seems like there's there's
universal values right there's love and
hate and there's all these you know and
then there's there's you know you know
you're creating your value reference
you're creating your own maps of meaning
really I'm creating them yourself then
you've just adopted somebody else's okay
you've just become like what Gurdjieff
called mechanical man you're just
mechanical in here yeah your activities
so becoming conscious I'm at Thein
you're running on script you're not
really autonomous it's all reactive
behavior and then so much hater is
completely deeply obituaries like what
is what does an individual mean like how
do you become an individual you know
because you know I guess there's very
few individuals in some sense it's like
we're all individual but how many people
are actually individuals I mean how many
people are just souls in a sensor or mmm
I think that is the process of
individuation yeah yeah you know if you
read Newman's book he talks about that
being that being a you know this you're
arising from them a maternal or the
matriarchy and then you know and the and
the the patriarchy arises from from bat
right then we have our society right now
which has tikona and then and then you
get young and then you have to kind of
go back and you have to kind of reunite
with I guess the the the the feminine
the matriarch of something like that
well it's got to be that overworld thing
happening and I mean it's gotta be what
or Laura or us the snake eating its tail
yeah well yeah you come up you come up
from that and then
and then you you you developed
consciousness and that that's been very
much a male Judah in the judeo-christian
it's been very much a patriarchy in some
sense but but perhaps we're moving to
like what's that if you dig into the
roots so I spent a good chunk of time
studying a Cepheid zero that the
transcription of Abraham's original
vision it's like a technical analog to
Genesis 1:1 it's that's the capital of
Texas is it isn't it no so what I'm
thinking about it it's supposed to be
the foundational like the first written
see how much truth there is to that in
terms of its temporal placement it has
been placed like do you hundred year
later anyways it goes through the
creation of existence through the
alphabet that's where the tree of life
the key to space and all that stuff
comes then but yeah Lord of Hosts
creates the world through three divine
Serafim or feminine angelic figures
number letter and sound so right at the
foundation of it there's this
intertwining of the masculine and
feminine well that's interesting that's
like that counter counter to the Trinity
because the Trinity is all male isn't it
you just mentioned that there were three
three female principles yeah I think
part of what not an expert in this stuff
so I'm kind of I'm kind of you know
flailing around here but I think in
terms of the Christian context you you
got the development of the cultural
tradition you got all the stuff that's
going on with the Roman Empire and
basically as the state of Rome is
collapsing and this power structure is
2pi to the land physically well if you
can't control that land anymore in power
structure you get on put that power
structure up in the air unassailable to
the common people and then suddenly
you've got dominion over everything so I
think it's kind of a corruption of the
philosophy an intentional corruption you
know order to exert power I mean if
there's
criticism I ever had a crisis that he
didn't do a very good job on error
correction or making sure that the
transmission wouldn't be corrupted but I
mean that's that's that's interesting
because that's what this that's what
Jakob Jakob Lee but with his his whole
theory was that this whole theory was
that the Christian the Christian the
Messiah the Christian revelation it was
incomplete in some kind of a way and
that Jesus wasn't was not liberated yet
and that you had to go into you had to
go and liberate Jesus and this was a no
that was his sort of thing that Jesus's
soul in some sense was trapped and and
and and that's why there's so much
suffering around Christianity
yeah it's an interesting psychological
read on it it's one read and the other
read he had was that the tradition broke
you know Brooke in half so his idea was
the Jews need need to embrace the
Messiah I need to embrace the Christian
and the Christians need to come back to
the Jews to bring the tradition together
like the tradition had been broken at
the point of Jesus which was you know
there's all these different
interpretations right he also was they
also you know the Jewish some of the
Jewish mysticism says that that you know
we that God was this that the human
needs to heal God is not the other way
around right the job's job in this was
part of Julie's idea that job jobs jobs
mission was within the sense to to heal
God and human because God was was that
God principle was was you know God
because God created the world and God
created duality right God created
suffering yeah and that the human beings
job I guess it's like a bet what you're
saying about creating values human being
job is to is to is to is to heal the
divine rather than the other way around
unity so there's a one aspect of the
cosmology that says that the universe
was created by the numinous
differentiating itself or shattering
itself into a million pieces
yeah so that it could become
differentiated you know order to
understand and know itself
and then yeah our job is to basically
figure out the meaning you know it's but
I think that's a segue for me for
Peterson and Harris which I think we've
chatted a bit about in text but Harris
always comes off to me like a tourist
like I don't he doesn't read for me like
someone who's really experienced in
Europe or that kind of trembling feared
divine piety like he's never really well
I wouldn't presume to understand what
his experiences particularly but I do
think that I do think that the fact that
he's done these Buddhists retreat and
then he's trying to invent the secular
religion is problematic you know so he
sought it wants it like he studied with
this great ocean teacher and and yet he
wants to interpret the whole thing in
his own in his own way and and and in a
secular materialistic you know you know
way which is is is you know I'm thinking
if if he was really operating within the
dough I think in that within the domain
of truth in terms of his relationship
with with whatever this particular
teacher was was trying to pass on to him
so I think well yeah and I think he I
think he has this very sharp kind of
analytical intellect but he just doesn't
seem to grass symbology in the symbolic
world in any in any way he just he just
he just he just he just reduces that to
its you know it's just he just reduces
that to its lowest denominator over and
over again and you know really he just
it's funny that I was listening to his
discussion and all the people all the
all the religions he was criticizing
were were Isis and Scientology all is
like modern you know that's that little
he was criticizing and and that that
those religions are as a result of this
this I think materialistic reduction is
pointed point of view trying to
just take the techniques out of the
living body of the of the tradition yeah
the idea of art a technique says that
this is the technical competence
required to exercise the art but you
don't have the art together then it it
doesn't have the like yeah or even in in
left-brain right-brain it's like he's a
completely left brain or yeah left brain
character in the senses yeah some
computers and talks about transcendence
or tragedy like he can see he's been
there like yeah he embodies it it
possesses him when he talks about it's
not some abstract concept where with
Paris it also he's kind of in a smart
and it's all pretty abstract and he's
very elevated yeah at the I'm waiting
for the Pangburn talks to come out
officially so I can actually go through
that and see how that discussion went
but watching Jonathan as Joe's reactions
doesn't sound like it went too far well
you know well you know so Peterson put
forward this very elaborate definition
of what he means by God you know I was
like 20 different things and and you
know he couldn't even just say it he had
to actually read it because because he
thought about this stuff for 20 years
you know and and then and then and then
and then sam harris interrupts him and
said excuse me you know Jordan
is this the same God that says you know
you can't masturbate it's like okay well
are you guys talking about the same
thing in any sense it's like no it's
like a little high school job like come
on seriously to have a real conversation
here and you got to play this like
what's this all about
yeah and also it was a fellas yeah
exactly it was an adolescent response
like okay you don't like the rules right
so you you want you want to do it all
yourself right but I don't think it
works that way I just I just don't think
it works that way well I did we need to
have more robust conversations around
that too so I think if you go through a
lot of that biblical quotes like in the
beginning us work
and the word was with the logos and the
word was the logos well that starts to
take on a meaningful depth and you don't
have to be religious in order to got
that so I think so the logos as I am
it's like your own personal relationship
with the Newman's so beyond the
tetragrammaton of the logos is the
numinous so I in I in so for himself out
but nothingness limitless nothing this
limitless light so that is the high
unity but your or our human mediation
point to do that is through the logos
literally through the logos so the old
is the representation of the rabbi's
hand pointing to divinity hey you know
frame of reference above is a nail
finding the next hey another frame of
reference so you have the highest ideal
framed against the residense the future
in a coherent frame of reference
I mean conceptually it was something
that I clicked for me with that a while
ago yeah I've thought about the
Tetragrammaton quite a bit I mean that
that's important that visualization for
separated serie that I did posted on
I personally YouTube channel that's
going back 20 years now back when flash
for was the thing so I think we start
reframing some of these discussions
later where is this appropriate where is
the logo specification I think most
cases the logos is where we need to be
actually addressing this stuff okay like
like I'm not very versed in this stuff
so so you have to explain it to me a
little bit more in layman's terms you
know because I because again it's not my
tradition so the logos the logos is that
is the point of entry the point of
contact
to the numinous that's what you're
saying yeah that's how that kind of
visualize it so in that speech according
speech or divine thus a divine sacred
sacred speech or like in some capacity
language okay yeah so Hebrew has no
vowels in it it's all consonants yeah so
there's an an idea within magic that you
have the fundamental represents of
everything that's just kind of this
undifferentiated white noise and the way
a generative process is by adding
signification or punctuation into that
white noise and you need to start
creating structure so the language means
doing that with sound but go back to the
Cepheid syria it's number letter and
SAPO and number letter and sound and
then with the Ebro but then every letter
also represents now so LF this office
house emails camel stuff have to do with
i mean is a relationship to that
tradition and and masonry are those two
or this is a separate area of study for
you overlapping areas of study so
there's stuff in paul foster Kate or the
old Tarot which was the basis of all
foster cases so there's iconography in
there which is paired with Freemasonry
[Music]
the collage is about the building of
Solomon's Temple the royal barge is
about rebuilding of the second temple
under Zarrella cool cryptic right goes
back to the first temple again and digs
deeper into the higher epic story
preceptory knights templar digs back in
its story if it's durable again and then
other degrees kind of go off in
different directions from there so
there's an overlap
- egg tradition the esoteric history of
Freemasonry they trace back into Egypt
through Judaic tradition I think the so
the Tetragrammaton nor what we hang will
size does Jehovah that word itself is
also the combination of to be in the
past present and future tenses to be in
the past in the past present and future
sentences revert to being and that
constructional word is basically a
concatenation of to be in the past the
present and the future literal so
interesting word matrix image while
write that word vertically it's an
anthropomorphic figure price saying I
come in his name put the sheen in the
middle of the oh hey buck okay and yeah
Yeshua literally in his name
yeah the fundamentalist reading I think
with all this stuff is really where it
starts to fall down and Harris's got
that kind of fundamentalist I don't know
if he's just not willing to engage or
it's easy for him to to sidestep that by
saying oh yeah it's this crude stuff
instead of digging in doing some of the
deeper stuff behind it well it's like
he's he's formed his atheist he's formed
is his family in a way and he's forming
he's got a kind of there's a
psychological expression I heard about
called tribal block right and so he's a
night ascribe any he can't he can't
think outside that this and it's just
almost it's impossible for him to think
outside of that it was possible for yeah
it's the descent in the home on oxy yes
to descend to what into homo Doxie homo
doc see what does that mean so weird I
really with the group thing
so groupthink yeah question of where's
the left go wrong my responses same
where every one else does they go
from home at oxy group thing to
orthodoxy
- dogma mm-hmm no that's a good way to
put it it's a standard path the sins
start people start stepping into the
echo chamber and not counting for
difference in viewpoint that's the way
it's gonna play out mm-hmm and I think
the left really did that I mean there
remember things like you know
everybody's got a valid viewpoint
everybody's got thought about boys and
Peterson echoes this to degree when he
says you know everybody's got something
to teach you
exactly what I was I was I was talking
with Paul he said the same thing like
that's a profound thing that Peterson
says like a you know each person is
really has something to teach you so
you're not even that each person is is
is like naughty and everything that
appears has something to teach you it's
like it's opportunity to learn
everywhere I mean I've learned process
optimization and addition taking job so
part in what in in a what job as a dish
Pig okay I've done that as well okay
there's opportunity to learn everywhere
but this whole coupling those two ideas
everybody's got you know something of
the value to say and I don't know it's
like if you individually rated yourself
sure if you haven't your signal-to-noise
ratio that's it you or you're just a
voice of the collective in some sense
yeah you're just the super-ego speaking
in a way you're not for the same point
made by fifty nine hundred other people
yeah sorry
a bit more yeah or you just need living
thought or you need you know give me
something give me something to give me
something to work with here
not just this mechanical repetition of
different you know you know hypnotic
formulas of political righteousness
these axiom constructions so like you
either got the pointed axiom you're with
us or against us all one side or the
other
watershed where you've got seams that
create a bounded space you don't go
outside of the channels but at the same
time all those axioms mean very
different things to different people
depending on where you are in the
personality didn't mention mm-hmm one
axiom could be extremely helpful to you
you say if you're high in eroticism or
something like that but if you're very
low in agreeableness
it might create a completely toxic
personality so without you've really
need to understand where these things
are grounded in the perspective of who's
hearing it and what it's yeah that's so
have you absorbed this all of five trade
personality thing from from Peterson as
well and thought about that or did you
know about that before or I'd come
across bits of it before I mean 20 years
an idea so I spent a lot of time as a
manager at waffle and dealing with HR
and hiring processes stuff without so I
I tried to dig into what was the current
psyche they're not just the see so much
buzzword the crabbed was like reading
sales flyers from any other industry I
found that that's kind of informed how I
look at people in the world
Peter's articulations of the of the five
five traits Peterson's articulations at
the five five traits you know for
instance I'm very high and openness and
my wife's very high in conscientiousness
so so it's otherwise I probably couldn't
survive and on some level right I mean
unless I had that there was that balance
in our relationship and then again you
know you know then I understand I
understand you know why she should
reactive to certain things it's it's
it's characterological right it's not
just it's not a sin or something you
know you know what I mean like it's not
like you blame a person for being who
they are you know and I you know I was I
guess because of my character being very
you know not not conservative right high
an openness I always I always thought
conservative people were we're stupid on
some level and I see that I'm kind of
I'm kind of wrong about that there's
there's a there's a
there's a wisdom there's a wisdom to
that as well right there's a wisdom to
all these different personality types
you know I and Buddhism there's
something called the five families of
Buddha and they're almost you can almost
map them on you know I'm almost map them
on this this is more MOT this more you
know empirical scientific thinking with
the the Venus and that pentagram as well
with that
you can you can map that on so I think
that that wisdom has kind of existed on
some esoteric level you know before it
gets articulated into scientific
rationale you know empiricism like you
know different different personality
types fit in in in the Buddhist frame
that they fit in a Mundell in a certain
kind of way you know the white foot is
in the center and that's openness and
then you have these you know you have
the red Buddha in the West and you have
the so you have this this this sort of
cosmology of different personality types
and each person is valid you know within
that come up cosmology well I think that
gets towards the I constructive truth
that all use so everybody's got a small
t piece of the truth it's honestly the
big t then that must combine and
integrate all those small pieces and
small T's don't fit into the big t while
they're not worth it figure things out
that all put back into separate sit here
again and the construction the Cubist
base so yeah Lord of Hosts creates the
world through these three divine Serafim
the first action is to take couplets or
Triplets of the three bead letters in
different organizations to mattify the
six surfaces of the cube and then the
three mother four letters market the XY
and Z attack seats within the center of
the cube it says double letters Marco
six surfaces again and then the seventh
one cinches in the center you're losing
me man I'm just you're losing yeah I
can't follow I can't follow that I need
to see a picture I think I can it's just
far too refer to a satiric for me too
to follow just just like that as you're
saying about the length for you but it
lays out the physical geometry x y&z
axis of 3d space it sets the outer
bounds of that space it's a it's an
interesting pattern that lot going on
there that's one of the things that
stressed me but Ebru
early i wish i knew more of its Sanskrit
the same reason that he's really archaic
languages there was aspects of Hebrew
even though it comes out of the
Phoenicians that there's a coherence
that doesn't seem to be there in other
languages like the whole thing with
c'mon tria we're instead of sub
patterning there especially if we diggin
geometry in Genesis 1:1 that's the
numbers Senate is like the layout of
Euclidean geometry
there's the error correction thing and
then it stops at the end of that chapter
she doesn't continue from there which
was odd mm-hmm
I'm one of Peterson's lectures where
he's digging into the basically the
Anthropology of the Bible and looking at
the different groups like the yah was
the flok mists digging into that a
little bit more to see where kind of the
nuances of the cultural traditions hold
into that the names are different like I
don't I is masculine Lord Elohim
feminine yeah well this or this rabbi oh
you would say that the the the the in
the Jewish tradition the Holy Spirit is
feminine and he would always say that
you know if women is not present then
God is not present you know it's like
the two have to be together for God to
be present and Judaism and Buddhism are
the only organized traditions that I
have any affinity with I'm all over what
Pearson's doing with the construct the
logos and everything else but I would
never identify myself explicitly
Christian really Gnostic
in my Holy Trinity math physics and
chemistry you have you have you have
affinity to Gnosticism or as well or not
Gnostic practice I mean that the
Gnosticism comes from the Rays of the
gnomon are the sphere in the sundial
mmm-hmm those things so not this isn't
for me is the direct engagement of that
process not having it mediated by
somebody else
you actually have why why you know I
will almost wanted to ask Paul about
this why is Christianity so terrified of
these things like you have the Gnostic
fallacy and all that and why and why are
they so terrified of unusual I guess
it's because it's a huge institution
like the Catholic Church right and
simply delete any bureaucracy you know
yeah I guess yeah you know but if you
think of if you think yeah well I I'm
I'm similar to you my biggest affinity
is I guess with with vijana and Zen and
and but and also and also a Jewish
tradition which is I'm just kind of you
know III don't have the just dipping
into a little bit like a Peterson seems
to be reviving the Christian myth for
the West and in some sense don't you
think or you don't see any value in that
I do I think he's on to something and
the premise that were untethered from
history and twenty years ago there
wasn't a music shop in Peterborough and
it's too young hip-hop guys in there and
one guy starts bitching about whoever's
playing on the music the store ripping
off Eddie the guy in the store goes
there puts down the police element in
front of them he goes look at the date
goes oh no your did he was like what 30
years later these people it's like
Kristin if you don't if your Krishna you
don't know what the Council of Nicaea is
regardless of whatever discussions on
why women down there if you don't know
what the council is how do you call
yourself Christian it's the heat you
know your whole ethos how can you not
know anything about its cultural
traditions and actually understand it in
some degree of death like that's kind of
where can you put on the Technicolor
coat and oh my Christian like you've got
to engage it in some fast you need to
understand and the historical thread of
how things developed I understand how he
got here that's one really liked about
the discussion with Peterson Anglia
where they both have this really long
view look yeah
1000 years long and across the breadth
of cultural traditions yeah really
robust and wide lens on human experience
before we start Pecola is Peggle is
amazing I read a book sexual persona
when I was in my 20s and I I think it I
think it changed my my entire mind in
some kind of a way in terms of how I saw
these things yeah it was a heavy piece I
mean that was cultural studies 101 press
we got a copy of that one yeah you did
that you do you read that in cultural
study they let you read that in cultural
studies it was possible to read that and
know so that would have been 1991 1991
yeah when the book came out that's what
when I heard it yeah so you you you
you're a father you have a bunch of kids
you you work in a you work in computing
and what's your software in systems
architecture I got two boys one of
them's 18 and 21 Wow
all the son is in the reserves transfer
unit Jeremy my youngest son still in
high school he's working I've got a
company called Norton simulated trading
systems for a virtual firearms range so
my youngest son and I are building a
brand new virtual firearms platform
virtual firearms aside from oh yeah it's
a training platform ok learning how to
shoot so you like to shoot things I say
I mean there's stuff like that you at
you I play our stuff and stuff like that
so I mean the warrior monk ethos so the
Freemasonry exercises is the brain the
memory work and all that stuff and then
I'm a desk jockey I need to get out and
get out from behind a desk and I don't
like you've MS ins especially in sport
it's rich analyze comment so let's get
in there ok you're an interesting dude I
hard time following everything you say
but it's quite it's quite quite rich you
get that lateral thing it's the little
tougher people come up sometimes go off
into the bushes a page line so if you
think you've read a couple of the
Sephirah Ben pieces that have been
working on yeah I wouldn't say that I've
read them deeply I've grazed them yeah
ok yeah so so III in the sense I've read
over them quickly and I thought okay
there's something you know going on here
but I couldn't say that I I wouldn't I
wouldn't say that I understood them
because I have to I would have to I
would have to I would have to really
think through them together or maybe I'm
not supposed to understand that maybe
they're just some sort of a transmission
that I'm not supposed to understand I
was supposed to just I'm supposed to
register on them them on some subliminal
level and absorb them that way so that
whole roll back of it it's gotta be
close to 20 years ago now doing some
visionary work on psilocybin and just oh
I hit with this vision again the
triangle that's coming out so it was a
triangle he appeared to me in a flash
and thunder I am but a stone before that
she that's your graphic
that's the yeah that's the graphic I've
been working on it's actually a
generative if you reload it quick it'll
it was like a lightning bolt aha I see
yeah yeah when you reloaded it okay so
you go through and it just kind of blew
up and those words and then left to
figure it out that was about 20 years
ago that was I was involved with the
pronounced work at that point so it's
the Paul foster casework but this was
before I got got involved in mainstream
Freemasonry this vision was part of what
led me in that direction was that go
through paleo the Paleolithic shamanism
follow that forward and then basically
go back so most of the modern Western
history traditions live heavily whether
you're talking about any of the stuff
charlatans and do like a dilemma or
ordinary and like most of their most
these people who started these
traditions lifted a lot of ritual
structure at Freemasons
so from the rainiest I went into
traditional brief mastering under the
Grand Lodge of Canada reporting under
the Grand Lodge of England and from
there I started poking around with this
idea like what in human condition is
worthy of being written in stone like
what survives that test and kind of
taken that on a personal level and then
a couple two months ago watching a
YouTube lecture with James Flynn
the guy from the Flynn effect cuts the
IQ so Glenn calls himself a moral
philosopher who dabbles in psychology
but the Flynn effect was looking at my
key studies and basically the fact that
we're showing 30 points higher across
the population that would work years ago
mm-hmm up until 1970 and then the Flynn
effect seems to a theater game and not
just Plateau but started to drop
Flynn's premise on this was based off of
the work of a Russian psychologist named
Alexander Luria and you know laureate
went around and asked people different
types of questions how are efficient
across similar they're not remotely at
all that's you know fish swims of water
crow flies croaking
so the end run of Lurie and his stuff
was that he looked three cognitive tool
sets abstraction with the application of
logical reasoning treating the
hypothetical as potentially possible and
classification so I something just
clicked with that I know I can be an
arrogant prick so sometimes I think I
hear he calls himself up being kind of
arrogant I'll just say straight up
 stupid people especially in
positions of business or power it's just
mind boggling like how do you get here
when you get tired she used but instead
of sitting in that kind of arrogance
like rolled down what the hell is
actually going on in the broken thinking
and really mmm these tool sets I mean
nothing's changed in the biological
substrate in 100 years but the market so
I see it tie here between what Pearson
was talking about the head start program
in the 60s where they're trying to raise
people up school program things like
that
mmm-hmm you know the end run was that
didn't really work other than the fact
the kids who were better socialized it
did better but I think in certain in the
same context on a social remediation
having access to effective cognitive
tool sets that mean once all the
difference in the world
like I'm cuz I learn all the on my
own and dig pretty hard to find it out
whereas you know some these tools should
be available for people like take
something like the John Howard
xiety and their conflict resolution or
anger management program teaches death
put that into the public health unit
yeah once every two years a one or two
week unit from great to all the way
through high school yeah it's kind of
staggering how how education is stagnant
I think like yeah I mean it ties into
the what the resentments I had in terms
is Christianity in terms of its kind of
look down your nose holier-than-thou
it's like that's useless it
doesn't remediate anything you need to
give people meaningful tools and space
to learn how to use them if you wanna
see actual change mm-hmm so I mean that
degree that's where I think the free
Minister comes in to at least out of
pattern levels so sets of working tools
like cognitive working tools so
cognitive working chose chose to make
people more intelligent in a sense yeah
just it's a better toolkit that they're
carrying around with them and I mean
again the biological substrate has not
changed but if you give to people better
tools after the start I'm gonna do a
hell of a lot better and so that was
kind of the old separation between you
know upstairs and downstairs was the
Downton Abbey model upstairs always
figured you know it was better because
you know he can see the difference in
these people because they didn't quite
have all those things there and we start
to do a moralistic like no four
forks and knives and spoons on the table
just to show or humiliate the people you
don't know how to pick them up in the
right order like that's some kind of
meaningful differentiation at a social
level
it was the fling the idea of those three
domains of cognitive development so
abstraction great useless if you don't
apply logical reasoning logical
reasoning isn't very good without the
abstraction either to start to get you
into accretion and bureaucracy it's
sweet side
a hypothetical well people are either
Chicken Little the sky is falling or
just like nothing to see here
I don't see anything and classification
I mean again that's very much the
resolution issue that Petersons looks
like it's okay to have these short forms
but you need to understand when the
short form is just the short form and
this is actually a whole domain of stuff
behind it short form meaning just
abstraction right like or you know the
map not being the territory yeah yeah
exactly yeah that's what I find about
you know Harris's like okay she's trying
to make the entire East right okay
yeah rational abstraction being you know
the answer to all human human you know
problems it doesn't cut it it's like
you're making a map as big as the world
all right it's just it doesn't get into
the depth the depth right yeah and what
I've been trying to do with Safra been I
guess is take all his personal journey
stuff and turned it into an open-source
model
good no bird search monologue so he said
an open source model so I don't beside
besides the texts that I'm running as
the you know the 1.0 version for
feedback and criticism so there's the
texts aspect of it that's broken down
into box and very bus so the box would
be you know this he appeared to me in
flash and thunder that was actually like
a personal transmission to use the
phrase address in action mystical space
where everything else is the verbo or
like the commentary the the literal
voice versus speaking in the voice of
christian tradition
the second part of that is to build some
visualization tools of around the Big
Five personality stuff so there's a
couple of sites like open psychometrics
org that have datasets I'm more
interesting at the big five and
population great five what Big Bite
population data I'm looking at the big
five and a context in poverty you know
I'm more of the subgroups breakout and
things like that
no so part of its this you know trans
with trans me mention around mystical
experience and then the other part is a
set of tools being able to actually dig
into some of the stuff and look at
yourself over time like Peterson talks
about the micro skills develop a little
bit and I don't think people are as
fixed as we project I think there's a
lot of room for growth across all of the
personality dimensions yeah yeah well
that was that was my initial misgiving
about this this is like okay how fixed
is the human personality and it depends
on how much you want to work apparently
you just you just you to eat a bit of
cell a7 suicide then psilocybin
mushrooms and then you can you can you
can increase openness one standard
deviation or or whatever so so so
obviously there are methods to seriously
change the personality although it seems
quite rare
the people are in contact with a lot of
these methods if people have liked some
of the some of the likes things
sometimes some of the practices I've
done in Buddhism are extremely physical
right it's like yeah and I don't think
people are aware that how that these
practices exist and they can change you
to a radical extent you know maybe if I
did and I could do some other kind of I
could go in a cave somewhere and do it
some other kind of practice for a year
and I could develop this other you know
I could develop this other visionary
ability but you know which would change
my personality but
but then again most most of us kind of
remain sort of we don't change that much
well people get fairly static in their
habituation and they don't its ticularly
comfort zone they don't push it as much
I mean there's it's very rare to find
people who engage with that innately
most people won't dig into that
transformative space until trauma forces
them to right it's a drama until crisis
I mean that's certainly my case I mean
crisis is it's just you know craft being
becoming dissembled becoming destroyed
by some event that happens in your life
it would be the only way that I would
have gotten into this at least an
initial investigation you know because I
still you know consider myself a
beginner but you know but you know I'm
kind of a beginner who has been
beginning for a long time say that first
the scene funny literally two weeks
before I heard about him I was I
submitted a proposal for a TED talk and
Milton close to here looking at identity
politics from systems analysis
perspective bunch of the same behavioral
pattern stuff when he first came on
board I think my first message to a
buddy mine was I want to start from
history tradition for this guy it's like
finally here's someone in public domain
who's looking a at the breadth of
material that has to address journal in
a lot of different directions and then
the depth of it I mean yeah I've got a
few criticisms up here and there that's
mostly specific little things but in
general process and principle that's the
way we need to be moving yeah well
that's the thing I was talking to
telling this to Paul the other day is
that I've met people in my life who I
considered you know maybe I've gone
further than Peterson but they're not
public figures right and they're not
having this effect this enormous effect
on the world you know they might they
might be having an enormous effect in
the world
in some subtle way that you know we
don't know but but but I couldn't talk
about them in a public space and I
couldn't talk about I couldn't talk
about those meetings that I've had with
people who are you know who are very
deep because those people first of all
are not interested in being public
figures probably and and second of all
that nobody would know what the hell I
was talking about I think that's part of
the problem with Peterson he covers so
much material in breath that you know a
lot of people are picking up two three
out of ten and there aren't really
seeing the whole picture so they're
making it really grossly misinformed
assumptions of what it is exactly saying
yeah yeah a real lack of willingness
yeah and I guess it's just human nature
right to me to make a cult of something
right like yeah I mean there's a hole to
make it to make a to make a cult of the
most superficial aspects of the thing
right yeah instead of reading maps of
meaning and you know and getting going
into the depth of that people are
getting it the most superficial
political stuff which is the least
interesting and if you see then while
you see that from the Facebook groups
that stuff as well like I was in the
boat party fairly early upon it like
it's the worst of the worst of all
low-risk conversations oh well I don't
really have I don't really have Facebook
conversations anymore I've just stopped
doing it because I found that it's like
people even like you know I can almost
apologize to you because you wrote me a
bunch of stuff in that and I just I
can't I can't respond to Facebook to
chatting anymore I don't want to do that
I want to do this kind of thing right
because this is so much this is this
this
is such a it's so much of a bigger
dimension having a real conversation
than having a text conversation and all
these text conversations leaves the
misunderstanding and animosity and gross
you know reactive react so I've kind of
I become allergic to chatting you know
in text and I think chatting in text is
almost a it's it's like a the reason all
this long-form conversation is suddenly
becoming appealing and people are into
that is because this chatting in text
has become so toxic and that people
people you know or like you know I've
been having them Curt buy that in some
kind of a way right and and they need to
have a fuller story they need a longer
they need a longer you know bigger story
they need to have conversations with
people like it's like it's like when you
have a conversation with people side so
there's something that something happens
right something really happens you you
you you don't just it's not this
masturbatory I don't know how to say
that but I don't know if you had that
feeling it's me but you're you're a
techie guy so you're on computers all
the time but I just I just stay away
from chatting with people these days
it's like I want I want I want to move
out of the social network world into the
into the the into into you know into
into because I think like I think a lot
of people lost their soul in that space
in some kind of way does that make sense
or yeah it's disconnected I did tweeted
something a couple of weeks ago tune in
turn on tune in turn on drop by
reversing that like turnoff to no drop
in turn off the shed do you know and
then actually see people in me in space
like ice or if not that then at least
like you can see the purpose and when
you're talking and actually have some
kind of definitely agent there
yeah yeah that's see more of that kind
of coming up I I don't go out and do a
lot of socialization see shows and stuff
with that bit of people like hanging out
yeah there's better conversation
starting that happen at the same time
people I went to university with you a
really great degree respect for their
intelligence and their integrity of just
going completely brain-dead can't
process new information anymore that
just totally shut down it's kind of
frightening
see ya people shut down right they you
know it's true you know people shut down
become very you know the learning
process stops at some point and it's
become ossified engaging the learning
curve
[Music]
[Music]