[Music]
Eric Davis thank you very much for
taking the time happy to be here so Eric
you are an author and your work covers
kind of the intersection between
technology as a terrorism you've also
talked and written about psychedelics so
those are topics that I'm personally
very interested in and have been for
many years
there are also topics it I found it
could be difficult to get to get people
to understand why they're so relevant
right now so I thought we would start
with that and get your take on that why
are these important things for us to be
looking at right now yeah that's a good
question because I mean I've been I've
been writing and thinking about these
things for a long time since probably
just since then let's say the early 90s
and in that period of time they were
pretty esoteric I mean not technology
obviously although even then when I
first started writing about the early
internet culture it was still pretty
small you know before the world wide web
came out there was a whole sort of
underground at esoteric freak it's a
lecture alone
you know through BBS servers and you
know and all you know of groups and muds
and mousse and so that was like the
early my early experience of even kind
of digital technology was this sort of
underground that was online and those
were the sort of first days of virtual
reality everyone was thinking about
virtual reality how that was going to
change everything and then they you know
the physical manifestation of that took
a lot longer and then these other things
were marginal in a lot of ways
psychedelics the occult the paranormal
you know there was they popped up on TV
you had the x-files you know there were
there were signs of them but in general
it was sort of a marginal thing to
follow and now none of its marginal
anymore and that's one important reasons
to go why why did this happen why is it
now that investment bankers and fashion
designers and when academics are
interested in taking ayahuasca or that
the you know that there's
sort of resurgence of popular culture
about witchcraft and paganism that there
are these younger witch movements that
are coming up and that the occult sort
of permeates more and more of a popular
culture what's going on what's why is
this all happening now and I think it's
there's a couple of reasons one is just
that consumer capitalism likes to find
an edge that it can colonize that has
some kind of flash so what initially
appears to be strange and challenging we
can move into and then more and more
people have access to it and it becomes
like a cool thing for a while then after
a while it gets kind of absorbed and
another fashion trend comes along so I
think some of that's what's going on but
I think there's a more more important
deeper dimension which is that partly
because of the spread of Technology a
digital technology of media smartphones
of the internet of social media that for
a variety of reasons the way that
consensus reality was structured in the
past even in the immediate past is
eroding and as it arose as it becomes
harder to let's say distinguish between
the online world and our physical world
because now our phones are with us
everywhere the sensors are with us
everywhere we're mapping this real space
to this space and going back and forth
more and more and we're looking at our
phones all day long we're like
interrupting or physical reality reality
with these information flows those two
worlds begin to kind of break down you
know again talking about the 1990s you
know we had this now very quaint corny
phrase of cyberspace it was a different
place when you got online you went to
cyberspace and in cyberspace there were
different rules you could be different
characters you could build fantasy
worlds you could meet that ended up and
we don't think that way anymore
it's nice well it's kind of one
interwoven digital read you know actual
material space this is a
interesting point which one is real you
know where is in your mind is that kind
of cyber what we used to call cyberspace
which is blended into our physical space
is it less real is there some underlying
reality that it's kind of masking us
from seeing or is it is it just as real
as everything else well yeah I mean the
language of realities are real a really
tricky one and you know I think it's you
have to kind of define your terms what
do you mean by this and that but I think
that the reason that things like
psychedelics and the occult are more
resonant now is because they both
represent sort of rich and creative
forms of let's call it irrationality
even though I don't really like that
word because it implies the rationality
is the real thing and irrationality is a
deviation when it's something more like
magical thinking or mythological
thinking thinking that does not follow
along mathematical logic or purely
causal physics or something like that
and maybe in the past we know we lived
alike in the recent past in the 20th
century we lived in a physical world
that was ruled by the laws of physics
and science and chemistry and and then
we would escape maybe to films or comic
books or maybe even we would be in a
religion and we'd do something that was
kind of different than that I feel like
right now
even if we're secular people our
experience of the everyday of just
ordinary reality is less and less
ordinary at least in the traditional
sense because these virtual or
algorithmic or digital logics are now
completely embedding themselves in our
not just in our spirit you know in our
experience of how the world works but
even our experience of ourselves and how
our minds work how we work how where we
are where are we in the phone am I
spread out through the networks that my
phone connects to all of my friends or
all of the information sources am i
there am I in a body here interacting
with the screen am I the screen that
these things aren't really abstract
questions anymore that were on some
level we're playing with them and
psychedelics and the occult and other
forms of irrationality are actually in
some ways good models for trying to feel
our way into what it means to be no
longer operating in this kind of
concrete space-time that we recently
were because everything is being you
know unraveled and then once you once
you start to unravel consensus reality
as a physical world where there's laws
of physics and also social institutions
that organize reality so we we trust the
newspaper we know they're not always
true but you know we more or less feel
like the newspaper has a good line in on
reality and you know when I grew up
there was there weren't that many news
sources so you know even though there
was a left wing and right wing and
whatever there was a sense that
everybody was talking about the same
reality that's gone you know the actual
feeling of consensus reality has
fragmented into these multiple worlds
with different basic assumptions about
how the world works is there climate
change is you know is there a conspiracy
you know is the earth flat you know all
of the stuff that again previously was
very marginal is now widely distributed
through reality you walk down the street
all these normal-looking people that
person might be a flatter through that
person you know might believe in the New
World Order or that you know that person
believes in UFOs you know it's it's much
more widespread because the nature of
the media has changed so much that once
you're looking at a particular kind of
information source or a certain kind of
world you just get more and more
feedback that supports that view and
there's more and more reason to distrust
everybody else so we're all learning how
to distrust everybody else and to
conform to our particular worldview and
that arose the sense that there's some
larger consensus reality that's weaving
us together so we're kind of let loose
and this very fragmented it's like
people used to complain about
post-modernism in the 80
in early nineties it's like no now we're
now we're living in it now we're living
real relativism or whatever because it's
just how we experience the world are
trying to communicate with other people
I mean it's it's really it's really hard
to have a conversation with a flat
earther or certain kinds of conspiracy
theory because there's no basis you can
you know like well no I mean climate
change is real because you know our
scientists show that this and they're
like no that's a fabrication and it's
being used by special interests and
you're like well where is the point
where we both other than the English
language where we both can kind of agree
on something
so that's splitting I think is is making
our experience less rational in a lot of
ways because rationality is partly an
incredibly robust and dependable
language of consensus my background is
in teaching meditation then also being
involved in the psychedelic world and
most of what I talk and write about is
the importance of bringing together
meditation that's kind of coming into
centeredness and using that in the
psychedelic experience because of the
same reason it sounds like of the world
we live in when everything is hyper
relative when you don't have a solid
ground I think it's very important to
find that inner sense of centeredness
where we're still in contact with the
world in each other but we have this
kind of groundedness so would you agree
that like because it's quite a serious
situation to be in it seems like you
know we're in this kind of world that
doesn't make sense anymore what do you
think we should do what is what are some
of the ways that we can navigate that
world well let's let's take that one
because I think that what you just said
is is both very true and insufficient
and let's let's go with the very true
part well I mean I just you know I just
published this book high weirdness you
know drugs esoterica and visionary
experience in the 70s and I'm mostly
writing about what I would say from art
from this current conversation is kind
of the beginnings of this crisis as seen
through the lives and minds and writings
of these very far out characters Terence
Mckenna philip k dick Robert Anton
Wilson reading them not as prophets in
Anacapa
P sense but as people who are
recognizing that once you get popular
culture and media and psychedelics and
the and the you know the the way in
which reality itself is manufactured
through our beliefs and you get all
those things going and you intensify
your experience things can get extremely
loopy both in your lives in your minds
but also in some sense in the world
world at large and that now we're kind
of in that larger logic and one of the
reasons I wrote about Robert Anton
Wilson who's not particularly well-known
probably the least well-known of all of
those guys is that though he has this
little cult hit his approach to these
questions I think is actually the most
relevant and his version of sovereignity
is I think there's we have to be careful
with with the idea of sovereignity I'm
not sure how your friend was using the
term but but just let's just take it as
a general term there's there's the
sovereign as the isolated individual who
is in control or responsible for all of
their experiences and can therefore in
some sense control shape direct their
reality so sovereign in terms of
sovereign power sovereign command but I
think there's a different sense of
individual responsibility that has some
of those elements but is also how to say
this more open to the fact that we we
are in a vertiginous situation where
there's no real ground and that part of
what you're you're holding on to is the
terror or let's just say disturbance of
not really being able to believe and yet
still being confronted by decisions all
the time that requires something like
belief or at least something like like
ethics and what Robert Anton Wilson did
is that he personally he was he was come
he was more or less a libertarian but
not in the evil and ran sense he hate he
hated and
and ian's he was more of like a man of
the people socially conscious but still
radically anarchist kind of person and
so a narc one of the things that's
attractive about anarchism in our
current moment is that it requires and
demands a kind of responsibility that
you take for your own experience for
your own actions that you can't you know
you can't really be an anarchist and
blame everything on everybody on
everybody else even if it is other
people's responsibility so well that
Wilson is coming from this attitude and
he's he's starting to notice that if you
if you you know start to go down the
occult route take a lot of psychedelics
experience with what he calls brain
change experience with positive thinking
or your kind of programming your own
perceptions the things get very loose
and very malleable right and but so how
do you treat that how do you think about
that and he really tried to hew to a
certain kind of skepticism skepticism
both in the sense of not really trusting
things of you know believing that
evidence is a good thing to try to
understand how the world works even if
it's not entirely sufficient but you
know definitely paying attention to
science and evidence in that sense but
also embracing a kind of willingness to
not know ultimately what's going on and
the story I tell is the one that he's
doing all this crazy stuff he's writing
satirical books about conspiracy theory
and occult ideas and mysticism and
radical politics and so he writes this
whole Illuminatus book with a friend of
his that's full of all this stuff you
know it's very relevant now although
it's also you know very much a book of
its times but then once he's doing all
these kinds of personal experiments in
California in the in the midst early mid
70s
basically he kind of loses the plot and
he enters into a world where he he fully
believes that he's receiving
transmissions from an extraterrestrial
intelligence associated with the star
system serious and he's getting all
these synchronicities that are
supporting this and he's reading books
that are supporting it and he basically
enters what he calls Chapel perilous and
Chapel perilous is this kind of paranoid
place where all these weird stories are
coming to be very vivid in your life and
he as he puts it there's only two ways
out of Chapel perilous either you come
out as an agnostic this kind of
skepticism that I'm talking about or
you're come out as a stone-cold paranoid
and so he goes through that and he gets
out the other side and we kind of you
know talk about that a little bit how
did he do that how'd he get out of it
and you know in a way it's a very
extreme story of like psychedelic over
you know too much psychedelics and
psychosis and things like that but I
also believe that it is a very good
metaphor for us today in terms of we
need to work with beliefs and
understanding and we need to learn work
with reason and skepticism but even more
fundamentally than that we need to sort
of trust ourselves both in the ability
to engage alternative possibilities and
then also withhold assent and you know
it's not an answer because it made we
may need to believe certain things so
strongly like we may need to believe
certain things so strongly about the
climate that we can do nothing but do
the things that will prevent true
calamity so I'm not saying that you know
agnosticism and an unwillingness to
believe is like the answer but on the
other hand what I think now is that for
the most part our information
environment is toxically driven by memes
or concepts and that often disguise
themselves around ironic ideas so you
think oh I'm just being ironic I'm just
holding things lightly but you're
actually starting to become woven into a
certain belief structure or a certain
way of seeing seeing the world and so
it's very important for all of us to
practice the ability to be
profound ambiguity with a sense of even
urgency to resolve it and not resolve it
or be more choosy about how the
resolution comes rather than doing the
emotional form of resolution which is
often where the trap is yeah that
there's paradoxes aplenty in this right
I mean I'm thinking we use a technique
in our retreats in our events called
inquiry which originally comes from AHL
mas and kind of diamond essence work we
use that a lot and that that's very
interesting because when you're an
Enquirer it's kind of like a talking
meditation and there is implicit in it
is I don't know but also there is an
implicit sense of there is some truth
somewhere even it's just a personal
truth of how do I feel about this or
what's what's going on in the space
right now and so that paradox is there's
you know there's a great quote I forgot
who said it but a question you answer a
paradox you live with and this sense of
just having to live with that that's
something I want to talk about Terence
Mckenna because in high weirdness you
also covered Terence Mckenna
he also shares that sense of trying to
make sense of this complexity is not the
way to do it you know I think he has
this famous phrase have kind of ride the
wave so where does Herod like why did
you choose Terence Mckenna to include
with those three thinkers because it's
Robert Anton Wilson philip k dick pants
mckenna so so why x McKenna and who was
he is well friendly yes sir don't that's
fine I mean now Terence is someone you
know I I knew personally so that was
that was interesting to me because in
the 1990s he became you know quite well
known in the underground as a sort of
rocontour not quite a guru but
definitely someone that people would
were inspired by to - especially to take
DMT or take ayahuasca or take high-dose
mushrooms so he was sort of a mouthpiece
for you know he one time he said
basically his role was to just give
permission so he was a very kind of
charismatic speaker a weirdo who also
seemed to be having a good time and
a good-humoured person who was saying
you know check this stuff out like if
this has any validity don't listen to me
you know go out there and do it yourself
and so he was really you know the most
colorful and sort of verbally creatively
interesting thinker in the kind of
psychedelic Renaissance of the last you
know 25 years or so and still
influential even even after his death in
2000 and then the other so that was why
just was very interested in him and and
he hasn't gotten a lot of you know kind
of serious treatment of his life I mean
my book is based on a dissertation so I
was actually getting a degree but you
know thinking hard about these guys that
usually people don't think about very
much at all and then I turned it into a
more accessible book but I wanted to see
what happened when he thought I thought
hard about these guys the other reason
was just that what Pat would which with
these three figures all share is that
they all have these extraordinary
experience life-changing experiences in
the early 70s these like more than just
a normal trip like something lasts
longer too long and you got to get out
or you got to embrace it or you got to
integrate it or whatever so I already
mentioned Wilson's serious transmissions
and and philip k dick really around the
same time had this experience he usually
called to 374 in which he encounters
this extraterrestrial force that is sort
of you know healing him from the fallen
world and then it ishi AIT's a whole
series of dreams and synchronicities and
paranormal things that he writes about
and thinks about for the rest of his
life it's really the last his the last
you know eight years of his life has
sort of dominated by this experience and
then his Harris's case he and Dennis
went down to the Colombian jungle from
in Terence had been in Berkeley before
and then abroad and they had this epic
mushroom experience called the
experiment at Launcher era and that's
like the core story of his life you know
he
later wrote a book true the loose
Nations his brother wrote a book they
also wrote a book together that came out
of their their visions here and it was
again when you read the trip it wasn't a
normal trip something happened they went
they got at the very least they oh they
cook they cracked in some way but but it
had more you know it had more sort of
pattern to it than a mere psychotic
episode so it becomes a very interesting
thing to think about and all three of
these experiences were similar in
certain ways different in other ways and
they all eventually saw the similarities
like Terence Mckenna was like oh my
experience was like philip k dick and
Wilson was like my experience was kind
of like located kind of not and they
refer to the Wilson's and you know so it
was there there was a shared sensibility
here and so when it would it made me
wonder I was like what what are these
similarities about what's going on why
why are these elements there you know
there's an element of science fiction
breakdown a fact and fiction heavy
synchronicity some stuff that looks like
traditional religious experience or
mystical experience but then a lot of
stuff that doesn't look like traditional
religious experience and like what is
that mix about and so I'm really just
interested in going why why is this
going on and so some of the answers are
historical they're kind of come from
similar backgrounds or they have similar
influences but I also think it has to do
with the time with what was actually
happening historically even
technologically in the early 1970s which
to my mind is really the beginning of
kind of our era like the where the era
that we're at this kind of unraveling
intensification mixed with a pervasive
banality that we don't really know what
to do with it's a - it's a very strange
it's like this banal apocalypse that a
lot of the technological and cultural
and even economic trends that set that
up really come out of the post sixties
experiment and experience so they all
are ways of kind of grappling with where
we are now in Terrence and that one of
the things that all three of them shared
to get back to our the main topic of our
conversation there's a certain kind of
skepticism a certain kind of willingness
to be in ambivalence and ambiguity a
definite commitment to inquiry maybe not
in the specific form but in the larger
sense that you'd specially Dickie just
kept asking questions you know almost
pathologically like compulsively he
would I would answer his question what
happened to me he'd create an answer and
then he'd immediately break it down and
start again as if he he needed to keep
asking the question and this was after
all the era of the seeker and what is
the the seeker the seeker is the person
whose religion or spirituality takes the
form of an endless search not at home
and it's not that I know you know I know
God and God loves me and loves my family
and I'm gonna grow crops and go to
church and that's all it is it's about
the home it's about the hearth
it's the seeker spirituality is about
the search it's about the drift it's
about in a way it's a more Restless it's
the more restless life we live as modern
you know post religious consumers where
we're like what's our lifestyle who are
we what's the thing we're gonna find bah
bah bah bah blah and that's the way I
want to get back to what I think is the
limits of the sovereignity model and
there's a couple of lines into it one I
think the most obvious in the most
politically important one is that there
is a strong connection between the kind
of self that in some ways contemporary
consumer capitalist wants us to be and
the kind of self that is often pointed
towards in spiritual work so the
capitalist thing is that it's basically
you could call it the achievement self
or I'm constantly working on myself
improving myself becoming more
productive becoming more efficient more
balanced more integrated so that I can
be more creative more in tune
more responsive more able to to be
flexible in relationship to changing
conditions keep myself happy keep
ourself productive now there's a lot of
great things in that list and in fact
one of the challenges of our moment I
believe is the way in which things that
are genuine goods are deeply bound up
with things that are less good and we
don't always see them so for me that is
a little too similar to the way in which
that aspect of meditation or that aspect
of spiritual work which does turn back
to the self and recognizes that their
self is sort of responsible for its
conditions in some ways and that you can
do practices and and take on
responsibilities that enable you to be
able to be more flexible stronger more
integrated less reactive less depressed
all those things which are great things
I've done this stuff I buy this is
partly my life is to do these things but
I think that that it's even more
important vitally important now to along
with that and this is where something
like inquiry I think allows for is that
along with that kind of inner work is we
we need two things one is that an even
more commit you know stronger commitment
to a certain kind of if not intellectual
then at least kind of critical
questioning the part of inquiry is also
questioning in the deep sense which
means like questioning the the value of
the systems that I'm operating in
questioning the values that seem very
positive to me like you know the value
of flexibility you're like flexibility
interesting was who's who's who really
gets flexibility well it's the you know
the gig economy definitely wants
flexibility out of me you know my
ability to like constantly find any
opportunity to work or to no longer
believe that I deserve some kind of
consistent job or consistent you know -
no no I have to be more flexible and
open that may be the best value for you
to actually emulate but it's a two-edged
sword and if we don't acknowledge that
we're really losing part of what we
should be generating in terms of our
capacity to stay awake even if we can't
ultimately change a lot of these
conditions very well and I would like to
think we could but even if we can't then
at the very least we need to stay awake
I think that's a great description what
comes to mind is when I was I'm no
longer teaching meditation as much I
used to have a studio and teach and
increasingly was feeling that this kind
of sense of mindfulness it's been cold
there's kind of commodification of and
it's happening with psychedelics as well
I think you know this is this this sense
of stripping the spirit out of it and I
remember one time getting a little bit
frustrated and saying to a group you
know of whatever ten people sitting
there I was like you know what
ultimately meditation is about learning
how to die before you die this is all
about death we have to connect with debt
and that's really at least a part of
liberation and it went down like a lead
balloon never did it again because there
was a sense of whoa too real but for me
you know I'm interested to hear your
thoughts on this that you mentioned it
kind of at the beginning is kind of
commodification of of the esoteric
commodification of psychedelics you know
it seems to be when it gets subsumed in
the culture it's something and it dies
or does it I don't know maybe there's
some trace of it left over well it's
hard to know about the trace of it left
over you know sometimes you know
depending on the day sometimes I'm
incredibly disappointed and angry about
the commodification and popularization
of meditation and psychedelics and then
the other days I'm like well it just it
shows that people recognize that it's
kind of powerful and transformative and
there's going to be that crass side of
it and some of those people who come
into it for coarse reasons will have
something happened to them and then they
they can't help but go forward in ways
that they didn't even want to and they
might even end up going I can't
I can't work at this job anymore or I
can't stop thinking about death I got to
deal with the death thing like there's
no way out I gotta get get on the you
know on the horse for this one so III
very you know for me it's important to
continue the conversation that so many
of us are happening and relatively
quickly it was it wasn't that long that
that mind I mean mindfulness has been
popular are longer but but and it's
happening even more quickly with
psychedelics where people are starting
to talk about this problem this problem
of commodification and one way of
thinking about it is is again it's it's
it's overly focuses on the self
despite the paradox that both of these
things done properly reveal that the
self is not what you think it is and in
fact in many ways is composed of others
multiple others in us and and
connections the intimate absolute
connections we have with everything else
so it's a strange paradox that in a way
requires a kind of a kind of dodge or a
kind of forgetting like you have to
package the psychedelic or package the
mindfulness in a way that keeps people
thinking that they are just these
solitary egos that are responsible for
improving themselves so that they can
form form better in life and kind of
hide the way that there's at least
there's a strong potential that these
things can also make you realize that
you are profoundly you know
interconnected not even just in the like
I'm one with the universe way which to
my mind is actually not necessarily
always the most politically helpful but
more like I'm in this room I'm connected
to my ancestors I'm connected to you
know these experiences that I have my
from the place that I am from the plants
that are in the room from the bird
that's singing right now that sense of
being intimately woven into the world
and that was the second point where I
was saying that to to kind of balance
out the potential capitalist narcissism
of self work you know in the one hand we
need to be more critical which of course
most people aren't they don't really
like to do that but tough we just the
people who can should continue to do it
more and more and
and be willing to point out the
Emperor's without clothes and point out
the false ideologies that hurt people
and just like harp on it but the other
thing I think that is that is that that
that turning within needs to be balanced
with a new kind of turning without or a
different mode of turning without we're
we're it's not about being driven around
by worldly demands and just following
the prompts on the phone and what the
what the your boss wants you to do and
you know to where you're just kind of
lost in the world but it's that having
gone in and in some sense achieving
detachment or observation on all those
forces there's another way of folding
yourself back out where you're open and
aware of the constant diversity and
multiplicity of your actual experience
there were always you know I'm sitting
here I'm with you we're breathing the
same air the lights coming in the camera
is doing its own thing with its own
sense of time that's already distorting
from the moment there's all these
reflections that are you know whatever
like that is not just trivial setting
that's actually who we are to some dick
to some extent and I think that there's
a couple reasons that this is a valuable
adjunct or nine teams not even an
adjective opening up meditation let's
say to this turn without because a lot
of meditation practices that are like no
just to either ignore it or just
recognize it as just a rising and
falling phenomena don't attach to it
don't think about it I'm like okay
that's part of it but you know some of
my most profound experiences and
illuminating experiences have been
actually when I'm much more intimately
connected with the phenomena around me
and the beings around me and the reason
that one of the reasons I think that's
important is that it balances out the
potential narcissism with a sense of
responsibility and connection with
actual agents particularly non-human
ones and you know one of the ways we
understand
environmental condition that we're in is
to be painfully aware of the way in
which we are always woven into these
larger shifts and enforces good and bad
in the in the environment so in that
sense becoming very aware that like
every you know every day I'm eating
plastic
I mean it's horrifying I don't want to
think about that not much I can do about
it
and yet by being okay with that which is
in a way being okay with dying I can
recognize that this is an actual reality
that we are all in right now and that if
there is anything to do about it which
is not altogether clear to me that that
comes through being willing to really
embrace that sort of gruesome reality so
there's a there's an element of the kind
of acceptance of the outside both as a
horror and as a realm that's populated
with many possible relationships that I
think balances out a sort of narcissism
that can be a little you know could be
kind of I figured out how to have bliss
inside myself so I'm not gonna let those
things bother me anymore I'm just gonna
stay this way and that can be helpful it
can be Nestle oohed lean esses area
points in our lives I'm I'm not a
black-and-white person about this stuff
but I think at the point we are now we
also need to come up with new ways of
really with wide eyes or open eyes
connecting with the world around us so
what you're just talking about this this
sense resonated me a lot this idea of
the necessity of something beyond the
ego something outside of us and and yeah
I think there is a narcissism and a lot
of the inner practices which are simply
based around self-improvement
you know bigger better faster stronger
so Terence Mckenna talked about he he
had this phrase that the transcendental
object at the end of time this kind of
strange attractor pulling history
towards it which is a fascinating
concept I'd love to get your thoughts on
in terms of how it relates right now but
I very much have the sense that the
death of God Nietzsche's death of God is
also what we're living in there's that
we for the first time don't have
something that is coherent
in the West that would kind of draws us
towards it like there's a kind of final
mystery at the end of things that's
beyond all of us so how important is
that right now for navigating this kind
of crazy crazy world that we're in yeah
that's a that's a really tough one I
mean just to talk about terrasses idea I
think you're right you put your finger
on it is that even though on the one
hand it is a crazy idea
it is also clearly sort of allegorically
appropriate to our moment I mean you
start to go like you go Terrence had
this idea of the time wave that you can
sort of understand the structure of the
development of his history and the
increasing amounts of novelty by finding
and mathematical object in the II Ching
and super crank kooky stuff and I talked
about that in the book it's like how did
he believe why why did he hold on to
this you know it's this really
invaluable idea doesn't really hold
water but from another angle does really
matter because he was clearly trying to
articulate something that feels true
about history this sort of ramping up
the sort of technical technology the
sense that we're entering these
asymptotes and Wilson talked about that
too even in the in the early 70s he was
saying here we go I mean he would even
draw out charts of like intelligence
increase and and you know he believed
that we were gonna go offworld and like
so there was all three of the guys were
very there they were not
back-to-the-landers they were
transhumanist they were looking forward
and through and up was there kind of
their kind of attitude in in in
different ways but now we're in this
situation where the the if the secular
idea of progress once held that place we
we nobody really believes that anymore
and if the people do it's it's not it's
at the very least naive and often kind
of pernicious I mean Silicon Valley
still tries to you know get make money
or get attention or whatever by going oh
there's something there's a new thing we
can make an improvement it's gonna
progress we'll have a better and you're
like no
like look every all this technology
produces has all these unintended
consequences that just make the world
more chaotic more confusing and more
irritating like I find everyday life
with technology incredibly irritating
because it's just all this crappy
software and pushes and things that are
trying to trick you into like joining
their thing and you sense this kind of
algorithmic like parasites that are just
like waiting to eat your every decision
I mean it's a very dystopian situation
even if the act our actual experience is
pretty pleasant most of the time
compared to other people in the world so
this progress thing doesn't really work
but in a way Terence found a kind of
alchemical mythology that still would
work he didn't have to say oh we're
progressing towards utopia in fact
sometimes his descriptions of what
happens at the end of time we're not
necessarily so you know Pleasant but
that sense and it was and I think it
also comes about based on the
phenomenology of psychedelics at least
for some kinds of people I can't say
this for everywhere but I think if you
are people like me and I suspect you and
Terence where you read a lot of stuff
you know a lot about history you know a
lot about religion you know a lot about
popular culture you know a lot about
technology we know your your thinking
and modeling the world constantly you
add a psychedelic to that and it's it's
sort of like intensifies and kind of
reaches like a breaking point and you
have that and because the time the sense
of time and psychedelics is so different
than our ordinary sense of time there's
a great phrase that the scholar Hansie
Onis had writing about the early
Gnostics in the in the ancient world
where he says that the Gnostics
internalized eschatology that means they
take the end of time which is usually
thought of as a historical event and
they internalize it they experience it
themselves and in a way psychedelics let
you or sometimes without you even
wanting to do that so you have an
apocalyptic scenario or you become a
messiah at the end
or your Christ on the cross or some kind
of apocalyptic event where it all comes
together that's also just sort of part
of the phenomenology of it at least for
historically aware you know human beings
so what do we do if we don't have those
things I can sort of what you're saying
what do we we don't have a progress we
don't have a God we don't have some you
know some model or idea and there I
don't know because I feel like I have
come to certain that values and meanings
that are true for me I don't think
they're just true for me I do think
they're kind of true and and you know
when people are interested I'm happy to
like pull them in but at the same time I
do recognize that that the minute you
really turn those into some kind of mass
concept the same crappy stuff starts to
happen to those ideas as to other ideas
I mean I'm very anti guru I don't think
it's helpful for people but I don't know
because I think that the people who have
the existential capacity to be in
ambiguity to take responsibility for
their not knowing to still remain
skeptical and evidence-based without
becoming you know reactionary
rationalist to continue inquiry with a
capital I and all the meanings that that
has you know that's not an easy road to
hoe the people who can do it should do
it to people who might do it should be
drawn into doing that but the people who
aren't gonna want to do that who it's
too terrifying it's not their style it's
not what they do I don't know how to say
what that is you know what what's gonna
work you know whether it's just
commitment to loving your friends or
commitment to you know your the social
justice or to environmental things or
whatever it is or even not going a lot
of places like how do we how do we keep
you know fascism at bay now I mean
that's a real question we opt out
like how we're out here you know when
during about the construction of reality
and doing our breathing or whatever and
meanwhile down the road is that you know
all these cultural systems are being
weaponized and they're resonating with
powerful emotions that that answer much
in much more simple terms to the same
existential problem that we've been
talking about so that's going on it's
not going away
it's probably getting worse and so how
do we build a just a life a culture a
way of dealing with the multiplicity of
people and diverse perspectives that is
going to actually have some real own
against some other things that are kind
of out about pacing us in some ways so
you know I think there's a lot of like
concrete fights to fight that are that
are intrinsically valuable but I suspect
that for a lot of us we don't we're not
going to get much more than a kind of
the the camaraderie of of you know an
arcs of you know with it you know I
don't know you don't know I know you
don't know I know you don't yeah I know
you know that I don't know and yet we're
actually cat connecting we're not just
trading meaningless mouth noises and
there's something there's something
hopeful or utopian in our capacity to
continue to connect that I think is
really valuable and it's also one of the
reasons that I think social media is so
incredibly toxic for the most part is
it's like whatever it's good for or bad
for or whatever there's a lot of things
that I think it's more bad for things
and it is good for things in terms of
politics in terms of what it does to
people's personality is what it does to
the possibilities of actually reasoned
conversation in cyberspace and not I
mean I again I've been you know arguing
about things in on the internet since
the 90s and there were always flame wars
but things are much much more massif I'd
now so you get this sort of mob logic
and anyway there's a lot of problems
with it but one of the other things that
it does is that it it prevents largely
prevents people or
or it pushes against people's capacity
to build friend networks that have the
intimate peer-to-peer you know we're all
on this leaky boat together bailing the
water together and made that may be it
and our ability to really enjoy the
camaraderie of that to affirm love and
connection in the midst of the situation
rather than taking political positions
and judging people whether or not they
pass a certain thing and that that's a
kind of false overly social social sense
of connection which we you know we are
also part of these larger social bodies
but it's like sociology run amok it's
like people just just acting and
thinking in terms of like these large
socio sociological blocks where I want
something that's more like friendship
spiritual friendships peer to peer
French uh peer to peer spirituality what
we're like we all know we don't know but
I know a little bit here or I can inform
you here or you're having a tough time
let's bring this together and that's can
be networks of friends that are you know
in the real physical space together it
can be far-flung but it's just not
mediated through the intense social
performance and masking and kind of meme
driven things as social media so you
know that's something that I think is a
concrete thing that people can do and
should do in terms of if they can of
their you know building a kind of
existential social ballast in their own
lives seems like a really natural place
to stop it was really lovely nicely said
Eric Davis thank you very much hey it
was great
[Music]
you
[Music]