and welcome to another awakening from
the meaning crisis discord QA our guest
today is a guy Sen stock who is not
going to be unknown to many people here
he is the founder and creator of the
circling method and the circling
Institute he's been facilitating
transformation for individuals groups
and corporations for more than 20 years
it is a BFA from the San Francisco Art
Institute and is the co-founder of the
event center for excellence and the Bay
Area men's circle he's an artist
philosopher poet body worker and
visionary thank you so much for being
here guy thank you so I'd like to
usually I start off by asking some
introductory questions so so you are
known as the creator of circling so I
like that ask you two questions about
this you can decide the order you want
it you want to answer them in okay like
unit I'd like you to tell us what
circling is but also what's the story of
circling how did you what led you to
come up with it what was the journey
that brought you there yeah well if I
can ask you just so I can kind of tune
into the listening a little bit more
like if I were to ask you the same
question what circling is based on what
you do know or don't know what what
would you say sure for my understanding
it's sort of a I think of it as a
meditative discussion where the parties
are trying to communicate with each
other to really to really see into one
another's to really put themselves and
the others shoes to understand not just
what they're saying but what they're
feeling in the moment you know in the
moment that they're talking yeah totally
and what and why would you do such a
thing if you would well for me from what
I've heard and we so we've been
introduced to the concept so this is the
awakening from the meeting crisis
discord which is based on John Vicki's
work and so a lot of us here have
discovered circling through through John
and from what I understand
and I'm eager to to experience that
circling can be can be transformative my
my inkling from from trying it a few
times with some some demos and and
hearing about it is that it will help
put you in tune with other people in a
way that you may not have been before
that you'll start to see things and
other people you know seeing their being
mode see see see them for who they are
in a way seeing things about them
characteristics about them the more
nests of them so to speak that you may
not have noticed before and and then so
interact with them in a way that you may
not have been able to before without the
practice yeah that sounds good to me
you keyed in on the the quality of
circling I think you know it's funny I
am I my answer that question has been
evolving and I think it'll just continue
to evolve because it's a circling
circling for me in the development of
the circling method right has been
something that I felt like we discovered
but it wasn't like we were looking for
something we discovered it as an
experience together me and a group of
friends back I think it was like late
90s 1998 I think it was um and just
spontaneously started having experiences
together that were just profound which
met like and I've been I have been since
then been been asking myself the same
question that Jerry the guy who I
started it with like asked me after was
all done our first our first experience
and we got done in our like it was like
twelve hours later we had had this like
experience of what we now call circling
happened and and he was he he looked
back to where we were and he pointed in
that direction he and he didn't have a
word for it and I was like yeah and I
pointed back at the same direction and I
didn't have a word for it and it was
this really beautiful kind of
tongue-tied
moment but we both knew exactly that we
had just experienced something that was
stood out as distinct from all the other
profound experiencing things that we've
been we were having at that time and
then we just spontaneously put our hands
out and just shook and committed to
whatever that was and I and I would say
that I have been continually finding out
what that is and and then shaped by what
that is in the finding it out and I
think that's just that process of of
leaning into some sense of
intelligibility that's beyond me yet
draws me and then in order to understand
it to bring words to it I on some level
in order to conform to it it ends up
transforming me that's been my
relationship with circling and it's
still going on right it's a little
happening right now as we're talking as
people ask me questions about it there's
still a sense of like I I often to
myself anyways think about circling I
imagine circling as a as an entity
sometimes of like and there's a sense in
which she's still she's still revealing
herself to be and when she does my life
I look different my life looks different
how everything shows up for me looks
different so how would you describe that
transformative effect that that people
that you experience and that you you've
seen other people experience well
there's a lot of different components to
it right but you know I I think on some
level it's interesting because when we
when we started this right would when
circlings just started there was a way
where our vocabulary wasn't we didn't
have the vocabulary to basically
describe what we were talking about
right because I think that authenticity
is really in a lot of the a lot of the
ways of describing this kind of thing
have to do with like a normal notion of
self right of
of in some sense a sense of self
fulfillment or self-reflection a
reflected upon self right that I somehow
own right but I think I think what
circling really get set to get set is a
deeper level of authenticity which is
how we in so many ways from the very
beginning right like the very beginning
when we're like infants right we're born
into a world and how I become is through
the attention and and my family and
contact an atonement with other people
how I know that I am how I am shaped how
I I'm just close to myself is can is so
deeply entwined with my environment
with you know and all the stuff all the
research that are doing on attachment
theory is like you know really
recognizing this is like there's a
certain amount of distance from the
mother's face that if then the infant
doesn't have it gets there's all kinds
of symptoms so I think it's like if we
just look at relationship being being
ourselves in relationship they're almost
indistinguishable from each other and I
would say that like that's pretty well
known in like psychology right for the
most part but I don't think we have much
of a way of knowing how that continues
through our own our whole lives right
that we're constantly coming into being
through our relationships and so
circling you could say is the
transformation has to do with what's
just so native soil to being a self on
some level right which is is coming into
into conversations and having
relationships that are mutually
self-disclosing
right in a way that that inspires us and
calls us beyond ourselves
that's what's possible in interactions
now I think that I think that the the
fact that there's something called
circling right announces that that's not
how relationships usually go right like
right right like they don't usually go
that way but they could and so circling
is all about like if there were
postures that you sit in if there were
if there were muscles that you exercise
if there was a an underlying logos right
that gave rise to allowing relationships
to open him that way together circling
is like extracted that out and made it a
yoga so so you on your website you
describe yourself to someone who pays
attention in such a way that will allow
the parties Lao you see you allow allow
you and I to see and hear those things
which have always been present yet never
occurred to you is this a skill that do
you think this is a skill you've always
had that that's innate it you were just
born with or in this something that can
be cultivated in people what do you
think what do you think what do you
think what do you think it what are you
kind of getting from what I'm saying so
far my my guess is that I think that
well certain people probably are are
more naturally tuned in to other people
as well but I think that it is something
that everyone can work on and get better
at and through practices like like
certainly right totally yeah absolutely
I think it's like I mean I think
personally I probably have a particular
acuity for this this is why I spoke to
me so much however I have to say at
least from my own experience I'm so much
better at it than I was when we first
started right so it has me think that it
is and also from what I've just seen
from teaching people for the last 20
years in in becoming good circulars
right is it is interesting because your
question kind of like points to
something that's I think really quite
deep right where it's always a paradox
and teaching this right because there
are skills and there are ways of saying
thing
there's things to pay attention to
there's certain kind of like you could
say best practices for ways of
communicating and attitudes and all that
kind of stuff right but when it comes
down to it I don't think a relationship
is a skill I don't think I think it's a
capacity right it's a capacity to be
related so it's in fact it's strange
when somebody has a bunch of those
skills but they don't have any capacity
to be in a relationship and they're and
they use all the communication
techniques and stuff like that it ends
up just feeling really wonky so I think
it's like that starts to speak to where
I think circling and learning how to
circle and what it starts to get at when
people talk about being transformed
right I think the transformation that
they're probably speaking of is that
there's that circle and kind of in a
certain sense demands right calls forth
aspire to you aspiring to coming into
full contact with another person right
deepening your capacity to be related
and that's really a being mode I think
is as Fromme would point out right it's
not a having mode so it's really tricky
there's like this is where it's kind of
most people that if you've ever
experienced circling it's like filled
with these weird paradoxes right it's
like it's almost like when you go to a
circling thing and you hear people
describe it you think you're talking
about like you're talking about
mysticism or something and in it and it
is in that way right because it's like
right on this mode of like where I can
become a better communicator right
however in becoming a better
communicator right I must be able to
deepen my capacity to communicate right
and and I think that that's where you
start to look at like development right
you start to use with terms like
transformation development right the
becoming someone who could be good at
that
so it's so I think that's where when
people talk about like deep
transformative experiences I think it's
it starts that's that you start to I
think it's one way of starting to get at
it
does that make sense yeah that's
actually excellent one way that you put
it on your website that was intriguing
to me is you said I can I can I'm
someone who can sit next to a stranger
and have a conversation with them such
that the stranger walks away living
inside a completely different world yeah
yeah yeah you know and I think like what
I've been thinking about it like
recently is I think one of the things
that circling I think one of the things
that circling really really really does
a virtue that it that that underline
circling and and and is a practice of
his reverence right because they I think
it's and just like with the virtue like
the way Socrates simple taught like the
Platon is talked about in virtue it's
like a virtue is like a one-level it's
like something that's already and Nate
Lee there but it's also something that
you can strive towards and when I think
what's when it comes down to it I think
what everything falls right those kinds
of deep connections with people falls on
your ability to to find yourself in a
reverence of with a another person and
to cultivate that sense of reverence and
I think that like when it comes down to
it it's the reverence that I experienced
and have cultivated through practicing
it that naturally flows into like oh you
know someone kind of listening to me or
somebody who's circling and go oh
they're a really good listener like yes
we're a really good listener but I think
all of that is expressions of the
ability to continually be in like have
the capacity to be in reverence and I
think that's really when it comes down
to it as an exercise if it was circling
was cultivating something I think it's
cultivating that at the deepest level
and so like a lot of the time people end
up with this experience of what like
reverence leads to which are these
experiences of awe because reverence is
predicated on a ansan this awareness of
my own limitations and that
that there's something beyond me that is
is something that I could I could never
fully understand right that's that that
attunement to reality in such a way and
attuning to people in that way of that
deep respect and reverence I think is
what is the say the machinery of that I
think is what what circling really does
cultivate in a big way that's excellent
so I'd like to open up this to two
questions if you could for the audio and
say say your name at the beginning the
question can be your your your your
discord name doesn't have to be a real
name
but who has a question fooor guy don't
be shy I will I'll throw out a question
I could yeah go ahead Mike great hello
guy thanks for coming here and doing
this your back nice to meet you Mike
nice to meet you so I'm curious I've
really enjoyed a lot of the
conversations that I've seen you give
and I'm definitely enjoying this offer
that you're providing for us here now
and I'm just curious I'm admittedly
feeling as though it's a struggle to get
the question out sorry I think we lost
you for a bit there Mike just start out
with a start over so so sorry can you
hear me now if I've been noting my my
sound has been cutting in and out so it
might be Mike oh yeah you're you're
cutting out again yeah you're cutting in
and out I'm gonna pass because all right
you know what if you'd like you could
type it into the the event listening
party text and I'll read it out
okay sure I'll do that great who else
has a question or a question or I just
love to get to know you guys and just
hear what you're hearing and what's on
your mind
sure hey I'm mercury um mercury I
actually sent you a message I'd love to
have you for a podcast on my channel but
for now I'll start with so this circling
practice and the changes you find it
makes in yourself and you have any for
how that's going to ripple out into
society at this time and to maybe tie it
into the way the pandemic currently has
created a unique opportunity for
restructuring and how do you see your
expertise working into how we might move
in a better direction as we begin to
reactivate Society oh I mean that's a
really good question well first of all
so when when I think about when I think
about myself and my understanding of
like like things like society and
culture and the world I personally feel
I feel like and some level like I'm I'm
kind of an ant on top of a writing on an
elephant's back they can and I can only
see an inch in front of me right so
there's a I just wanted just presents
like where I come from what that is like
first of all I actually don't even know
what's going on and I I stay I feel very
humbled by all the changes so I'm I I
don't know I don't know exactly what's
going on and what society needs or even
what society is however that being said
right I think that there's one of the
big big dilemmas it seems that were
inside of prey is actually Chris and
Chris and John talked about this in a
paper that they wrote I thought it was
brilliant with the way that they put it
we're like we're in some kind of weird
spot where we only recognize right we've
we've only recognized like first person
present and third position right and
we've lost the sense of the other right
in in in precisely in other words like
awe and you can see it at all of like
the kind of you know the the identity
politics and you know all that stuff
right where people are becoming more and
more identified with a label or their
group or their gender or whatever it is
right and we've lost contact with the
sensibility that one becomes who one is
in and through dialogue and through
relationship right the transformative
power of that right and if you lose that
that that spoken the wheel all you're
left with is kind of worrying games
right and all the things that come along
with this so I think it's like circling
happens to just really speak to a way of
restoring the recognition of the other
at a very simple level right to really
kind of look at somebody and and and
begin to see like see them as distinct
from your view of them and and begin to
open up and begin to listen to them
beyond what you could already think by
yourself
I think that's of that I think that's an
ancient value I think that goes way back
and I think it's it is strikingly gone
right now like in the in the normal
discourse like that like the
governmental discourse and it's like
it's really scary on that in that
respect I also think it has something to
do with like being in the age of
technology from the Heidegger sense of
the word right that I do also think that
we
are in a time that we particularly don't
understand right which is what is you
know if we if we look at if we look at
how technology has has mitigated so much
of our communication and I I think it's
a profound change that that I think
we're gonna look back on and go wow this
was like the this was like a huge thing
that just happened right where where we
started to separate when I need to
relate to you I can actually like I can
text you I can email you I can do all
these things to relay information to you
without having to go through the awkward
experience that it is of being with
another person in communication and
tolerating that ambiguity there's so
many different ways that we don't have
to do that anymore
and it's in its and of course like all
other technologies like all of their
innovations like it will allow us it'll
it will just we will naturally move
towards what's easiest right and not
towards what's hard and I think that
when we've like with the answering
machine where I think was the first way
I think where is it first started right
was where was where I can like when I
have a communication for you I can
actually don't have to go through the
the conversational you know relating
that happens and that level of
conversing on a is how we become who we
are so I think there's also another part
of it which is what why something like
circling even makes sense right in this
time speaks to the time because on one
level I think circling that there's such
a thing as like a yoga for inner like
intersubjectivity is such a strange
thing right in but it but it makes sense
that if we've eliminated so much of that
right in our culture to come and hit
like to come and have to do a like a
yoga right and concentrate just like a
gym is for our bodies like going in and
in doing exercises of relating
is something that's only emerged in the
last 20 20 years but I think it speaks
to that so I think it's like I think
circling as a practice points to
developing capacities that are probably
central to what's going to have us move
forward excellent
mike has posted his question I'm
struggling to ask I'm struggling to ask
the question because I feel it's a bit
of a weighted question but I'm curious
if you consider circling a form of
spiritual practice and if so or if not
why and thank you for your response
let's see you just think about that for
a second well I think there's a cop
there is a couple things like so for me
it's been a spiritual practice through
the experience of it I think as a
practice though that it hasn't been
explicitly explicitly spiritual I think
it's been very very useful for it right
because there's a there's a way because
it's like it's a it's a practice right
there's there's not there's there's not
stuff that you have to believe about it
right so it's not propositional in that
way however it seems to afford a kind of
spirituality or are waking up to a
spirituality through people's experience
and and in some ways you know as John's
pointed out one of these he noticed is
that you know he goes to a circling
group and everyone's do you know using
this kind of mystical spiritual language
right and I I think that points to what
it affords but I think part of why it
affords that is because it doesn't it
doesn't presuppose spirituality so yet
everyone that I you know everyone who
gets really involved in circling all of
them basically I think what most of them
would probably say if you asked him like
is this a spiritual practice I think
that for them
they said yes it would would be it
definitely engages the machinery right
these John's language that's that is the
very much the same machinery that that
makes room for spiritual experiences and
its feelings of connectedness and all of
that stuff like cognitively emotionally
and by in Anna bodied way so I hope that
answer is did that answer your question
very much I'm hoping you might be able
to hear me and I don't cut out yeah yeah
do you feel as though I thought you gave
a really wonderful example in sort of
pointing out it very much how I'm
feeling with regard to war like how how
do we on the one hand it sounds to me as
though you're expressing yes or you did
I heard the affirmation I'm expressing
yes there there is for yourself this is
a spiritual practice that's going along
but at the same time on what seems as
though a very social level in in light
of kind of the much larger worldly
global context that we're in it's as if
to me we're at a mode of being
challenged on how to actually speak
about that yeah and so it's it's kind of
an in-between state and so there's I
feel as like that the answer that you
provided is in many respects a lot of
examples that I feel I've had with some
conversations with the people here in MO
that like you know I we're talking about
it and yet we're not talking about it
and what does this mean and trying to
figure that out and also yeah yeah that
means that meant a lot
you know I'm thank you for your response
because it's kind of helping me to
formulate my own ideas and thoughts on
it all right I'm glad I'm glad to hear
that I mean it's like a worthy it's a
worthy inquiry and wrestling match to be
in right now
right cuz it's like it's and I think a
lot of it has to do with our
relationship to proposition right
like you know III think I think where
where precisely gets spiritual for me or
where I have spiritual experiences is
you know there is that sense in which
you're with somebody right there's it
there when you look in another's face
for example and you get really present
and you find you start to hear about
their lives right and you really start
to listen and there is that mutual
disclosure that starts to happen there's
a way in which there's you right and
kind of like you could say something
essential about you or your suchness
your individuality starts to reveal
itself to me but through more of a kind
of a cognitive feeling right it's like
in some way in some way in some way it's
an encounter that is is transcendent in
itself but there's also this other way
where like in in seeing who you are
there's also a way that who like that
also opens up to something much greater
right it's in is one of the things I've
noticed with who is circling is that you
know somebody will open up about
something really personal to them and
they'll they'll take a risk and we'll
share something that they've they've
that's hard for them to share right and
in sharing it who they are is revealed
right beyond the content of what they
they shared like the courage or whatever
it is that's like that one that one is
hit with that sense of being moved by
someone like that is simultaneously
points to something about existence
right that we can easily start to talk
about well what is it to be moved what
is it that's moving us right like what
is it to call what what makes it worth
courage right for the sake of what and
these start to get into these very
deeply philosophical mystical spiritual
distinctions that start to open up and
that's one of the cool things about it
is that we're
this the sense of the suchness of the
person or the essence of the person and
the sense of inexhaustible
intelligibility becomes figure-ground
and at some point was circling Gers
there can be this back and forth where
the figure ground starts to
interpenetrate each other and I think
it's one I think actually those kinds of
deep conversations those kinds of deep
forms of intimacy are one of the few
places that people can experience
something something beyond the secular
but in experience all on argue away I
think it's one of the places where where
being is is still can still be disclosed
to us in the way in the way that it can
historically has been through like the
church and all that stuff so so I think
that is a really deep question it's a
deep inquiry and it only touches on
everything yes 100 I'd love the fact
that you were describing what sounded to
me is a genuine attempt like there seems
as though there's a point in which you
you you you're starting to recognize
that there's something more in that
experience that you're having with that
other person and then I'm what's coming
to my thought is kind of there's this a
tuning that you're you're noting within
your being kind of thing like it like it
like you actually note kind of a sound
or a tone or something like that and so
you you're trying to connect more with
that sound and the more that you try to
do that the sound becomes even more
resonant and more harmonic and it
becomes an even fuller sound and it
makes a greater desire on your being to
want to share with that yeah more so
does that make sense oh it does make
sense and then then there's the
experience of in tuning into that sound
in it disclosing itself more to me that
allowing me to recognize it more right
at some point I start to read
I have become someone who could hear
that sound right and that there's a
mutual disclosure right exactly and I
think that I though the basic
fundamental unit of relating is there's
a that that's possible right and I think
circling that like in dialogue owes and
all the things that we've been talking
about I think is one of the primary if
not the biggest access point to that to
that kind of spirituality for lack of a
better word that we that becomes
available to us right it's a full
participatory thing right through
purchase like it's like I know like
knowing you as a participatory event I'm
a communal I'm a community project right
it's like it's a I cannot know in
relationship I cannot know you without
being known right there's a like like I
cannot hear you without being someone
who can write and - so tuning in to
those two that mutual self disclosure
that back and forth - what starts to be
get revealed as something the greater or
deeper horizons that we recognize as all
that has already always the case that is
in fact having the conversation right
yeah thank you so much you did responded
exactly where I was hoping so thank you
I guess I mean thank you for a time yeah
yeah thanks for pointing up the music
I'm hearing it more so Socratic skeptic
dave has posted a question guy thanks
for your YouTube channel have enjoyed
many of your videos I'm close to
developing a campfire space at the
bottom of my garden in our allotment I
want to do some kind of men's group do
you have one piece of advice for a
beginner at hosting these what
advice well well I mean so much of this
work I developed around fires at the
beach in San Francisco like with the
group of men there's something really
really ancient about that I mean I think
the biggest piece of advice is just
doing it and showing up for it there's a
and setting the context right for what's
possible and what you want to occur set
in setting and then just showing up and
then and then follow the movement of
what shows all right as Heidegger would
say follow the movement of showing I
think that's most of it if he's just set
like like time-space invite the people
set your intentions and then let the
games begin
and then find what you're doing together
right and I would also say that like
that that'd be an example be like kind
of be the be the happening that you want
to have happen there so lead with your
vulnerability like share and the way
that you want to see other people share
kind of really do it in lead it from the
being mode I don't think you can go
wrong with that and then and then
afterwards make it part of it have
people tune into what right what
actually does what glowed and what
doesn't and then make that explicit
amongst the group of like Oh like yeah
when we did that that seemed you really
likes like zero in onto something and
you go okay well what was that like and
start to look at it like start to tune
into the music as you were saying so we
could start to hear the music so it
becomes a the process itself starts to
facilitate the the thing that you want
it to facilitate but more of a midwifing
process listening to it oh thanks going
this
some thoughts for reflection on yeah but
I think just having the courage to put
something like that on and responding to
it wholeheartedly with your whole being
like and just being the context that you
want that you want the content to arise
inside of is the is the is is the key
hey guys thanks for coming and doing
this that's what this is Tyler Tyler
so midwifing that that's such a great
term i something we've been playing
around with lately trying to notice in
this conversational space is the kind of
the essence of masculine and feminine
energy and when it is that people are
trying to seize control or commit to a
position or hold fast and when when the
space opens up and when people relent
and when connections are made and I
think what I've really noticed is that
so much of this is typically expressed
in in deep primal relationships between
men and women between the masculine and
the feminine as expressed in that sense
and the way that that's related to the
types of bonds that we seek in the the
deep compensatory aspect of the
masculine and the feminine and are and I
wonder if there's some quality to a
different ratio of men and women in a
group that has some effect on it or if
there's some aspect to evoking that in
the presence of more men or more women
who may not necessarily naturally come
forward with that aspect of themselves
now specifically the the aspect of
themselves that you're talking about do
you mean like do you mean like the
feminine something like the feminine
coming out in men or the masculine
coming out in women right yeah
very you mean kind of yeah Animus thing
totally well you know it's funny I I
mean I don't know anything like I don't
know anything for sure about this but I
can just like look to my experience of
this is that it's always struck me that
that you know that when guys get
together they love to philosophize right
why is that I and I think it's because
actually it's one of the ways that we
actually can experience something like
burr or being pregnant with an idea or
conceiving something in that way right
that there's there's a way that it's
like almost like in the like something
about the domain of philosophy starts to
get at ways in which like men can
experience something like a birth right
and that kind of energy and I've and
I've noticed like with my with my wife
for example like I'll just I'm like you
know I spend all day with these
questions that are burning in me and
thinking about them and reading fucking
books and having conversations and like
I'm just doing that my whole life's
about that right on some level and it's
funny like there's just a sense with my
wife like that where she'll be like she
totally gets it and she'll go there with
me but there's kind of a sense where she
already is all that right
she's she's like she already is she's so
identified with life that like you know
the the sense of the mystery for me
that's so compelling all my attention
goes there she's kind of already the
mystery right she's like it's like
embedded in her way of doing the dishes
and so there's that I think there's a
difference there right that
that's my experience with that but I
think something about that there's
something in terms of circling and about
these practices relationally that I
think that there's something about
listening and a deep sense of listening
right that I think Socrates always
talked about is you know listening as
Midwifery right which is the kind of
listening that I noticed that I think
that that ultimately is very connected
to reverence right and in that I think
that in my experience it I don't know if
you want to call that feminine or not
but like there's definitely a quality of
proactive quality of being able to hear
not just what you're saying but like
who's saying it and like like what isn't
being said and to start to orient around
something being birthed that isn't fully
there yet right in an emptying and a way
of a deep silence in oneself that can
call out come into prêt like call out
the presence what's concealed and in
reveal in and call it into disclosure
right and that is very much I think
probably the closest thing that I ever
personally get to something like a
feminine experience
yeah I don't know that's perfect yeah I
I I mean I experienced it very much the
same way and and that's why I end up
using those well use those terms I think
just because I noticed so much of the
resonance in various aspects of my own
experience in the masculine feminine so
I like I was I I was there for the birth
of my two children I helped the midwives
I helped pull the children out and
there's there's something to that like
the there's this there's the struggle
there's there's this masculine struggle
right it's it's fierce it's it's
energetic but then there's also this
hush there's this wait this patient wait
and then all of a sudden there's
something completely new
right like yeah that moment when it
comes out when the newness the novelty
has arrived after that pregnant period
it's just yeah so sweet yeah right and
and that that combination of the
masculine and the feminine in that
moment and the product of it if you can
I think if you can elicit this in
conversation I think just as you said it
very much is like though it's the
procreative power in in our minds giving
birth to the tensions and struggles the
pregnancies in there that we've carried
with us for however long right and you
saw yeah that's that's that resonates
deeply Thanks yeah I mean you're
bringing me back to my when Forrest was
born and my my wife at that time I'll
never forget this like oh there was this
point where she was the nurses had left
and her water just broke and she's they
put her in the bathtub and all of a
sudden I went to go get something and
then I come back and all of a sudden I
hear this grow like this moan and I look
over at her and I watched I was so
struck by her because it was like it was
so clear that she was experiencing a
true
and is about like more pain that I could
even imagine yet yet she was like the
moan was like where she was just kind of
digging in and like completely being
with it with it had such integrity that
and I was I looked at her and I was
struck by the experience of other nests
I was like whatever it is that she's
doing that level of integrity was almost
like a pure kind of integrity of a being
with that pain so it was such solidarity
and such like fullness or whatever it
was and I was just like I I had the
sense of like man very few guys that I
know would ever sign up for that right
or could we know what we were signing up
for
and it's interesting kind of like in
that sense of that they're just
something so you know it perhaps this is
what the masculine you know what the
masculine does with the feminine is is
our love for them in some way kind of
birds out right in them like when our
consciousness is really really centered
and really clear and in a certain sense
we open our consciousness to them and we
see them and we love them so deeply that
on some level I think what happens is
they bird into a pier it's they bird
into adornment they glow and glisten
right and the more that they glow and
glisten right the more my consciousness
has to expand in order for their
appearance to fully blossom so there's a
and it's interesting now to think about
this right if I think about it now of
like well what is it that's happening in
in like a in like a conversation my wife
is just giving me the thumbs-up and a
heart thing on her chest she's crying
now that that there's if we look at that
like okay so what's happening with the
love of an idea when it when a when a
distinction or a something about a
dynamic or an idea is being disc
losed right like if we say on some level
that my listening is a giving burst that
- that right there is a certain kind of
like it's funny I think it really is is
like this experience of being fully
engaged in that way of giving birth and
it's just interesting to think about
that like I do think it's one of the
ways that we get to experience that
birth this morning I just wanted to
share that synchronicity and I know it's
Cruz mythology out but she's naming my
nephew Odin welcome Odin so church fire
Ethan has a question in text chat are
you familiar with the International
Institute of restorative practices I
took a course last year and they had an
emphasis on a similar practice that they
called circling to use in a classroom
setting but your name never came up is
your method different from theirs and
are they are they taking your copy right
[Laughter]
yeah the I've never I've never heard of
them
yeah I've never heard of them so I
really can't answer that well I guess I
guess there are other Institute's that
that do there are other organizations
that do claim to to do circling you
consider circling proprietary do you
mind if other people use the term if
they're not in conjunction conjunction
with you sure if you don't that's a
whole like that's a whole left brain
world right now I'm contending with that
a lot right now
and I think that the way that we're
working at it because it's been a you
know it it's it's there's a
set of distinctions around it but we're
basically kind of looking at a way to to
preserve circling right and in a way
such that people know when they're
getting it and so like what what
organization and what way to do that is
all what we're in the process of you
know trying to do right now because it's
been a it's been spread like circling is
spread like crazy and on the other hand
circling is very difficult to do well
and so there's a there's a way where I
like that it spread so much and then
there's a way where I'm just hearing
people call circling like to me it
doesn't look at all sound anything like
circling so there's a there's a sweet
spot in there that I'm that we're
working out anything in particular that
you'd like to point out that's the wrong
way to do circling something like a
common mistake made huh yeah well I
think here's here's one of the things
right and I think it's also a bigger
issue but I didn't no one emphasizes
that circling is not therapy and I think
that one of the things the things that
really kind of troubles me a lot is when
I I hear people talk about like that you
know what when I heard when I hear the
word people talk about trauma and
working with trauma and circling and
like these kind of mishmash and kind of
therapeutic kinds of sensibilities and
with it it starts to really look like no
that's not what circling is right sir
circling isn't psychology in fact you
could say that like circling is a I
think it's a philosophical
phenomenological practice right where
it's more about the revealing of what of
what is and it's so it's so I think the
the issue is is that like a lot of times
that people find that really healing and
they find it really therapeutic
but there's a real big difference
between trying to do that or trying to
invoke something like healing or therapy
and just doing the practice right and
going into that space so that's that's
one of them is like is it when you're
when you're circling somebody's like the
one of the big no nose is kind of giving
advice or or trying to get something to
happen um it's more like what we want to
do is really open up to what is
happening and seeing how close we can
get to what's happening and then notice
what happens as we get closer to it and
there's other things to like that you
know you don't want to give advice right
you don't want to be fixing people you
don't want to be trying to heal therapy
or correct people or kind of like impose
your like your values onto somebody it's
all the things that what you want to do
is circling is just deeply getting
intimate with what is as it reveals
itself to you well if I can rig a
follow-up to that I mean if somebody is
circling and often what is in our heads
is dealing with whatever stressors we
have or things like trauma or
psychological issues that we have but
that may be what somebody's feeling in
the moment how do you recommend you do
you recommend disclosing those things
not disclosing or doing and how do you
do it in a non therapeutic way well it's
interesting is there we go well here's
the thing about it is that is it I think
that like like when you're when you
really be with something it can be
really therapeutic right so there's a
sense of like yeah like as we go in to
ask you like well what's what's going on
with you right and then just maybe one
layer of it is is is the situation that
you're thinking about and then we just
kind of get really present to what that
situation means to you right and as we
dive in there right you're like you may
hit some sadness you may hit some
and we just keep welcoming whatever's
there as it reveals itself to us and how
it reveals like what happens in the
space between I just actually I just
posted a on my channel a couple of
videos back earlier this week I just
posted a pretty good videotaped circle
as a demo circle that I did for in the
art of circling program which is a
year-long training that I do it's a it's
a pretty well it's circlings difficult
to catch on film but this one does a
pretty good job and it's a pretty like
it's a pretty profound circle and you
can really get the sense of just kind of
diving really really deep in with this
person and and just being with what is
and more of what is just started to
disclose and her whole life was at it
right now I want to be
but for your time we're coming up to
about an hour and we started later are
you are you okay - keep going did you
want to yeah I can go right
I can go for another probably 10 minutes
or so sure anyone else want to either
ask a question or give an experience
interacting it in some way I kind of had
a question that came up when we had a
kind of mini demonstration here with
people that had had partaken in circling
before and there was some effect i
noticed from one of the facilitators
that to me at least felt like a kind of
bending of the interpretation of a
person's response towards a positive
effect and i'm assuming that this was
kind of a way to create perhaps a
certain feeling over what the practice
was inducing and one of the questions
that came up is in the practice of
circling is is there kind of this
orientation of in some sense trying to
move away from our tendency to affect
certain observations or is there this
kind of perhaps more directed sense to
it you partially answered this in your
last couple ones but i wanted to kind of
highlight that specific area i think
well let's see see here's the thing
about it is that there's what we're
talking about is like a relational it's
like a relational practice right so
right it's there's what like there's
what's going on with you and then
there's what's like going on with me as
well as it's happening right so there's
a way where if the circle if you know if
the circle is structured where we're
just circling one person and everyone's
attention is on it right really the
place that you want to come from is just
really like seeing what's what's
happening and and then getting is close
to to what what's all there is human
possible you want to like you want to
like eat and what's what's interesting
about it right is is it in relationship
you know we say that the practice is
like the practice of being with what is
or as I like to say of dwelling in the
question how deeply can we and how
profoundly can we be with what is well
is in relationship is like the moment I
see it the moment you bring language to
it its disclosed there's also the moment
that it somehow changes often right so
there's an evolving disclosure that
happens with it and what we want to do
is we want to tune into and be attuned
by that whatever that movement of
disclosure is it it's funny because it's
it's interesting I've noticed this with
that I think one of the ways it gets
like one of the things that kind of gets
in the way of circling a lot of times is
this very kind of atomistic sense about
the present moment right where there's a
sense there's a sense in which right if
we just talk about what's here right now
right as if like as if like the the
moment was a dot right and then the next
moment is another dot or something like
that right I think totally misses the
the ontology of how temporal temporality
how temporal we are through and through
so for example like what may be present
for you is this this this tension in
your shoulder and that's what's like
that's the thing that you can sense it
you can feel but then if I go okay well
what's all involved in that tension
right what will usually find is is a
whole future that I'm anticipating
embracing myself for and like then what
we find it's like if we unfold that that
tension in your shoulders even more what
disc gets disclosed is like what has me
anticipated maybe a whole history right
that
embedded in the concerns in which is is
is this current note is the tension in
my shoulders but just like music I don't
hear music by listening to each note
Etta mystically I actually I only hear
music precisely when the note points to
the future and the past notes that just
went on and I could start to hear the
melody right that's it that's the that's
the thing that we want to do is
revealing more of the music that's being
played in a certain sense right and
that's the beautiful description of the
phenomenology that I was experiencing
even within our our little attempt to
get a feel for it yeah we're in many
ways it was by hyper in some sense hyper
focusing on that moment that it seemed
to expand into almost a narrative unto
itself you could feel history and go
yeah bingo blossoming forth through that
exact moment
bingo right I was like well what else
what what the hell else are we other
than at like a moment of the world
disclosing itself through and as us
right like so if see go deep enough into
somebody's issue you if you just keep
following that thread eventually you're
just gonna hit god right it's that and I
think that's what what where it starts
to get mystical and and where it makes a
lot of sense to describe circling in
this kind of spiritual language right is
precisely it's that quality of
attentiveness to the phenomena of God
because when you think about it every
we're so it's so it's so intense being
human I think about it I could actually
I this is a good this is a good
explication of this when I was in art
school I graduated from the surfaces
guard Institute I'm a painter and a
sculptor and I had this art teacher that
was in a life drawing class that I had
for a number of years in a row so that
he was really good it was
funny to hear him talk about the
difficult B in capturing the human form
and what you used to say is like there's
it's so difficult to render either
abstractly or expressively or or or or
literally representationally because
there is not one part of the human form
that isn't dynamic and expressive and
another way of saying that is that
there's not one inch of us that isn't a
communication right that everything is
expressing like for us we are we are
creatures of language right and we are
constantly like emanating and imbued
with levels and layers of
intelligibility most of which we're not
even aware of but all of it is a
communication right so on some level
when you tune into you would be I mean
the levels of the levels of complexity
and depth of what you can begin to hear
if you really start to attune to the
depth of what it really is to be a human
being and this is what's interesting is
like I think I can only tune into the
level like the deepest level of your
humanity um I could only tune tune into
that with my own humanity right and so
that kind of quality or that observation
of like yeah the more we tune into this
the more there's almost like a like a
narrative stretch unfold from itself
right from the phenomena like that
but if you think about like the way you
stand as then unfolding happens though
like what you start to all the micro
instinctive movements and your nervous
system that you make the attune again
does facial expressions the clay how you
stretch in certain ways in in in
becoming a part of all that I think are
is the machinery right that affords us
being open to the world in a radical way
it's interesting the image or one point
that kind of popped up in my my head as
you were describing there was having
mystical experience in relation with
others
and having this sense of almost those
those micro expressions that deep
connection to the thing in some sense
animating the the object actually
started to blur such that the object
itself was likewise the expression
underneath or part of that thing that
animates fundamentally and in some sense
it felt like a deep blurring between the
kind of ontological pursuit and the
theological pursuit and it I don't know
it's like it moved me out of a naive
aesthetic frame I have a helicopter in
the background sorry it moved me out of
that naive aesthetic sense of someone's
physical existence as somehow
representative of some aspect of beauty
and instead that sense of beauty seemed
to be in the existence that was there at
all I don't have a good I don't have
good language anymore but that was good
and what how would you say the process
of seeing that right and then reading it
like what did that do to you if it did
anything who did you mean I'm in order
to to see that right what did that take
on your behalf oh it's interesting
flipping it back inside because it had
such a deep kind of mirroring effect in
that it likewise felt like I was
experiencing myself as the object within
the subject see I'm again losing my
language yeah well notice notice okay so
just like right there notice cognitively
the stretch that you're needing to make
in order to describe this experience
that you had right that that stretch
right it's precisely the practice I
think great disability like for example
right there just in that state okay
how do I describe something that's
needed like both subject and object
mirroring each other as it's happening
like like just feel all the different
capacities you're trying to balance and
just in your cognition and describing
that like I think that is the that's the
thing that the circling opens one -
right right right
and yeah in that sense there's there's
this kind of deep realization that I
can't actually capture the thing outside
of existing itself yes and here's that
here's what's really interesting this is
where it starts to me or into the in the
Socratic dialogue right where there's
paradox of of of the dialogues where
here Socrates will like say okay what is
what is this virtue and then it's just
that like the whole the whole ride is
this frustrating thing where you find
out at the end
like not even Socrates knows what the
answer to that question is yet somehow
at the end of the conversation there's
this openness that somehow the dialogue
had reached a level of aporia that
transcended the dialogue itself and
that's me he started to like the like
the dialogue allowed us to begin to
circle around and noticing a kind of
disclosure of what was already the case
um that we realized in not being able to
put into language we realized that we
walking away from that our eyes our
vision is better our listening is deeper
you know there's like people want you
want to send your sons to go spend time
with Socrates it's a it said I think the
that's that is the possibility that's
open in relationship and dialogue that
is one level it's really really old but
it's it's it's latent and it's possible
I think that's what I think it's that
sensibility that even draws us to this
dialogue that we're having right now
it's very exciting it is yes and thank
you much that was a wonderful bit of
conversation I'll open it back up I just
I just got just so let you know I just
got a text and my client is needing to
cancel last minute so I actually have
time oh sure well we'll take it serious
what is the what is the the one who's
hosting the meeting what's what are you
getting
what are you here what's what's striking
you what's the well you're talking about
reverence was very interesting to me
you know reverence is I mean I think I
have a discomfort with the concept of
reverence you know that maybe it strikes
me from the the religious aspect that it
you know that it seems different from
you know respect or you know
appreciation that Reverend seems to be
you know giving up something to the to
the the other the other side so that I
found that that interesting I guess the
way I sort of reconciled it in my head
is it's reverence of the apprec--
reverence of the communication between
the two people yeah that that that I I
think I could I can sign sign on for
that there's it's the communication
itself we're reviewing yeah the
disclosure the living disclosure that's
happening and the process that we're in
you could you can as you imagine that is
it fair to say that you can see you can
feel whatever organ that Revere's you
can feel that or going to be able to
open up to that
yeah and the just the yeah exposing I
guess you opening yourself up to to
communication in the way that you
haven't before and valuing it for itself
right right yeah yeah what is it like to
think yeah what is that like for you to
just kind of think about that and ponder
it and well I know there's something
exciting for me always in in having a
good conversation when you get into sort
of a flow state where you're where you
say even an argument with somebody who
you disagree with but where you're
really communicating where you're really
understanding one another where and
maybe you come to some realization or
you or one of you realizes something in
the other person's arguments and or vice
versa and there there was an ecstatic
feeling that I I sometimes get in those
kind of discussions and then what do you
think about that ecstatic feeling what
do you make of that what what affords
that or what is it about what does that
say about conversation that that one of
the things that lets you know that
you're in one like that is is that you
start to get you can feel it really
ecstatic and in this flow state what do
you make about what do you make of that
well I think that we have there you know
I you know when I before I started the
server some of my work sort of on
Twitter my pet projects and Twitter was
promoting productive discussions and I
would try it you know Twitter
discussions for example are very
unproductive and it was sort of garbage
fiery like but I would have some good
discussions with people and they would
say you know what this was the first
time I've actually had a productive
discussion and and they there is a
certain delight there and and I think
they're people don't realize how
rewarding it is to really communicate
with somebody and we get into these
us-versus-them dichotomies yeah and we
really get caught up in them and it's
hard to get rid of it but once you do
even with you know when you have a great
discussion with them
yeah reading it brings you it brings
them closer to us and your stand them
better and there's something great about
that and I think there's there's an
untapped desire I think that many people
have and they don't realize they have
that desire all right until they have
that experience and they're like wow
that was great I don't fight Yeah right
there's something inherently is it fair
to say there's something innately when
you have those conversations where that
you're describing it's like there's
something encouraging about it right yes
it's like it's it's one of those things
I noticed this about like I think it's
one on the same level of doing a loosen
to Jen's right like I always had this
experience of like when I would do a
loosen - Jen where I would start like it
would start to come on and I'd feel the
shift in my consciousness and usually
like my first thought would be
oh shit it happened again when I was
thinking about dropping this acid or
doing these mushrooms or whatever like I
thought I was actually thinking about
this but now I remember like oh this is
not I was not representing this at all
now I remember this right there's a
quality of like like there's knowing it
and then there's gating it's right and
this experience of like when you enter
in that space I have yet and I've done
like I don't know I probably I
calculated at one point I think I've led
something like 8,000 circles right in my
life and whenever that thing happens
it's always like that it's always like
this existential oh yeah right like
there's something about it that cannot
be represented right it but it's a
living idea it's a living sense of a
sense of what's possible becomes felt
and that that that felt sense of
possibility I think is the standing out
that one feels which is what ecstasy is
right to stand out from while being in
and I think until somebody's had it they
don't necessarily even know they they
want it when it comes to
communicating with other people right
totally totally and here's the thing
about it is like what one of the things
I've noticed is that I really do think
that like listening does it there's I
see a lot of I see a lot of books on
communication right and I see a lot a
lot of literature on it right as there
is there ought to be but usually what
it's talking about are like it's all
it's usually talking about ways of
talking right ways of expressing
yourself ways of saying things and I
think one of the one of the big the big
things that kind of gets forgotten is
that there is no speech without a
listening right that ontologically right
there's a sense in which it's hard to
imagine like first they were speaking
and then somebody listened well what
calls forth the speech right unless
there's a listener there so this sense
of this sense of listening is so deep to
all of our communications but it's one
of those it's one of the things that I
don't hear much attention being given to
it but like you know if somebody like
you know you could take the clip like
the most closed person and then you just
start getting interested in what has
them be so closed right what hasn't
think the way that they think and you
lean into them and you you listen to
them you listen to - to the sense of
them being a legitimate other there is
something that in people I've noticed
that just innately responds to that
right with self-disclosure we're almost
designed to do that I think on some
level so there's that I think one of the
things I really appreciate about
circling is this deep a to admit in this
focus on to genuine what is it to
genuinely listen to someone what is to
genuinely as Heidegger would say you
know maybe it's a good idea that we can
hear things that are beyond what I
already think and because I think that
there is what becomes possible and
listening at John and I talked a lot
extensively about this a lot and
last video a few days ago I really
appreciated it and it was this sense of
like listening when you think about what
listening really is I think people
usually think of it as like well
listening is just being kind of an
emptiness right that that is filled with
words on some level but that's not
listening at all like if you think about
it
as I'm talking right now especially like
of the people listening to me at some
point you'll probably throughout this
conversation you'll probably have like
drifted and started thinking about
something else and then you notice like
oh shit like you you pop out of that
thought and you realize you hadn't
listened for the last minute there's a
it shit that reveals this very very
close relationship between thought and
listening that it's I can't I can't
listen and think at the same time so
there's this way in which when I listen
right in some way I'm in a certain sense
I'm allowing another to think a thought
in me right that's kind of what
listening is now what's really
interesting is that when you think about
that like this is why I think for me I
would have to say that I've just been so
fortunate in this regard since the young
age I've just had people older older
people who have just taken me under
their wing and and in some ways they
would speak to me like they would speak
to me on some innate level like what
made them mentors for me is that they
knew that like for for them to speak to
me that in order for me to listen that
something profound would be happening in
that listening that would be that that
that that spoke to who I was and spoke
to who I could become so there's this
there's this way and I think probably
everyone on this right everyone on this
list probably has like a a bent towards
both the spiritual but also the
philosophical the the the intellectual
right and I would imagine we all know
that experience of like like grappling
with the tech
right or an author or somebody who
thinks is saying something to you but
you can't it's just outside of your
ability to comprehend but you're drawn
towards it so you draw it into listening
now there's some thoughts in order for
me to think them
I can't think them standing on my own on
my own like presuppositions I need to
act in order to think the thought that I
can kind of sense is there's a lot there
I must in some sense stand on a
different set of presuppositions in
order to understand what you're saying
like that's we're listening and as you
start to shift your presuppositions you
start to shift who you are how you
understand and this is where I think
listening becomes really can become
really transformative and in many ways
it's like I kind of feel like myself
like on some level I feel like I'm like
constituents I'm constitutive I love the
profound relationships and conversations
I've ever had in my entire life
including the ones that went badly fun
I'm most fucked up by all the
relationships that didn't go well right
so so that that issue of the the
mind-wandering do you have any tips for
how you keep your attention focused on
the other person how you really take it
in without losing it yeah well I think
one of the I mean one of them is just
like first of all it's just having that
intention like having the intention and
being transparent to yourself with the
intention of like I really want to hear
you I really want to get what you're
saying
and then some practical ways of doing
that is just simple simply kind of like
exercises of just simple paraphrasing
like before you speak like summarizing
what you just heard right like like like
like right now like you wanted to so you
so you're you're what I'm hearing is
that you have an eye on a practical
matter that like it's not always easy to
listen to people so how do I begin to do
that what are some practical things that
I can do to actually do that did I get
it
yes you
exactly yeah so one of the things I like
about paraphrasing as an exercise is
that it it's it's similar to mimicry I
think it's a lot more profound than just
repeating what you heard it's actually
when you paraphrase somebody you're
actually in a certain sense becoming
them and taking a walk with what they
just said and there's something that
happens in that walk that like speaking
it actually manually has you think what
they just set out and at the end of that
thought there's kind of a little sense
of like oh you just went on a ride and
then you can you can start to notice
whatever you say next will be in direct
relationship to what they just said hmm
I think there's something about there's
like that you can look at that is like
an asana right of like really making
sure that you kind of repeat back what
you heard before you say the next thing
that's one way of doing it excellent I
don't want to
focus of everything does every does
anyone else want to jump in and yeah we
fact it like I'd love to hear what you
guys are hearing what you're getting so
well at the start of the conversation i
i sensed an attempt at an engendering of
enthusiasm and I sense it again but it
was I wasn't really there in the middle
of the conversation apart from some
genuine enthusiasm I guess but so is
that something that you're you're trying
to play with like creating like an
atmosphere for for fertile relationship
or and and do you have like strategies
of relating to that well I think it's
kind of like I'm not sure if this is
what you're asking but I'll see if I can
if I can if my answer to let's like let
me know if I answer the question that
you're talking about so see what I have
to say like one of the things I've
noticed in just in my own experience is
like my my temperament is naturally not
extroverted right I would have to say
I'm like more on the introverted side so
I often times right this is and this is
where it's so interesting because in a
certain sense being committed to
developing circling that commitment has
drawn me out to more relationship that I
would have I wouldn't have naturally I
would I wouldn't have naturally
preferred so I think you guys all know
this like it's like we're if you're in a
bad mood and you don't feel like talking
but you have an appointment or something
or like there's like you committed to go
to your friend's birthday party and
you're feeling depressed or something
like that there's this kind of hump you
have to get over but then once you once
you start to engage in the dialog where
you go to the party
like there's there at some point like
oftentimes what what I found that
happens at some point I surrender my
will right over to the ritual of the
relationship or the conversation and at
some point I find it's become in the the
realm of the always already I'm all
already always it caught into the flow
of the conversation I can't tell you how
many times it's been it's well here's
the thing it's like it's like it there's
a there's a you could you could look at
conversations as like a ritual right and
so like when you have commitments that
have you go beyond your preferences I've
this is one of the big things about
relationships I've noticed is that in
some sense like just getting yourself in
front of people and becoming involved
there's something about the the economy
the conversation starts to catch right
and I find myself like someone who's
having the conversation and I want to
and I get into a flow so I think like I
think you know we could show up we can
show up to a conversation with that
intention without necessarily having to
feel like it which is often the case for
me right so that that's that's really
nice so so how do you decide what to do
do you think like the end like
experience all things are you'd like
attuning to some kind of tone that you
sends out there like yeah it's much it's
I would say that there's a you know it's
interesting it's it's so it's so
interesting to think about this because
it's so imagine
imagine you're you know you you're
you're alone in a room right just by
yourself and then just bring like
somebody in the room and just sit there
sitting in the quarter
that's a completely different room all
right
like versus when you're alone and then
when there's someone else there there's
such an there is such an embodied
socially embedded beyond ourselves thing
that happens when we're around other
people so there's just a matter of just
could - getting yourself involved where
there are things going on in your body
and your social makeup that will just
naturally be attuned and be attuned by
that that that that somebody else is
there right so I think there's just
natural machinery that just just works
on its own so half of I think most of it
is just showing up and then the other
part is just like just I would say
really bringing my interest to what
other people are saying and what the
conversation is and manually bringing my
attention there and at some point as I
bring my attention there just kind of
like with meditation right you bring
your attention back you know like when
you start thinking you lose contact with
your breasts and in a moment you you
catch it you bring yourself back I think
it's like it's something's very similar
in being caught in a dialogue right just
bringing yourself back and showing up at
some point a dialogue and especially
really deep dialogues right in some
sense you become a self you yourself
becomes given by dialogue and that's
where we start to get a dialogue oh s---
and a lot of these conversations that
we've been talking about but I think
it's like it's very similar to where
where you bring your attention and so
bringing your attention to like you're
you're in your interest to who this
person is and what they're saying and
like even if you don't feel like it even
if you don't feel the interest right
bringing kind of coming out of yourself
and bringing your interest there like is
a way of letting letting the process
catch you
how's that no that-that-that's
great yeah I'm I'm also playing with
these things and I'm trying to figure
out some some orientation so it's always
nice to hear other people yeah
explain the process way anyone else and
yeah what else are you guys hearing how
many people are here twenty twenty-one
right now
Oh twenty-one right on a question I've
already spoken a lot so I don't want to
step on anyone else mm-hmm well well I'm
sure they'll scream if you start
stepping so look I'm just going to start
stepping okay I want to reverse the
polarity of my first question where I
asked about scaling up yeah stead do you
have any thoughts on applying this to
our own internal dialogue and how we
interact with ourself just also to say
you've talked a lot about what we can
learn about ourselves and grow in
relationship do you feel about self
development in extended periods of
isolation huh yeah well I would you know
I would say that I mean what you're
pointing to is a real deep thing right
you know it's it you could almost say
that we're always in a dialectic right
of some kind with ourselves with our
environment and like even when we're
thinking worth like we're thinking that
thought has some sense of somebody who's
hearing the thought right or someone
who's thinking I think really it's it's
arguable but I would say that like it's
it's safe to say that like we're a
relationship all the way down and I'm
constantly talking to people in my head
right even when they're not there
like for example
this is a great example I think in Cory
Anton's book which I just I just
uploaded another video on Cory anton who
wrote a book called cellphone
authenticity which is kind of a an
existential hi to Gary and reassessment
of the self and then from that
reassessment what is what would what
does that imply for authenticity it's
really love his I love that guy
so we go deep into this well any things
he says in this book that I just thought
was just hilarious and ironically funny
was he you know imagine you know you can
imagine an artist who does the greatest
masterpiece of his life and then when
he's done he imagines other people
seeing it and criticizing it so he
destroys the painting the question is is
did he avoid that did he avoid the
criticism I think you got an answer no
he didn't write in it in the end that
there's this way and it starts to
highlight that like I am social all the
way through like even when I'm alone
right there are embedded social
practices in the in the way that this
the the agent or an arena relationship
show up is is imbued with people even if
they didn't ever criticize me that I
destroyed the painting so that they
wouldn't presupposes that I've I was
already I already was criticized by them
right I didn't need them to criticize me
and so that just kind of gets at how
deep it is so I would say that like that
we're always in dialog intimate dialogue
with ourselves and that there's that
there's there's a way of of being one of
the ways of having reverence for
yourself and respecting yourself is to
is to give attention to that dialog and
I know that like in working in my
coaching practice and working with
people one of the biggest places that I
think that we're really fused right the
self is really fused as to the super-ego
right or that sense of
that sense of that that that critical
voice that often like its job is to kind
of keep you the same right which is
really about your survival and how it
lives is this kind of this this constant
sense of criticism that comes up
whenever you start to go beyond the
shape you normally take and I notice
that like in when I'm working with
people coaching them you know they start
to set goals and they start to do they
go they start to move towards what they
who they aspire to be and it inevitably
brings up all that self judgment and
criticism and so one of the big
relationships that they start to get
into is to start to see that that's
happening oh there's a structure at me
that's like basically telling me what
reality is and who you are and what I
can and can't do and Who am I to dare to
even think I could do that and all of
that like all of that that process and
so a big part of realizing and going to
that next level of who they are is about
having a real relationship with that for
what it is and going into dialogue with
it right disengaging from it like
hearing the way that it talks to you and
the way that you position yourself and
fight with it and avoid it and that's
like an example of like seeing the
dialogues that are always going on
inside of ourselves so yeah some
personality model I'm sorting myself out
was mentored under Roger strucken and
Reinhold Sabol he specializes in doing
some personality would love to hear you
have a conversation with someone an
expert on the submarine circling when
you dissect yourself into a variety of
some personalities what they work people
through seems very similar in a lot of
ways what you have people do with each
other
totally totally yeah yeah
I am all I like I am like even when I'm
alone I am only myself in relationship
to another right like it's it's kind of
like ontological II that's what itself
is it's it's always an agent and arena
it's a deep struck it's like in the
structure of our being so I think all
those kind of techniques are really
great that kind of work with
subpersonalities and have you go into
dialogue with them it just seems to just
make explicit what's already going on
right so I think it can be really
helpful to break that stuff up right and
to you know actually have each part of
you complete a sentence with the other
part and you get in a dial if things is
resolved just on their own that same
kind of moving to another level through
you know conversation basically with
yourself all all things that facilitate
that just seem like like no brainer
that's good
and it's also you know it's interesting
to like I think one of the ways that
people often you know encircling a well
if you notice like we like if you get to
know somebody you start to eat like
everyone has rants that they get on -
right well you'd be talking to them and
all of a sudden they're just like
they're addressing some concern that you
didn't have with them about something
and they start to talk to somebody else
it's almost like they're taking one of
the these people in their head and then
they're kind of putting it on you and
then talking to you um encircling seems
to bring that out a lot like where like
for example I'll give it one example of
somebody I was working with for a long
time where he he came in he came in and
we started talking and and and I started
to notice that he kept saying this
particular sentence structure over and
over over again he kept saying he would
say something and you say I yeah but
it's cool it's alright and then he
talked about something else and at the
end of it he say oh that you know it's
cool but it's okay it's okay
and I after like counting a
about 30 times that he said that it
finally was like can I ask you who
you're talking to and he's like what
what do you mean and I was like well
you've reassured me that it's cool and
it's okay like 30 times and I never
insinuated that it wasn't cooler okay
and all of a sudden he's like he stops
and his eyes get really big and he's
like who was I talking to and then over
the next year we discover that actually
who he's talking to he had no idea like
his whole like what happened in his
childhood and his parents were insane
and his mother was hospitalized and then
he was like kind of holding his whole
child he was like the savior for
everybody and he had no real
conceptualization of that or awareness
of that yet that he would kind of index
his world in terms of that history and
then try to solve it and so like that's
an example of like where where we
actually and oftentimes encircling where
people will be sharing or talking if
people feel disconnected and oftentimes
what starts to happen is we look at that
we go it's like okay so what was
happening in that moment and oftentimes
what'll happen is people will realize
like oh they weren't talking to us at
all they were assuming that like I
didn't you guys didn't like me and
therefore I was kind of already kind of
anticipating that and trying to please
you right and it wasn't actually in
connection to the people there so like
when you start to get into an exam and
like well when when there's a loss of
connection or the lack of connection and
then you you highlight that and you get
curious and like start to unpack that a
bit what you find are those kinds of
internal relationships that we project
out it's not
the person who flips you off on the
street or whatever that's often not
about you at all it's just you're not
mad at me you're still mad at your dad
or whatever yeah going around
interacting with the world in such a way
that they're just projecting their own
things onto it and interacting with that
totally yeah totally
absolutely absolutely it's kind of like
one of the big openings right you know
talking about listening to really listen
to somebody in some senses is is you
know a teacher of mine that that said
like ask me is like okay in order for
listening to be available right to you
for genuine listening to happen what do
you have to understand about listening
such that if you don't understand this
listening is impossible
right and we Pete we were in a he lived
in a like a an area that had like a town
square with a park in the center of it
and we were like walking along and and I
would give him I don't know some smart
answer about it and he's like nope give
it another shot and so he walked around
the park like three times and he's like
he stops me and says okay you ready
it's like what do you got to get about
listening such that if you don't get
this listening is it possible he stops
and he looks at me and he's like you got
to get that you don't listen and he's
and all of a sudden they start started
sinking is like oh yeah like what I have
to get about listening is that I don't
listen because if I can't hear that I
don't listen right listening is
impossible but the moment I hear that I
wasn't hearing you that I was hearing my
projection of you or all my pre
listenings of you all my judgments of
you or whatever the moment I can begin
to hear that is the moment genuine
listening becomes possible and I keep
hearing I keep getting that on a deeper
and deeper level myself like I always
like because I never think what I'm
listening that I'm not listening I
always think
I'm listening when I'm listening but
like then I'll start to hear like oh
shit I actually wasn't hearing you but I
just heard that I wasn't hearing you is
the moment I begin to hear you it's sort
of like meditation when you realize your
mind is wandering very much like
meditation I think I think that's why
circling oftentimes is is referred to as
a is an inner subjective meditation
anyone else want to share what they've
taken from the conversation today well I
wasn't actually gonna say anything but
what was just said about not listening
that was very interesting to me and I
was wondering if there's any techniques
for kind of helping other people have
that realization that that they're not
really that they're listening to
somebody who is not there or that is in
their head rather than the person who's
right in front of them trying to
communicate with them all right
well I think it's like I mean one thing
just on this end I think it back to just
saying what you heard right so just
having like like really really saying
saying okay this is what he heard and
telling him what you heard and then
finding out whether or not you heard him
right like is that what they met right
and so that's one way right of just not
assuming that I'm hearing you but
actually checking right because I have
to say there's so many working with like
lots of couples in marriage counseling
like most of the time when people are
arguing they are not arguing about the
same thing and they don't hear that
that's so like a lot of a lot of the
coaching is just having them start to
hear what they're actually saying to
each other and then having them hear
that they weren't hearing it I mean when
it comes to somebody else it's mostly
like you can I think you can ask them
like so like what are you hearing I just
want to make sure that we're like you're
hearing what I'm saying or I just want
to get it right and you can invite them
just speak it out right where where you
make the listening u11 is you
unconcealed listening and you say you
acknowledge there
listening that could happen here right
and it's kind of what what this
conversation is inside of and it it
could it could happen in greater or
lesser degrees and to tuning to the
listening and then bringing it up as
part of the conversation that's
something that's really rare but it's I
think it's always valid to do I've got
something to add here have been this has
been a recent epiphany of mine the whole
how to have a good conversation thing
I'm happy to share I'm happy to pause I
tend to get into monologues but I've
learned recently how to stop doing that
well oh my point of view on this is
roughly that the best way to have a good
conversation is to shut the fuck up I'm
being blunt but it's the truth my father
unfortunately he has a different problem
my brother has the problem of not being
able to shut his mouth my father and
these are both major triggers for my own
hypomania well I'll leave it at that but
my father has a problem of not being
able to hear and it's not that his ear
his ears have problems is that his ears
aren't open whereas I'm now all ears I
have nothing but ears my I don't even
have eyes anymore and with my father
what I noticed there's a pattern that
he's gotten into he's built a gutter in
his mind a gutter that the bowling ball
just wants to fall into and the more
that you build through this gutter you
till this line he becomes easier and
easier to fall into it he found a wife
that adapted fully to him she would
English she learned his culture she
moved to the Middle East I'm gonna end
the monologue but for my father his
problem is that he asks direct questions
and he asked them an infinite number of
times cuz he doesn't respect your time
he doesn't respect my time he just
thinks that you'll solve the problem for
him so he never had to hear because you
will solve the problem for him after 50
question if you ask the same question
three times or 30 times eventually the
other
is going to get frustrated and they're
gonna stop talking they're gonna either
do it for you or stop talking to you so
I think these are the two things one is
shutting up listening like literally
opening your ears you'll find that you
attract people to you when you do this
you'll attract muses people that don't
speak for months maybe maybe they
observe you and then you'll find a
creative spark that opens up the door to
many more epiphanies yeah totally and
that speaks to just I think what you're
talking about is it that speaks to the
primacy of listening right there
yeah there's a way in which you can
listen so deeply that somebody can begin
to speak more deeply right in you could
say the openness in which you're
listening takes place and thinking about
this yesterday I was working with a
client who is with another teacher and
he was taught she's talking about like
he's writing emails to him that she
finds herself using language in a new
way when she types to him and and the a
way that she's really like impressed
with and proud of herself afterwards
she's like oh wow I can't believe that I
kind of came up with that and in a
certain sense that was in the context of
his sense of listening that she
literally became someone and spoke in
new ways that was in some way speaking
into a listening
so like listening is a it's not just an
empty it's not it's never just an empty
space right it's a generative it
generates speech it's this it's the it's
the space in which speech is disclosed
into in fact I would even say like some
of the best thinking Rae is is I really
learned this from Heidegger in a big way
because he talks a lot about this that
there's like this kind of this deep
wedded miss between listening and
thought that that you know I think the
best be
comes out of where you are tuning into
something and and you're listening
you're listening is just is right before
what you're about to say it's like
you're listening to what is being
thought right a moment and then you
speak it right after where there's a
listening and speaking that is comes via
the listening even to yourself and what
you're saying right what wants to be
thought I think that's really like
that's where genuine thinking really
comes from is is kind of like we hear
what wants to be thought we hear us like
a glistening of an intelligibility that
doesn't have words yet but we can hear
it and we can begin to bring it to
speech and we find out what it is that
we think through revealing what we're
hearing through our speech I think
that's the sweet spot we're listening
and and listening and speaking and
thinking become like almost the same
event that's like flow state stuff I can
definitely relate with that and I
definitely don't want to jump on anyone
who would like to add but you know I
actually believe not you know that's it
that's a that's a crutch to say that to
get a little meta but you know I would
say that I've solved the meta crisis the
crisis of the sense making apparatus and
I believe you've touched on it I
resonate deeply with what you just said
if I can offer a tool that you might use
in the future to convey your
understanding your listening skills one
of them is to just relay it back very
simply in their own words literally copy
their words if you don't know what they
said literally just say verbatim what
they said back to them they'll correct
it and then if you want to get a little
bit more advanced you might say it back
to them more concisely with more
concision if you will like a surgeon and
if you want to do even better you'll do
what I just did repeat yourself use
different words different tone and then
draw an analogy make it visceral I just
drew your your mind if you have an
internal monologue which many of you
to stabbing and blood and now when you
think of concise you're gonna think of
blood maybe perhaps perhaps not but
confusion is good too because when you
confuse people you open their brains to
program it actually to reprogramming
because they're already in a cult many
cults and you want them to be in cults
that are productive for them and their
families and so they they need sense
making apparatus they don't have it
they've it's been programmed out of them
as a baby you have this it's literally
just listening to the environment their
ears are born open and we closed them
intentionally or maybe unintentionally
but it's definitely negligence
it's definitely abuse and what I've
learned is that just literally by
opening your ears all of your senses and
listening to the environment it tells
you everything you need to know because
people reflect back into the environment
when you speak you hear your words it's
not for you when I'm speaking to you
it's for me
because I'm teaching myself how to say
it better next time I'm teaching myself
what's important and what's not and when
you ask for advice sincerely and you
take advice and you believe things with
conviction you make a statement in the
environment the environment moves around
you the environment changes this is what
the reality distortion field is I will
get to Mars by 2023 and the world says
you're crazy
it's impossible he's been saying it for
20 years the guy's insane clearly
believe the same thing he's been wrong
for 20 years but in retrospect he's
always right and this is the same same
thing with Trump he's the biggest idiot
who always happens to be right but I'll
pause there there's a quality of
attunement that we've touched on too
right where you know it's interesting
it's like there's also something that
goes on below the level of speech and
cognition right which i think is
constantly going on in relationships
which is like come is also is for
came on when we learned how to speak
like since you today we don't like
babies don't acquire language through
understanding the word that they're
saying they do it through mimicry and I
think that there's there's a real deep
thing that goes on that when you're
paying attention to the other person
while you're speaking you can you're
registering subtle ways in which they're
paying attention not paying attention
and and your body kind of innately can
begin to could be present - they're
listening as you're speaking it's one of
the things that I noticed what would
happen to me and like even when I would
like I'd lead courses and then we were
first we were first leading courses it's
like I had never done it before right
and and I would I
there was always parts before we would
start circling where I would set up the
conversation by like like having uh like
like doing the talk on a certain
distinction or a framework or something
right to set up set it up and then
sometimes it would just rock and then
other times it would just call fall flat
and I was real identified with it so I'd
feel really really bad it would it fell
flat and I feel really good when it
didn't but like it was the same
conversation I would I would have the
same conversation and then one would
would really fly and the other one
wouldn't and I for the longest time I
couldn't tell what the difference was
until I started to realize like that oh
when it went well what was driving the
conversation were the relationships and
the people in the room and that when it
went badly like is was when I was trying
to when I would disconnect from the
people and I get self-conscious and I
was so focused on what I wanted to say
and so then I started to see that
distinction and I get in front of the
room and like what would happen is is
like when I saw myself kind of get like
just trying to focus on what I was
saying I would bring my attention back
to the people in the room and I would
just look at one person and start
speaking to them and then that
then that just started to become more
and more the way that I I had
conversations in further room with
people where it just became second
nature to where because it's all
whenever we're speaking with there's
always a listening that's going on and
then just being attuned into the
listening and allowing what I say to be
in direct relationship to the listening
is I'll start to speak be Kings that are
attuned into the room and are completely
irrelevant right I just want to check in
with you guy it's it's been two hours
now and we're oh wow I don't want to
stop you if you if you want to keep
going but I want to be respectful of
your time as well oh yeah I should I
should probably go spend a couple hours
but this is been great this has been
fantastic it's been fascinating and you
know we certainly love to have you back
at any time
yeah and I want to draw people's
attention to the voices with Verve a key
that guy did recently with John and is a
couple other conversations on John's
Channel plus a bunch of conversations on
guys Jam so you've had you've had a
quite a bit of a back and forth with
John there's some great discussions yeah
totally yeah I'll give you I can put up
a link to my channel sure sure that
would be great and I can put it put one
up too
this has been this has been amazing
we're so grateful for for your time I
think and the interaction is just the
the getting in deep and that's that's
fantastic really I loved it I appreciate
it I appreciate the way that you held
the space like I could feel I could feel
your involvement and like you're leading
in and thinking new things and being
interested and asking questions and that
really set a good tone for me thank you
oh great thank you very much appreciate
it and think and thank you to Tyler for
recording as always it and to everybody
here for for tuning in and participating
a great community that we're we're
forming here and each conversation seems
to be getting getting better and better
so it's it's really nice - nice to see
ya nice to meet everybody I hope I get a
chance to talk to all of you it may be
here at some point thank you guys thank
you guy and thanks to everyone who's
here
thank you bye you're amazing
thanks again