everybody we are back it is Jack Murphy
and this is the Jack Murphy live podcast
flagship podcast of the liberal order
you can find me Jack Murphy on Twitter
at Jack Murphy live at the website Jack
Murphy live.com Jack Murphy live
everywhere all across the internet
actually if you all learn more about the
liminal order also come on down to our
website there and check it out as
liminal - border
check it out today I have a return guest
in fact the number one first guests on
the Jack Murphy live podcast the one and
only dr. Jeffrey Miller how you doing
Jeffrey I'm great good to be back on
it's fantastic Jeffrey is an
evolutionary psychology professor at the
University of New Mexico he is an author
of a number of books his latest one is
called virtue signaling you can also go
to his website primal Polycom catch up
on all Jeffrey's latest writings his
book recommendations and other resources
for this time in Corona and other things
Jeffrey it's a crazy time right now man
how are you holding up over there in New
Mexico we're pretty good I'm in a shared
house my wife Diana Fleischman my
housemates just in an aria and we got
onto the prepping thing pretty early
we've got at least a million calories
stockpiled and we've got a lot of online
projects we're pursuing and you know I'm
pretty active on Twitter still as primal
Polly yeah so we're just trying to UM
coordinate with our friends and family
to make sure everybody's safe secure and
trying to figure out you know what the
next three to six months hold for the
world the economy families etc yeah it
sounds like you've got a a corona
version of the hyper hell's going on
over there with everybody working on
their individual projects and reaching
out and building a little community
which is which is fantastic and it's
exactly what we need in this time of
corona and one of the reasons I wanted
to have you back on the show Jeffrey you
know there's a million things we could
talk about but back more than a month
ago now you sent out a memo to some
close friends and associates that really
outlined your vision of what may you
know you're sort of aggregated vision
from others and experts of what of what
may be coming down the road as early as
in February and I have to say looking
back on it now you were one of the first
people who were out there publicly and
privately sharing this information and
sort of getting ahead of the curve and
very interested to see how you came to
that so if you don't mind sharing a
little bit about that mem
and then we can just sort of back up and
start from the story and how that came
to be because in this time of
information overload of increasing
complexity of lack of clear direction
especially from the top and from
everywhere conflicting information from
the world horse health World Health
Organization CDC trying to make sense of
the world today to not only endure but
to thrive is a really crucial
conversation we need to happen so I'm
happy to have that with you Jeffrey so
so tell me the story about this memo
that came out in February you know start
from the beginning because this is
important how we get to this point yeah
this email was based on a number of
things that kind of primed me to take
covert 19 maybe a little more seriously
than some folks did number one my then
girlfriend now wife Diana Fleischman got
me involved in this effective altruism
movement and a big part of this ei
movement is thinking about existential
risks to humanity
I'd actually taught twice a advanced
undergrad seminar on the psychology of
effective altruism we spent at least two
weeks in that class on existential risks
such as threats from artificial general
intelligence nuclear war and pandemics
so we read quite a bit about pandemics
and the fact that the smart people in EA
were taking pandemics both naturally
occurring ones and also bioterrorism
ones pretty seriously at least as global
catastrophic risks that could kill tens
of millions or hundreds and millions of
people you know they're not likely to be
existential risks that kill all of
humanity but the a lot of smart people I
knew were writing about pandemics as a
big deal and an underestimated threat so
I had a kind of background preparation
for for taking this seriously
um you could you give us just a quick
one on effective altruism I'm not sure a
lot of people are familiar with that
yeah effective altruism is this global
sort of do-gooding movement that was
launched about ten years ago by a couple
of oxford moral psychologists Toby Ord
and will make
and they wanted to build a movement that
was rational and evidence-based it was
about doing the most good that you can
given limited resources and trade-offs
so it's kind of the intersection of like
policy wonks moral philosophers
scientists rationalists it's full of
very smart slightly ask me people who
read a lot of science fiction and then
you know try to think seriously about
how do you actually help the most people
you can
and traditionally effective altruism has
focused on things like if you give to
charity what are some some of the most
effective charities that have the best
evidence that they actually do good
instead of just doing virtue signaling
and wasting money they also pay a lot of
attention to global poverty and global
public health to pay attention to animal
welfare and reducing factory farming and
recently they've especially paid a lot
of attention to existential risks so
that's kind of the EA context very
interesting you should bring up this
notion of trade-offs that's you know
with where are you gonna go off on a
tangent here Jeffery it's amazing this
conversation of trade-offs that's
happening right now from from what I've
seen you know there's two there's two
extreme camps right there's the like
basically do-nothing camp right and then
there's the on the other side sort of
lock everything down and keep us all
separated for who knows how ever much
longer and in that analysis is certainly
a series of trade-offs and it's not one
that I think people are excited about
having this conversation right now
there's some heavy issues in there so
what are what are some of the trade-offs
they you're you can see from our policy
approaches or the do-nothing approaches
or the do-everything approaches GDP
values of wives etc etc yeah the the
trade-offs are always there even if you
refuse to recognize them and this is one
of the core ideas from effective
altruism that if you're doing serious
public policy and I'm trying to analyze
and predict which
policies are going to be best you have
to try to quantify things as best you
can
it's not helpful to say you know lives
are infinitely valuable and we have to
do everything we can to save every last
person that's delusional we never do
that with regard to any policies you
have to try to put a dollar value on
human life or else you know nobody would
ever go to work in dangerous occupations
like logging or you know being a lineman
or being a soldier
nobody attaches infinite value to human
life on the other hand you have to take
economic costs of shutdowns
seriously because jobs translate into
lives and into human wellbeing and not
are a lot to families so anybody who's
saying the economy matters more than the
lives of old people you know if they
can't quantify that it's hard to take
that seriously but on the other hand if
you're like it we should be willing to
undergo a global recession to save a few
hundred thousand old people that's not
really serious analysis either right
well we've got both Joe Biden last night
saying basically human lives are
infinite in value one of his tweets and
we've got the governor of New York State
saying effectively the same thing now
how much of that is just pure total
political BS and how much of that is
them actually not understanding what
public health policy it's all about
I think it's half virtue signaling and a
half ignorant I mean I don't know these
guys I don't know they're sort of
educational background I don't know
their advisers but it's really not a
helpful message to the general public
for politicians to have this kind of
attitude that the public can't handle
the truth if politicians think well we
have our esoteric knowledge we have what
our advisors and policy wonks are
telling us but we can't convey that to
the general public because the public
would panicked and the public couldn't
handle it
that's basically anti-democratic that's
saying we the elites know better we're
gonna make decisions behind closed doors
for the good of the public maybe or for
the good of our party but if it became
generally known what we know then the
country couldn't handle it I think
that's an incredibly patronizing elitist
attitude and that's what got us into
many of these problems in the first
place well and it's not a it's not a new
position either I was talking with Sam
Hammonds from the niskin and Center
about globalization in China and such
and he kept referring me back to Paul
Krugman going back in like the late 90s
even saying we can't let the barbarians
get a hold of the real data and
information on globalization because
then ah they'll just be empowered and
have you know knowledge and we just
can't let that happen because they won't
understand it and we need to rush
headfirst into a completely globalized
borderless frictionless economy and
ironically not ironically totally
predictably we've ended up in a
situation now where globalization has
many merits obviously but some of the
downsides are basically making people
that eat bat soup in China your
next-door neighbor and so and and then
them also making a medicine that you
need and and also supplying you with all
the stuff that you want and need and in
strategic national defense industries as
well so here we are still with the
elites trying to keep the information
from the masses but times are different
today times are very different today and
in fact the elites and a lot of our
leadership they probably don't even have
the answers in fact we can probably
count on the fact that they can't
comprehend these complex systems and so
what we're seeing in response now is an
in conjunction with social meet social
media technology is the emergence of
these new intelligence and information
networks and user are at the hub of one
yourself and that's partially how you
came to have this these understandings
before most people did
least publicly so continue to talk us
through your experience in drafting up
this memo and and as we go through it I
definitely want to dig into the
trade-off so that we were discussing
because this is the difficult dirty
national conversation that's not really
being had in a detailed level so let's
continue with the story I'm will keep
drilling down on things as we go through
it
yeah so the the further backstory to
this
arguably pressing an email I did you
know four or five weeks ago the the
first background was I was already tuned
in by the effective altruism movement to
the risk of pandemics as global
catastrophic risks
everybody in EA knew sooner or later
there's going to be a virus like corona
virus that creates big problems the only
the only issue is when and our
government's going to take that risk
seriously enough to prepare for ahead of
time and it's now become clear the
Chinese government was preparing they
did have contingency plans most other
Western democratic governments did not
take it seriously enough despite clear
warnings from epidemiologists and Bill
Gates and lots of other influencers I
think what do you attribute that to him
um the fact that America is run by
lawyers and not by scientists or
engineers right we have a political
elite that's used to ruling through
argumentation propaganda and influence
and not through actually coming up with
evidence-based policies that solve
practical real-world problems you know
like a virus where you you can't reason
with it you can't propagandize it away
it's just they're doing its thing right
so I think the second big influence was
the fact that you know I married Diana
in late November we had a honeymoon for
two or three weeks in China we visited
Chengdu in Sichuan province we visited
Shanghai and then a few weeks later I
actually returned to give a talk in
Shenzhen north of Hong Kong and during
that whole period we interacted quite a
bit with local academics you know we did
these old tourism
but I was also avidly reading a lot of
books about China Chinese governance the
meritocracy how their whole Chinese
Communist Party system operates in terms
of identifying and promoting talented
smart people into positions of power
well you sent China and meritocracy yeah
they have an incredibly efficient
meritocracy actually so could you dig
into that a little bit and make a
comparison to the United States because
people I think first blush would say
pick the merit meritocratic system China
or the United States and I think most
people in the u.s. would pick the United
States but we also you and I know our
listeners know that the meritocratic
system in the United States has been
completely destroyed for a number of
years decades even and it's only getting
worse
but please tell me about your experience
in China because that sounds that's
actually pretty fascinating concept
there yeah so you know for history as
China was actually the first major
civilization to use widespread
intelligence testing to allocate
government positions to talented young
people that was the Imperial Chinese
civil service exam which they've been
running for 800 to a thousand years and
it was a matter you know for all four
centuries of identifying people who were
literate and mastered the Confucian
classics and could write insightful
essays about that and they used this to
identify you know then these tests were
administered to hundreds of thousands of
of young men per year if you did well on
the exam you would be appointed to some
position of kind of low level government
influence and power if you did very well
you were sort of fast-tracked into like
this guy might be a good candidate for
mayor of a local town or city and you
know the the Chinese imperial system had
many flaws and many weaknesses and it
was kind of not very good at promoting
technological development but they did
have this background of thinking of
being IQ realists and taking
intelligence seriously as something that
deserves identification and cultivation
and
then you know you get the Chinese
Revolution in the 1940s the meritocracy
is disrupted by several decades by Mao
and his policies but then it gets
basically re instituted in the 1980s you
get the Gaucho of the national
university entrance exam which everybody
who's aged eighteen takes it's very
challenging students study hard for it
it determines are you going to get into
the first second or third tier
university or not university at all and
then even during an after university the
Chinese Communist Party has basically a
human resources department that keeps
national track of everybody who is
talented in the public sector but also
in state-owned enterprises and private
businesses and basically what happens is
if you're a very talented young person
this Bureau will assign you to different
positions to kind of test out how good
you are at running a business a
state-owned enterprise or the local
government if you do well you're
promoted to positions of increasing
political responsibility or business
responsibility they deliberately rotate
people between state-owned enterprises
private businesses and political
positions so by the time you're a mayor
of a big city you haven't just been
elected as a political you know
apparatchik or somebody who's good on TV
or good and debates you've actually
proven you can already run a small town
you can already run a factory you are an
effective manager so you got promoted
based on these sorts of meritocratic
criteria and by the time you get to the
Standing Committee of the Politburo you
know the top level government decision
makers and advisers you've already
proven you can run a major
corporation you can run a province you
probably have at least a master's degree
in engineering and I was just hugely
impressed the more I learned about this
that the meritocracy in China despite
all the the corruption and ideology
behind the scenes I think they have a
government of very smart practical
minded people who know that you know
their welfare is closely tied up with
the economic well-being of the people
who are looking after and and public
health that is that's completely
fascinating and totally contrary to what
what I think they would have us think
here in the United States the powers
that be or just common culture or
whatever it seemed to me the year first
my first thought would be that all
political positions of power just filled
with cronies and party party tools and
they're not really focused on
efficiencies or doing things better than
anybody else they're more interested in
just power and control over the people
but your first-hand experience your
history or your understanding of their
history you're on the ground you know
personal connections and conversations
with people I've given you a different
perspective was there a personal
connection or conversation or an
observance or something that you had
there that that confirmed
we had been reading or what you had
suspected I think the thing that shocked
me you know apart from all this
background reading was just seeing with
my own eyes that that China has
leapfrogged in terms of technological
and social development so fast I mean
every single subway that we rode in any
major Chinese city was better faster
more advanced cleaner than any subway
I've ever seen in the US or Europe the
rate of building I mean when I visited
Shenzhen for example I gave a talk at
Chinese University of Hong Kong Shenzhen
new campus built from scratch in the
last five years I was staying in this
huge hotel there is a massive
construction site outside the hotel I
happen to ask
my colleagues hey what's that they said
oh it's just we're building that what
will be the tallest building in Asia two
thousand feet it'll be done in four
years and that's just something that
happens so I was very impressed with the
kind of rate of development a lot of
Americans if they haven't been to China
think of it as a backward place that's
full of these weird wet markets and
people eating barbaric food and to have
these sort of images of like rice
paddies and Chinese communism as it was
back in the 70s and they're not up to
date with what's actually happening
there so I go on this honeymoon I get
back from China I hear about coronavirus
in China and how seriously they're
taking it how what draconian decisive
measures they're they're implementing to
deal with this and and Wuhan and Hebei
province and I think oh if they're
doing this they think this is a really
really big deal and I compared it to the
likely response of America and European
countries and I thought we don't have
the political will or the meritocracy or
the awareness of pandemics as a risk to
handle this very well compared to China
and I thought this is really bad this is
this is going to be a kind of global
catastrophe because no matter what China
does it is going to escape it is going
to infect other countries and once it
does that it's going to be a global
pandemic so I'd like to dig down on this
a little bit because people are using
the China case as a comparison for the
United States and they're looking at it
as being you know ahead of us in the
future an example of what to do oh my
god they bent the curve their numbers
are down cases are down but let's just
drill down onto China for a little bit
just China have any motivations beyond
on the same analysis that we're making
in terms of GDP health death you know is
a recession
you're gonna kill more people than the
virus are they are they maximizing for
the same outcome as we are I think
honestly to a large degree they are it's
just I imagine that behind the scenes
the smart people running China are much
more willing to talk explicitly and
rationally about the trade-offs that
they face I think this is why they were
willing to do such an intense lockdown
so early you know there were a few weeks
of kind of denialism and obscuring what
was happening but once the Chinese
leadership took it seriously they
realized either we go into full-scale
serious militarily enforced lock downs
or we're gonna have a national recession
that screws our economy we have to get
ahead of this virus absolutely as fast
as possible and we have to use the full
decisiveness and power of the Chinese
government to do it now they had
experience in dealing with something
like this right I think I read that to
h1n1 they actually enforced quarantines
and shut down similar to this and then
they also have their systems and
software tracking and guys in countries
like Singapore and South Korea that I
mean they're they're just like prepared
right they they they like wargame this
stuff out they've they've had actual
practical experience and so they can see
into the future a little bit more
clearly than we can or we're willing to
in the United States so assuming now
that their their trade-off and
optimization model is similar to ours
you basically get out of this thing with
the least amount of damage right and
saving the most lies as possible at the
same time that trade-off do you think
that the data that's coming out of China
is reliable do you think that the and I
realize that you're not like a Chinese
Studies expert or
epidemiologist but you were there and
you've had experience in you're very
smart guy and you've talked a lot of
people so do you do trust the data
that's coming out of China because I
really am litt interested in this
comparison between what they did what
we're gonna do and is it gonna work the
same way I don't fully trust the data
coming out of China I think they're
playing a very subtle very long game in
terms of geopolitical influence and I
don't think they necessarily think okay
we have to be fully open and fully
disclose 'iv to the West in terms of
everything that's happening internally I
think their their view is it's basically
none of the West's business and we will
give you the information that we think
helps China right not necessarily that
helps you but you know having said that
I think I'm as worried about the kind of
geopolitical side effects of the
pandemic as I am about the kind of
economic side effects mm-hmm I think
China knows very well that it is getting
a lot of credit internationally for
being able to handle this pandemic so
decisively internally and offering a lot
of help to other countries I think
China's reputation will emerge from this
looking a lot better probably than
America or Europe look in the eyes of
the third world and the eyes of other
developing countries and I think they're
perfectly willing to capitalize on that
I think a lot of other countries are
going to after this pandemic look at the
relative efficiency of different
governments and think wow China not only
succeeded in an unprecedented rate of
economic growth and lifting hundreds and
millions of people out of poverty in the
last three decades but also they seem
apparently to be able to handle global
catastrophic risks better than
american-style democracy can that is
that is interesting comparison do you
think in there now
they put the same value on a human life
as we do now I understand economically
speaking this should be cut and dry
but there's more to it than that do you
do you think in their calculations that
they put the same value on a human life
as we do in the West in the United
States I think in the aggregate they
actually do now care quite a bit about
the health and well-being of their
citizens more than they did maybe 15
years ago a lot of Chinese politicians
like mayors of big cities are promoted
based on things like how quickly can you
improve air quality and reduce pollution
because they're extremely worried about
you know the lung damage and the deaths
that are caused by that so I think as
you shift from a kind of manufacturing
based economy to a service economy they
realize the economic well-being of China
depends on most Chinese people being
healthy happy workers and and consumers
and citizens so I don't I don't think
they they view human lives as expendable
the way that we sort of assumed that
they do however they are willing to be
utilitarian and to make tough calls and
to say sorry it's inconvenient to lock
down a whole city for weeks on end but
for the greater good we will do that
because aggregate welfare depends on it
and do you think the citizens of China
have this a similar perspective in terms
of the greater good because that's
something I think that we're struggling
with right now in the United States I
know a lot of the conversation is around
really what is the damage to the economy
gonna do for health indicators right
unemployment is a leading indicator for
all kinds of bad things for people but I
think baked somewhere deeper into it is
this conflict between the innate
individualism
United States versus what do we have to
give up in order to help our fellows and
I think that that probably ties in well
with your studies in thinking in
effective altruism so it's a it's an
interesting scenario to consider at this
time China is a very confusing place in
this regard I think there is a lot
stronger collectivism there's an intense
you know Han Chinese nationalism they
view their country as not just a it's
not just a country it's a civilization
it's an F no state it's a population
it's a gene pool right
they don't have this civic nationalism
where oh if you sign up to Chinese
values you're Chinese they have a very
biologically grounded view of what their
civilization is and what its interests
are so there's collectivism at that
level to promote Chinese economic
development I think the government has
promoted kind of runaway consumerism and
luxury consumerism and materialism at a
kind of strategic level so there is a
lot of focus on luxury brands and kind
of individuals and families getting
ahead economically but I think basically
that's a government policy that realizes
hey we can harness individual
competitiveness and family kind of
economic aspirations to get people to
work harder and consume more and that's
good for the national economy but I
think if they had to revert back to an
intense collectivism like if they got
into a serious war with another country
then they could sort of pivot on a dime
and renew that sense a national purpose
that they have
well the United States is sort of in one
of those precarious situations right now
where we have a common enemy at least a
first-order common enemy of the
coronavirus and one of the positive side
effects that I have seen is that we all
do seem to be focused on the same
antagonist right now which in a way has
a very powerful effect of reducing some
of our differences that we have
perceived or perceived differences and
and squashing some of our petty err
political conflicts and social conflicts
to get us focused perhaps like we were
in the 70s and 80s or in the 40s or all
the way back to 1776 these having these
uniting uniting common enemies is a is a
powerful force for national unity but
you brought up an interesting
counterpoint or just an interesting
topic which is the sense of nationalism
and they're sort of their ethno bastes
nationalism do you think that a
nationalistic perspective like that it's
gonna lead to more optimal health
outcomes or some outcomes that are more
optimal than our civic nationalism do
you think that there's some sort of
biological reason why we may have a
tougher time thinking holistically like
they may in China given our you know
diversity or ethnic diversity
nationalistic diversity our nationalist
countries better equipped to survive
these existential type threats than ones
perhaps based around a civic nationalism
or or an imagined order absolutely yeah
I think diversity is our weakness in
terms of responding to crises and I've
been like I knew America was partisan
and divided and I'm very familiar with
Trump derangement syndrome and woken us
and you know everything that has hurt
freedom of speech and thought and
universities and all of that but I
really did think if we had a global
pandemic that America would come
together
faster and and more decisively than it
has seeing the partisan squabbling about
the economic stimulus bill that just
passed was baffling to me I could not
believe that politicians were still
genuinely more focused on election
prospects than on the health and economy
of the country so to some degree there's
been a little bit of a a coming together
nationally to defeat the common enemy
the virus but honestly I still see so
much residual partisanship hatred of the
perceived political opponent people
still seem to think the election is more
important than the pandemic at a certain
level and that's partly journalistic
malpractice the journalism has become
mostly political propaganda rather than
something done for the common good um
partly it's just our political system
partly it's the fact that you know the
American citizens are just not very well
educated about global catastrophic risks
yeah I mean there's a certain rational
ignorance about those issues I mean the
the chance that an individual actor is
going to be able to impact those
conversations in a meaningful way or
decisions in meaningful way sort of
leads one to a rational ignorance but
you know in terms of the pandemic being
more important than the election if you
think about I guess last week there is
about two million new unemployment
claims they're projecting maybe six to
ten million claims this month at least
based on what candidate or this week
based on what Canada did they had ten
million claims or a million rather which
is one tenth of our size you know in a
good in a good economy for four years
the president could add two hundred
thousand jobs a month right so he could
add eight million jobs maybe over the
time of his term we could lose that many
here in a matter of two or three weeks
so to the extent that anybody thinks
that the election or the person in power
is more important than what tap
with the pandemic and response that's
just completely irrational but to be to
be shocked and chagrined at the
rationality of our political system you
know gosh you would think by this point
I would be it would be a moment more
cynical but I still am continuously
disappointed in that regard and to see
the squabbling over the response is
fascinating and I just don't think
people have the same expectations so
this is a good way for us to segue back
into your memo because your expectations
and outlook were what drove you to your
conclusions and what was your worst-case
scenario what was in your mind what was
the do-nothing scenario and if you can
if you've looked at the Imperial College
stuff you can peek it related to that -
it's okay if not because of that that
study does seem to be the basis for a
lot of the global response but what was
your perspective back in February if
nothing had happened and the virus just
spread unchecked we're like us
flu whatever go to the hospital if you
can't breathe it'll be fine
what's another you know two seasons
worth of car wrecks you know all at once
here but the that was in your
perspective was it no I guess you know
apart from being involved in effective
altruism and apart from some personal
contact with China and sort of taking
the the pandemic more seriously because
China took it seriously a third thing is
I just throughout my whole life I've
read a lot of science fiction including
a lot of dystopian science fiction and
I'm kind of tuned into the the fragility
of civilization and the fact that it
depends on a lot of interconnected
networks that we tend to take for
granted until they fail even just
reading the novel World War Z by Max
Brooks I highly recommend you know we're
not going to ever face a zombie pandemic
per se but that novel was really good at
tracing out the many many weird side
effects that are likely to come about
from a pandemic all the way from
economic recession - social unrest to
increase nationalism and international
tensions to kind of mental health issues
and psychological problems and family
conflict and marital conflict and all
that so I had a kind of roadmap for
sketching out oh my god there's a lot of
possible unanticipated side effects of
the pandemic even if it's relatively
mild even if it's only a few hundred
million cases even if the death rate is
only one or two percent you still have
all of these other effects that we're
seeing play out in kind of slow motion
and I thought there are so many possible
downsides to this and there's so few
upsides I can see and the likelihood of
our political leaders dealing with it in
a rational and decisive way is very very
small almost zero and you know it's it's
hard for them because you know you look
at the CDC you look at the World Health
Organization and as late as late January
early February they're given
terrible exact opposite advice you know
go out don't worry about it wash your
hands it's fine
masks don't work it's just the flu I
mean they were playing downplaying it
for some time actually which is really
interesting and frustrating and it just
really comes back to sort of the general
complexity of everything I think it's
it's nuts for us to think that one
person two people even a team of people
in any institution or bureaucracy are
gonna be able to come up with the
answers to these problems and the future
and we're seeing this is the
decentralized intelligence and
sense-making network that has been
brought about by social media and
connectivity and people over time
yourself especially myself - we you grow
in the network
can you build increasing numbers of
connections high value connections your
vetting these connections you're
effectively curating expertise and
drawing on a wide pool of sources
information and analysis perspective
domains and you're able to come to your
own best to arrive to conclusion and so
in your experience you've built this
network you're an academic you travel
you write you've done written a number
of books you've done how many millions
of podcasts and lectured and and went to
school at various different schools
across the country so your network is
very robust at what point did you
realize that you were probably getting
better information than than the
president I'm not totally sure I'm
getting better information but I think
it's more diverse information from a
wider variety of sources and I think
it's less politically mm-hm manipulated
you know oh the game theory of advice
giving at the sort of top national level
is so complicated and so distorted
everybody advising the president has
their own agenda and that agenda is
almost never perfectly aligned with the
interests of the American people right
and the president's interests are not
aligned with those of the American
people entirely given the way the
electoral system works so the great
thing about social media particularly I
think Twitter has done a really good job
of sharing useful information about the
pandemic very very quickly and you see
ok certain epidemiologists who seem to
know what they're talking about under
showing good judgment and making
accurate predictions they just bubble up
and they get followers and they get
influenced very very quickly so to
distribute an intelligence in the social
media system is amazing and formidable
and it's one of the great strengths I
think of our society mainstream
traditional journalists aren't really
being very helpful because almost all of
them are basically captured by some
political ideology or other they're
almost all partisans of one sort or
another absolutely and this coronavirus
circumstance there was an article in
Vanity Fair just yesterday saying that
sort of rogue intelligence networks ones
who may even have gone through the
cancellation process and who are already
outcasts in some ways we're ones who are
most able to bring this information to
the forefront more quickly and with sort
of less risk to themselves it's
interesting phenomenon that being
canceled or shunned today is actually
like an inoculation that gives you a
super power because you're able to take
edge positions that that that may be
correct
without the reputational risk or the
professional risk or immediate risks to
your name being yelled laughed out of
the room it's interesting phenomena have
use have you seen that and I'm going to
get back to what your worst-case
scenario was yeah I mean at the moment
the people who have really surged in
terms of their influence have been
deleting epidemiologists and scientists
and people who know about global public
health most of them haven't been
canceled they've just been kind of very
obscure people working away the almost
in private with very little public
influence but a few of them have stepped
up and they've really mastered the art
of public communication and outreach and
the social media game and they're having
enormous positive influence not just on
America bear in mind you know Chinese
military intelligence probably follows
these sort of edge cases on Twitter at
least as much as Americans do
deafening decision makers I think around
the world because they know damned well
that
you know the sort of official media and
official American Journal as a
mainstream journalism isn't really
gaming out the likely implications of
this pandemic nearly as well as some of
this sort of cancelled private citizens
and kind of obscure academics are yeah
yeah well if we needed another reason to
put the last nail in the coffin of
mainstream media now would be especially
Vox can we put the last nail copper box
who had the issue of retraction and a
deletion because they said that the
epidemic wasn't an epidemic wasn't gonna
be anything to worry about they said
that just like a few weeks ago so in
your analysis what were you thinking
what was the what was the worst case
analysis that did analysis that
do-nothing scenario in a way the naree
Oh actually came to pass at least for
the first couple weeks after I wrote
this this email the worst case scenario
was the American leadership and a lot of
the European leadership would basically
ignore the corona virus epidemic in
China for partisan political reasons
that Trump's initial response would be
oh no we this is a really bad time this
is election year I don't want to think
about a pandemic that it'll you know
hurt the economy I'm gonna go into
denial mode and delay any decisive
response I don't want to panic people I
don't want to create widespread anxiety
and concern and that's what we actually
did see for a couple of weeks was
denialism by the US and UK and and many
European governments until the point
where they couldn't
sweep it under the rug anymore because
they're just too many confirmed cases in
too many countries and then we saw the
sudden pivot into sort of taking it
seriously for a while and shutdowns and
shelter and plays since and if you lock
downs and people kind of watched the
exponential rise but then in the last
week now we've gotten to push back
oh no the economy's tanking unemployment
will spike global recession issues what
are the trade offs of lives versus jobs
so we had a sort of sweet spot for a
couple weeks where everybody globally
was taking the pandemic very seriously
but now we're back into a kind of denial
ISM that says oh we can't admit that
this pandemic could actually be
massively economically inconvenient for
at least a number of months or years
yeah recently so this is March 25th for
you future listeners recently this would
this week Donald Trump pivoted from
basically sounding like he was willing
to do anything it took putting the
experts up front running the press
conferences like a champ I thought seems
like he has a very strong command of the
facts knows who his teammates are he
knows when a question is asked who's got
the answer he really feels like to me
he's in his element he should be doing
this every day it should be like a board
like a an apprentice style boardroom
thing for him every day he looks like a
star but in the last couple of days
after a huge outcry on social media
about and we never know how directly
these things are linked social media
outcry is a trump trump behavior but we
do know that he regularly follows free
tweets and reads the feeds of a number
of people that we know who have big
audiences and lots of influence and a
lot of those people were freaking the
 out over the over the unemployment
GDP shutting down the economy you know
and I've been doing reporting on this
I've been getting reports all along like
in advance of like auto plant closures
and trucking issues and supplier
shutdowns and port closures from
coronavirus and stuff and
and so you know he Trump listened to the
outcry and now he's changed his tune a
little bit now he's singing the other
side now he's saying uh you know we're
gonna we're aiming for Easter having
everything open by Easter now from my
perspective I think he's just that's
just cheerleading a little bit and like
trying to give people hope like I
watched Battlestar Galactica last night
the the three-hour miniseries that's a
great great thing to watch but at the
very end you know when it's just there
one ship and their convoys and whatever
and they're totally annihilated by the
Cylons
you know the Captain Commander gets on
the in front of everybody and he he's
like there's this secret place called
Earth and we're gonna if we're gonna
find it I'm the only one that knows it
and we're we're gonna find that and he
just but it was a lie and he gave them
hope right so maybe there's something to
that about Trump just giving people a
little bit of hope because I don't think
that we see the localities and the
states changing their behavior at all
isn't that right I mean if anything
things are continuing to get locked down
even tighter yeah and I well another
little piece of backstory about this is
I was one of the few people in my local
psychology department to take this
pandemic seriously and to say you know
we should actually start canceling
faculty meetings and cloak Weah and we
might actually have to cancel in-person
classes and four weeks ago my colleagues
generally thought I was insane and like
Miller has gone off the deep end what
the and then of course within again
literally a week the president of the
university is saying okay we're going to
extend spring break by two weeks and
then quickly okay we're not gonna have
any more in-person classes till August
at the earliest so but it helped a lot
that I had a local colleague in my
department who was from northern Italy
and who had two siblings who worked in
northern Italian hospitals and he was
getting direct reports from his sibs
about the conditions in northern Italy
and what the pandemic was doing there
and it was gruesome and alarming and
horrifying and that helps me kind of
take it seriously oh it's not just Wuhan
it this thing is gonna go everywhere and
it might have that effect pretty quickly
in America yeah well as it started
happening I remember they closed my my
kids school for one day big cliff they
first closed it for one day and I told
everybody look they're only closing it
for one day so they can plan how to
close it for the rest of the year and
I've been warning people that every
school system that saw that they were
gonna close for a week will come out
later and by the end of the week and say
they're closed for three weeks and then
after that they'll say they're closed
for the end the year and we're starting
we're starting to really see that so to
the extent that Trump is cheerleading or
giving people a little bit of hope or at
least at least letting on that he
understands course he understands that
the economic fallout from basically what
would constitute a depression really I
mean if the if the unemployment numbers
get to where they're being projected and
if it GDP goes down by twenty or thirty
percent or something that's juts
depression this is this is a once in a
hundred year event basically
economically for us I mean 2008 2001
1981 these were issues these were
serious issues but this one seems to be
even more powerful so how do we how do
we go how do we go from from here into
the future a little bit and I know I'm
getting off track a smidge but I'm still
just fascinated by what do you think
that trade-offs are like how much I wish
somebody could just give me a percentage
point of GDP per life saved okay and
then how many lives we thought we were
going to lose and how much that would
cost us and then just show me the
freaking the spreadsheet is there a
spreadsheet Jeffrey have you seen
anybody with a spreadsheet like this
I've seen a few people do like partial
spreadsheets but almost nobody is enough
of the generalist and knows enough
different areas to really do a
comprehensive kind of cost-benefit risk
analysis of different policies which
ones are going to work and which ones
are going to have which exact kinds of
costs and there's so many unknowns still
we still don't know if you get
Crona virus infection what are the
long-term health implications of it even
if you don't die what are what are the
implications for your lungs or your
reproductive function or whatever right
I've seen studies that say long term
long term organ damage as possible
yeah and we also honestly don't know how
resilient the economy is at this point
we've never had an economy that is this
globally interconnected with supply
chains spread so far and where so much
of our American standard of life is
dependent on imported goods especially
from China and where a lot of the
crucial things that we need aren't made
in America so I think you know if you
want to jumpstart the economy after a
national lock down the discussion we
should be having is which industries do
we need to rebuild in America in terms
of a domestic manufacturing base and
also you know are there ways maybe to
insulate the American financial markets
a little bit more from what's happening
in other countries
that's all other discussion I'm not very
expert in but III think at least a lot
of working-class people are going to
lose service industry jobs as businesses
that rely on people coming in to places
like restaurants and stores a lot of
those businesses are going to be lost
they won't be easy to restart there will
be mass unemployment and what jobs will
those people go back to I hope that
there is a political will to try to
restore American manufacturing as Trump
has been trying to do and promising to
do careers
unfortunately that is something even in
all these instances they always try to
say we have shovel-ready projects
shovel-ready projects that will lead to
direct stimulus for the American economy
but that's there's no such
thing as a shovel-ready project and even
if even if there were you know the
impact on this it's gonna be months down
the road years down the road even it's
not going to you know put twenty million
people to work in in March or April
unfortunately one of the common themes
that I've been having in discussions
with people lately is the world seem to
be on a trajectory of what I've been
calling indiscriminate connections NATO
expanded as far as we possibly could
World Trade Organization helps bring
down barriers and friction between
countries for capital goods and and
finance and machines and services and
everything
social media brought us all together
you're just thrown into the the pool and
you're swimming in the same water with
everybody and just putting everything
out there and I feel like we're starting
to see a reaction against that the trend
of indiscriminate connections seems to
be ending and the smart money seems to
be what I've been calling into strategic
disconnection and somebody else that I
should change it into like making the
right choices or something that's a
strategic disconnection how do we
strategically disconnect from this
global global universe on shore these
things that we're talking about in terms
of manufacturing and then square all of
this with the competing individualism of
the United States plus this now like
burgeoning sense that we have to act in
a greater good like where are we going
Jeffrey these seems like he seemed like
a whole number of weird things kind of
all coming together we have to think
more collectively but this is this
country is built on a completely
different ethos isn't it well I think
any evolutionary biologist who
understands you know how organisms and
adaptations evolve is familiar with the
concept of damage limitation and
hierarchical structuring so you know
cells have cell membranes around them
and organs have tissues that sort of
containerized them and
organisms themselves have skins and
immune systems that create a separation
between what's inside and what's outside
and then you have tribal you know human
tribes for hundreds of thousands of
years where it was very clear who was in
the tribe in terms of physical
appearance and ornamentation and
languages and dialects and who's outside
the tribe and that is a very resilient
system because if there's one cell or
organ or organism that's damaged you can
kind of easily distance from it and you
can contain the damage and all the way
from you know an organism fighting
internal cancer to a tribe expelling
Psychopaths you have to have boundaries
and borders and this kind of
hierarchically structured complexity now
runaway globalization sounded great
short term like let's have international
flights that mix everybody together
let's have massive international tourism
let's have global supply chains let's
have you know global financial markets
that can be extremely efficient in the
short term but it is extremely
vulnerable long term and I think people
are finally realizing yeah we need
boundaries and borders and immune
systems because otherwise you know you
are vulnerable to any any local damage
or you know virus or or cancer kind of
spreading unchecked
this is gonna take a different
perspective than we've had collectively
and it's definitely going to take
challenging what the elites have been
telling us for 30 years I do remember
quite vividly being a economic student
at George Mason's very libertarian
economics school in the late 90s at the
same time that the World Trade
Organization had its meetings in Seattle
and there was massive protests and I can
I will never forget how convinced I was
at the time 20 whatever years old
listening to Brian Caplan and others
back then he was just an adjunct telling
us you know that globalization and and
totally open neoliberal policies were
you know going to be net a higher
benefit for everybody involved no matter
what like it was some sort of
rule from God and then sort of chuckling
and laughing at the the the counter
arguments that were put up by the
protestors many of whom black bloc and
tief oh by the way which strikes me as
super ironic at this point or weird or
whatever and that they in they were
saying that there was gonna be a race to
the bottom and and and the guys from
George Mason just dismissed that first
of all and now it turns out that they
were actually right in a lot of ways one
of which which I don't want to get into
it's climate change right like we
basically just exported all this
manufacturing to a place that didn't
give a about the environment made
it global warming worse and then also a
race to the bottom in terms of wages
waist race to the bottom in terms of a
sort of exporting our manufacturing and
and just changing the whole face of the
country and it strikes me as that moment
seems suppression back then now thirty
years later had we only listened to
those crazy Black Bloc protestors and
the voices of everyone
maybe we're not here so what is it going
to take for us to collectively are we
gonna be able to capitalize on this
moment of free what is it gonna take for
us to collectively begin to understand
what you're talking about boundaries
borders immune systems and it applies to
all of our networks in all of our
systems with
their social systems your computer
network systems your economic system
when are we going to tune back into
biology and understand that this is how
how we work I think my big worry now is
that people will say ok there's a global
pandemic there's a global recession
therefore we need global solutions
basically we need you know the United
Nations not more power and individual
nations to have less power because
global coordination is the only way to
solve this I sympathize with that and I
think for certain kinds of problems we
do need better mechanisms to do global
coordination and trade information and
and sort of figure out what are the best
practices and if we're dealing with
these issues but I think that would be
the wrong lesson mostly to take away
from this I think the right lesson would
be countries need to have a much larger
degree of autonomy and the ability to
strategically disengage from each other
then they then they currently do and if
that means you know the global economy
is 10 or 20 percent less efficient by
certain metrics in the short term so be
it I would rather see humans still
surviving in a thousand years even if it
takes a little bit longer to get to a
state of of universal prosperity than to
have a sort of constant set of global
catastrophic risks hanging over our
heads just because we think globalism is
kind of more efficient irrational
according to a certain set of George
Mason or University of Chicago
economists yeah when you mentioned the
global solutions and you said the phrase
United Nations I laughed you know why
because literally the first person I've
said I've heard mentioned the phrase
United Nations in this whole thing I
haven't heard anybody say United Nations
and you're saying it's not the answer
and it's funny Trump hasn't uttered the
phrase United Nations and
I haven't heard the United Nations seems
to be far out of favor and and may be
seen for how ineffective a body and and
so a counterproductive it may be but
it's interesting I do I do notice the
emphasis lately on localism and and
people will dispute to NAT I've been
tween nationalism is self-care and
people have been disputing that it's
like no no it's actually localism I'm
like okay we can argue that later but
like the the mood the vibe is the same
localism nationalism it really is about
this strategic strategic disc
connections and the end of
indiscriminate connections which is
which is going to take a you know if you
if you if you think about like a title
like a wave pool you know that big waves
come in he's gonna hit that wall like
it's it's gonna take so much to change
the energy and just and move that tide
back out the other way and there's gonna
be a number of limiting factors when it
comes to that of course there's the
obvious global corporate neoliberal you
know cabal that basically wants to
maximize shareholder profits and GDP at
the expense of everything else which is
basically how we've been ruled since the
90s the Bush's the Clintons the bushes
the Obamas etc would have gotten the
same with Jeb Bush same with Hillary
will get the same with Biden if he's
elected besides besides that Oh are
there other things that are standing in
our way of accurately assessing these
matters my first thing that comes to
mind right now is what some people will
call the mind virus the mind virus of
identity politics what the Claremont
Institute is calling multiculturalism
now locusts intersectionality you know a
lot of this stuff has sort of been
pushed aside temporarily in terms of the
conversation but I think it's gonna be
making comeback because it's it's super
pertinent what impact and you're an
expert on this sir we've talked about
this quite a bit also on our first
podcast number one what impact do you
think identity woke velocity has had on
our perceptions of
this pandemic our responses how we
handle things in the future is there a
relationship as we were talking about
before and I'll toss it to you right
after this we were talking before Eric
Weinstein said just the other day we're
we're now living the unthinkable because
we couldn't say the unsayable or
something like that so what's your take
on that sir well one thing that's given
me hope is actually how quickly
mainstream journalism and the sort of
national focus of attention abandoned
all of those woke issues that actually
focused on the pandemic and everybody
kind of realized all this we've
been debating for the last few years is
is trivial garbage compared to an actual
global catastrophic risk now you still
get little examples of like Vox or Vice
coming up with kind of like this is our
woke take on the pandemic and it's weird
side effects are like it's especially
bad for this minority or it's especially
bad for women or blah blah blah but as
far as I can tell nobody takes that
seriously and the journalists who write
that stuff end up being pretty
embarrassed by it mm-hmm so I think
we've had a national reprioritization of
issues and people are realizing now oh
my gosh a lot of what we were doing six
months ago was just dumb dumb virtue
signaling if I can throw that phrase
into the mix so that's heartening that's
that's good that means people are
sufficiently realist that one there's an
objective threat that can't be you know
argued away just by canceling it or
trying to get it fired I mean the
typical woke tactics of like oh chrono
virus is a threat to us well let's write
letters to try to get it fired lets you
know get twitter to kick it off social
media none of that works and people know
it doesn't work so you know we could get
a resurgence of woken us after the the
pandemic kind of Peaks and resides but I
think at that point we'll have so many
real-world economic issues and
geopolitical issues to deal with
that I think this might actually be the
nail in the coffin of that whole era of
kind of runaway social justice well that
would be optimistic that's an optimistic
take sir I don't necessarily agree with
that I think I see the deep-rooted
philosophies are are so pervasive in
academia and in corporate corporate
America and in the media that it will be
difficult to have the pandemic eradicate
those those views and I do think that
there is a certain sort of just a deep
deep down conflict between people like
yourself who are aware of this notion of
damage limiting and limitation and that
borders and boundaries and immune system
are essential to human functioning is
etc which is a you know somewhat
deterministic or essentialist point of
view in terms of extrapolating from our
biology into our society whereas people
that are adhering to an intersectional
phenomenon will you know toss that out
completely don't see any connection
between our genetics and our society or
you know and all the gradients in
between may you know say two
boundaries borders and immune systems
may say - oh look at this
nationalist society that was able to
handle this existential risk they'll
gonna say to all of that so I
still think that there's gonna be
competition there because people just
can't shake it and I also do think that
it led us partially to this point of a
lack of preparedness or at least to the
point of where we had 100% positive
expectations of interconnectivity a lack
of boundaries a lack of borders a lack
of immune system and an emphasis on you
know but I think that that's
going to continue on and I think that we
can also squarely lay blame to some of
this
circumstances on that but I will take
your optimistic energy and I will
incorporate it into my worldview and I
will look for it I will be on the
lookout for it sir because that would be
a very good thing
I just don't see how we get there right
now
well here's here's a sort of view that's
partly inspired by your democrat to
deplorable look what really got Trump
elected I think was you know
working-class people who had suffered
from globalization realizing this is
really hurting me my career my prospects
my job my family and I want somebody who
gets it who understands just how much
this sort of you know economists 30,000
foot view of globalism how much it's
hurting us on the ground okay now what's
gonna happen if we get to 20%
unemployment by the summer and people
realize oh we don't have a domestic
manufacturing base and supply chains are
disrupted and our economy is not
actually very resilient the numbers of
people who were in that category of the
economically disadvantaged and is going
to be towards you know realizing oh my
god we have legit real-world problems
that need to be solved the US needs to
strategically kind of disengage from
certain aspects of globalization we need
to rebuild the health of our nation and
anybody who stands in the way of that is
just doing delusional virtue signaling
and they're not gonna have any patience
for it I hope I hope that is the case
unfortunately I do see being in
Washington DC even the the service
workers who are out of work here
they're all laying it squarely on Trump
somehow that Trump didn't act fast
enough that Trump didn't actually close
the borders with with China back in
January that you know by Trump saying
things are gonna be open by Easter that
he's all part of the problem somehow you
know how it works Trump derangement
syndrome but I think over time Popat
pocketbook derangement syndrome may may
override some of those some was as you
said virtue signaling positions and open
their eyes in fact it's in of all the
candidates who were running in 2016
and who were running right now there's
not one I would rather have in the White
House and Trump mostly because the the
the required actions necessary in order
to overcome this crisis and then prevent
something like this from happening in
the future
are in his playbook already decoupled
from China increased manufacturing you
know let's question our borders let's
question our boundaries that is in his
wheelhouse already he was made for he
was made for this as a matter of fact
even if he was made for the anti woke
campaign he seems to be even more suited
to the anti-globalization or let's say
strategic disconnection campaign that
should be coming up soon that's right
his the most important policy positions
that people resonated to that got him
elected are those that are pretty well
aligned with ways to build more
resilience into our country in the wake
of these kind of global threats so he'd
also he doesn't have to do a big policy
pivot now do the right thing no he just
has to say look at me I was right let's
keep going is is you don't have to
answer this but is that it would that be
enough for you to to toe your throw your
vote in there in 2020 yeah mmm I mean
I've kind of stayed away from being
either pro or anti Trump for most of the
last few years like I almost never tweet
anything about from partly because I
want to cultivate an ideologically
diverse following on social media I and
Trump derangement syndrome is so intense
and people are so partisan I just don't
even want to kind of take sides in that
issue but honestly if it's a choice
between Biden with some random woke VP
candidate who will probably end up being
president given Biden state of health
versus Trump it yeah I that's that's a
that's a tough call um you can you can
punt headline Jeffrey Miller supports
Donald Trump just kidding I mean in a
good point of view in in a way it's it
was very very sad to me that Trump did
delay his decisive response for two or
three more weeks than he could have
because that does play into the partisan
politics that gives millions of people a
reason to doubt that he's the kind of
decisive leader who can handle these
crises in kind of a proactive way and
that's really sad because it would have
been great on many levels if he'd
handled it better earlier and he's kind
of been playing catch-up but now I worry
that these economic advisors are kind of
biasing him towards we you know we have
to open up the country or too early yeah
well I think relative to some of the
other countries in Europe Germany UK
Spain for sure we were ahead of the
curve there he was a little bit ahead of
the carbon and I will carry a little
water for him here I mean world why
can't I say that World Health
Organization and the CDC both even the
Surgeon General United States we're
running basically misinformation
campaigns all up until just recently and
I think that there's some analysis to be
made of at what point do we know enough
to go crazy publicly and and I would be
happy to read the books that are gonna
come out later to know all the top
secret meetings that were taking place
before Trump's public pivot I would
suspect that there was a number of
conversations or at least a number of
times where he came out and was still
publicly downplaying where he knew where
we were going in a couple of weeks and
didn't want to set off any
necessary panics I mean I can understand
a little bit of that if the inevitable
is the inevitable interesting would a
fascinating turn of historic events to
fall right into Trump's playbook in his
path here but I don't want to make this
too much about politics what I do want
to I do want to stir steers towards is
what I wanted to stop we emphasize the
power of these intelligence networks and
your network because we have a common
friend we won't name him here but you
sent out that memo to him and we can try
not to use States or stuff but you sent
out the memo to him and not only was he
able to help his family but he took
action that had pretty widespread right
spread impact so if we want to talk
about that vaguely and just talk about
any other sort of reactions that people
in your network had then we can start to
talk about sort of the follow-on
exponential effect of just being
accurate with your creation and your
data dissemination yeah so this was a
case where somebody was in a particular
industry that could take sort of
proactive steps to do its thing better
in this case it was mental health care
and where they were able to kind of
pivot from in-person meetings to more
telemedicine and people being able to
call their psychiatrists or clinical
psychologists more effectively because
this first one was able to anticipate oh
my God if this pandemic really becomes
an issue people aren't going to be able
to go into their mental health care
center or their you know drug treatment
center or their homeless shelter or
whatever then what so even if you can't
personally influence you know the global
outcome of the pandemic or the national
policy level there's still a huge amount
that smart professionals can do to kind
of create more resilience within their
own industry or within their own
extended families or even to just kind
of game out okay what what happens if we
face a recession and you know I found it
interesting that
for example the evolutionary biology and
evolutionary psychology conferences the
the scientific societies were fairly
early to understand Oh pandemic it's
gonna hit everywhere we should cancel
our conferences early earlier rather
than later we should try to you know
encourage people not to fly around the
country giving cloak wheel and we're
gonna have to learn how to collaborate
online so I think what we saw there was
people taking decisive action themselves
in their little networks and having the
influence that they can have at the
level that's that's effective
inappropriate yeah and that an army
girlfriend not only did he was he able
to influence his own practice but he got
information to state-level actors state
was able to take actions the the ripple
effect of timely and well curated
information is very powerful within the
liminal order we've been we've been we
had a specific coronavirus room in our
chat application wicker as early as
December beginning of January and we
have a bunch of very smart nerdy guys
data scientists epidemiologists logistic
Lotus distance logistics guys basically
scouring the world for information and
and using their personal networks to
gather information and to make sense of
it and to be discerning about it and
we've been working on this since like
very intensely at least is it January
for sure and we put out a paper to our
members in middle of February which was
our corona virus posture and we were
able to recommend to our our guys you
know how to get prepared what to buy how
to be how to be stocked and advanced so
that they were set with not only masks
if they wanted them the right vitamins
people we've been ahead of the game on
chloro Corinne or however you spell it
HC Q and not only that but we had guys
we had our guys
of Lee positioned in the market not only
that but we have hedge fund managers in
and around the network who also then
took our information and position
themselves defensively as well so the
the follow-on effects I mean we're
talking about millions and millions of
dollars we're talking about countless
number of man-hours anxiety lower
depression lower professional
orientations set up you know planning
for your medical practice or your
dentist practice or or whatever it was
that's something I'm very proud of
actually and we have been just working
constantly to give updates to our
members we have 200 active members now
and so this is not like small small
influence you know I mean obviously
relative to the country but you know
we're the network is powerful and and
there are people like yourself or in a
sort of greater network who have been
giving us information we be exchanging
information as well and all this stuff
works together so we as a group can have
greater sense making and discernment
better than the government better than
one guy in one desk at Harvard somewhere
and this example of our increased
cognitive abilities is fascinating to me
but I want to just take a quick turn
here Jeffrey how do you prepare yourself
personally though right like there's all
this information there's all these
networks but if you're if your body if
your mind if your spirit isn't optimized
even if you're not finely tuned you're
not gonna be able to pick up on these
signals so there's a there's a there's
the macro macro stuff then there's what
we do on the network level then there's
what we have to do on the individual
level and you know what is what is your
take on that what do you do to tune your
instruments so that you can tap into and
identify and be able to discern with
some integrity and to make choice and
commitment around your sense making
capabilities how do you how do you
maximize that
well you know I did this book mate a few
years ago with Tucker Max and it's it's
sort of a self-improvement guide
disguised as dating advice for young
single guys but we focus a lot and there
on how do you level up your physical
health your mental health your world
knowledge your social skills etc and
that kind of advice I think is always
good but in particular it builds in a
lot of resilience for dealing with
crises so we know coronavirus is much
much more dangerous if you have
pre-existing medical conditions to some
degree that's a code word for obesity
diabetes metabolic syndrome all that
stuff that comes from not being in shape
not lifting heavy not doing sprints all
you know all the stuff that everybody in
the manosphere and the paleo movement
you know knows to do so I think looking
after your physical health normally
people think oh yeah that's good cuz
like I'm a little bit sexier and you
know I'll live a few years longer and
then something like this hits and you go
oh my god this is actually a matter of
life or death but particularly for
anybody's sort of over you know 30 or 40
so that's one thing I think build
physical and mental resilience into your
life the second thing is for example my
whole extended family has really come
together and we have regular kind of
zoom calls with each other and we
compare prepping tips and financial
planning and all of that and were much
better interconnected now then then six
months ago even though my family
regularly gets together for weddings and
reunions you can kind of capitalize on
that existing Network family friends
co-workers neighbors get to know them
figure out who is rational and stoical
and resilient and conscientious in an
emergency I felt personally very lucky
you know to have a wife who was very
much on the same
very early and recognizing this could be
a big problem we have to prepare we have
to game out different scenarios I think
some people have that good fortune to go
oh I made good mate choice and now I'm
with a partner who is gonna be a good Co
prepper a good collaborator who I could
actually survive really rough times with
other people are realizing oh my
marriage is fragile because my spouse is
actually not you know mentally or
emotionally prepared to deal with this
very well at all
so I predict a huge spike in divorce
rates from this this great cloister ring
but also a big improvement in a lot of
people's relationship quality and kind
of family the stability and integrity as
they kind of you know come together to
confront this dis threat yeah it gives
gives new meaning or additional depth to
the phrase shared common values right
he's not its disposition is one and and
also just a willingness to accept the
data and to go where the data data shows
you right what do you what do you do for
your mental and spiritual well-being
because I talk to guys like Jordan Hall
and his brain he is he is in orbit
around the earth not just 30,000 feet
right and and we can talk about the most
meta meta meta stuff but then by the end
of the conversation it all comes back
down to some certain personal behaviors
what do you do sort of sir to keep your
mind right and keep your soul right how
do you how are you working to keep your
head clear so you can actually be in
tune with all this information that's
around you and not distracted by it and
not damaged by it but yet able to get
the right stuff and then to do the right
thing afterwards yeah at the at the
moment my life is a little bit weirdly
split between basically like half
Twitter and half your
work outside it so there's a lotta like
try to get outside and engage with the
real world and like you know grass and
bushes and landscaping and sunlight and
physical labor and then go online try to
participate in these kind of
intelligence networks and share
information and make plans and you know
worry about okay when do I get back into
the stock market with my pension etc so
I know what the good advice is and I for
example on primal Polycom I share a
bunch of resources like these are the
books to read about stoicism resilience
mindfulness you know keeping your mental
health in good shape personally I'm not
as good at following all that advice as
I should be but I try to kind of pay it
forward and and give that advice at
least others well we're all we're all
that way
I mean you know nobody's perfect all the
time that's for sure but you also
jeffrey have done years of investing in
this moment it's not as if you're coming
to this you know an empty you know years
of at least thinking stoah clearer about
the Stoics or about staying in the
moment or using meditation or vigorous
exercise or creative output something in
order to help calm yourself calm your
spirit calm your brain get a get an
anxiety reset you know if you need to
and a lot of that stuff builds up so
that you know if you do if you do get
distracted for a little while you have
reservoirs and reserves there but I do
know that one of the common themes
around being a success in this world
today is to take care of your mind body
and soul first and then your family and
then your community and then hopefully
hopefully your nation and I do see a lot
of that happening around me it's how
I've designed my life of course but I do
see I do see it happening out there and
it does give me some hope liminal order
has given me a ton of hope for the
future and and inspiration what do you
think is an opportunity coming out of
this
a crisis I've taken to calling it the
corona Kairos like there's opportunity
here to grow and I don't mean tell me
when invest in the stock market or that
I should buy the certain stock what I
what I want to know is like what do you
see as opportunities for change what can
we use this as a catalyst for for
society level change institutional level
change you know humanity level
perspective shifts what what is the
opportunity here and how do we start
building that conversation so that this
isn't just something that we have to
endure but something that actually leads
us to a higher equilibrium after
afterwards so I think at the personal
level a lot of people are confronting
this oh I'm at home all day what do
I do with my time and some people are
deliberately cultivating better habits
and trying to figure out how do I often
integrate my work life my family life my
personal growth you know how can I treat
this as a sabbatical rather than a
staycation how can I read good books
instead of watching trashy TV how can i
watch you know good deliberately chosen
movies like we had movie night last
night and we watched Hitchcock's rear
window the all four housemates and
talked about it afterwards and watched
YouTube videos analyzing it like I think
that's the kind of habit you need to
cultivate rather than just you know
watching random clips from reality TV on
on YouTube oh but all the way up to the
kind of the national and global level
one thing I would love to see is you
know within China they actually do quite
a bit of kind of compare and contrast
kind of a be split testing between
provinces like at the moment they're
doing a serious comparison of which
cities did well at controlling the
pandemic what exactly did they do what
lessons learned you know can can we
develop so we can roll them out next
time at the national level I think at
the global level we're going to have to
look around and ask which countries had
really good versus bad responses to this
what did they do
what were their what were the pros and
cons of different institutions that they
had and I hope Americans actually do a
pretty deep and serious rethink about
our political life and figure out
did China do some things that we can
emulate at least in a time of crisis you
know how did why did why was Singapore
so good at dealing with this particular
crisis is that something about the
legacy of Lee Kuan Yew and the way
Singapore is organized politically do we
could actually learn from and conversely
I hope other countries look at sort of
America and what are our strengths I
think this sort of intelligence network
through social media that you talk about
is one of America's strengths and the
fact that we can share information among
sort of smart you know app estates and
experts and heterodox thinkers in a way
that is actually harder to do in certain
kinds of authoritarian cultures so I
hope that there's kind of a
cross-fertilization of good ideas and
practices and institutions I would I
would love to see that you know maybe
after the next election for America to
have a serious debate about you know how
did we up in 2020 and what did we
do right and can we build some more
resilience into our national political
system do you see any long-term changes
coming to education from this you work
in education your professor you deal
with the education system and classes
and students and the whole thing you've
probably done online preparation for the
review your lectures for the rest of the
semester etc what do you see as
potential changes to the long term
education system in the United States
based on what's happening right now with
Corona 2020 I don't think it'll have
have that big an immediate effect but I
think a lot of students now are kind of
reef
thinking what are the pros and cons of
live in-person classes what is their
real function if it's this easy to take
in-person classes online which it isn't
actually every professor I know is
absolutely panicked and spending a huge
amount of time trying to figure out how
the do I teach online effectively
if you've never done it before
but I think from the student point of
view they will start asking hard
questions like well I've been closed
during at home for a few weeks I'm
actually learning more from watching
YouTube videos about this topic than I
was from that Professor you know there's
amazing YouTube channels that are
sharing really high quality information
presented in very compelling ways much
better than academics are doing it in
our classrooms and maybe students will
start asking hard questions like what's
the point in university why am I getting
this credential am I really learning
anything is it just signaling us Brian
Kaplan's argued and I think the
universities themselves might face
decreased enrollment a lot of people
figuring yeah maybe I should just
cultivate my career outside the
university why should I wait till I'm 22
to develop crucial life skills yeah yeah
as if the university experience wasn't
already on the ropes it does appear that
this could be a serious blow the the
public trends are definitely changing a
little bit the winds at least are
changing around college and the
university need of university my kids my
eldest daughter is a freshman in high
school she's being bombarded constantly
she goes to a very you know upper-middle
class suburban school where everybody's
got their eyes set on the on the big
prizes and you know they tell her if you
don't go to college you're gonna live in
your mom's basement the rest of your
life
and of course at home being a little bit
more open-minded we've had a wide number
of conversations on what the possible
education paths are for somebody today
and moving forward into the future and
it will be interesting to see how the
university is fair after this how all of
education fares my friggin first grader
is going to be doing tell learning okay
like they expect her to sit now from the
computer for a couple of hours a day and
like try to engage with the class now
we'll see how that works out this is
gonna be an amazing test case actually
and a lot of things are going to be
tested it's going to be interesting to
see what the data shows and how it gets
incorporated as we both know
bureaucracies and institutions are and
love to make changes that will reduce
their influence and power or their
budgets so it may not be something that
happens right away but it could it could
provide some seeds for alternatives one
of the things that I've noticed that has
been a positive and I'd like to wrap on
a positive here is that I'm viewing this
time with my family as like us extended
snow days these are gifts these are
gifts we are at home together during the
day at a time in which you would not
ordinarily be together and we're aiming
to make the most of it rather than to
just endure it and one of the ways that
we've been able to do that is by having
like a light schedule and it's not you
know every 15 minutes but like two hour
blocks like hey we're gonna recreative a
way free time even if it's just free
time is blocked off and family meals and
coordinated activities coordinated you
know media consumption and especially a
lot of group exercise and after the last
four days in our own kids were like man
this was the best weekend ever
you know and for me that's a positive
I'm taking away from me I know that in a
few years I'm gonna look back on this
with nostalgia and and happy memories of
my kids and the time that we spent
together I'm gonna miss it I know I'm
going to miss it
in the future when my kids are gone or
when they're back to you having a rosy
rosy rosy yeah that's my dog guys when
we're back to having you know eight hour
school days evening activities rowing
horseback were lessons private pitching
coaches though tournaments out of town
etc etc all that is going to get in the
way of these really deep and intimate
connections that were forming now or
reforming or you know emphasizing and
I'm gonna miss it Geoffrey I really do
think I'm gonna miss it when it's gone
so I'm gonna try to take you the best
advantage of it as I possibly can
yeah I think that's a good attitude and
we're trying to do something similar in
this household I mean most of us on to
be honest working mostly from home
anyway so it's not that big a change but
I will say I feel much more closely
connected to my sort of distant family
members extended family and friends
because we'll have time to kind of
coordinate zoom calls and phone calls
and we're actually spending the time to
email each other much more actively
I think there might actually be a kind
of national shift away from workaholism
you know possibly away from the kind of
to career couple norm I think there's a
reason why a lot of Preppers do
homeschooling and have very strong
family values and I think a lot of
people will come out of this particular
crisis thinking you know what I don't
want to go back to the way things were
before working 50 hour weeks never
seeing my kids just handing them off
between spouses doing alternating school
runs all of that you know nuclear family
stuff I think a lot of people will
realize quality of life matters more
than
run away career ism or run away
credentialism or run away GDP ism yeah
it's an interesting interesting type
taught you know connection between
indiscriminate expansion connections for
the sake of maximizing GDP
indiscriminate connections in your work
and social professional lives for the
sake of maximising your earning power
and your whatever quote standard of
living and all that sacrificed the
things that were most important it was
which were our immediate family members
our immediate local communities and the
value of personal connection and so I'm
hopeful that there could be a sea change
but you know let's keep our fingers
crossed but not hold our breath and and
and look towards the future and look
towards ways to shape the conversation
the national conversation that way and
you know it does start with
conversations like this it starts with
tweets it starts with that saison blog
posts and this podcast and all of a
sudden it starts to snowball into
something that that is meaningful and if
we can if we can take the focus away
from GDP at all costs and workaholism at
all costs and start to remember about
the why we why we're here and why we're
doing what we're doing and the personal
connections and the power of love
basically Geoffrey the power of love
then I think that we're gonna end up
being better officer amen amen to that
well Jeffrey thank you so much for
coming on to talk to me about corona and
to talk to me about your times in China
a million pieces of wonderful
information in here of course Jeffrey
you can be found at primal Polycom want
to give the rundown for your like your
Twitter handle in other places that
people can find you yeah so Twitter I'm
just you know at primal poly and primal
Polycom and includes links to all my
books including the most recent one
virtue signaling I've got a bunch of
great recommended readings nonfiction
and fiction novels science fiction
YouTube channels to watch so if you're
stuck at home with your family or like
what
I read what do we watch that's high
quality just have a look at that that's
one thing I've tried to do is sort of a
might as well share you know stuff I
know about and care about and um yeah I
think this is just a great time to
cultivate good habits family habits
reading habits viewing habits and ways
of maximizing these wonderful social
media networks that are alternative ways
to share intelligence and insights away
from mainstream media yeah and I
appreciate that and these conversations
are all part of that like I said Jeffrey
again thank you thank you so much guys
reach out find him on Twitter at primal
poly go to primal Polycom get the book
virtue signal and get the other book
mate go back there's other books even
too many for me to remember Jeffery
prolific there's a number of podcasts
that you can watch from him YouTube
videos all kinds of stuff Jeffery always
fascinating always a pleasure to talk to
you thank you very much sir
and we'll hopefully we'll do this again
very time sometime soon in the future
and hopefully we'll have some good news
to report then on the global world and
on the power of local love and
connections right thanks jack take care
all right Thank You Jeffery b'bye
[Music]