howdy this is Jim rut and this is the
Jim rut show listeners have asked us to
provide pointers some of the resources
we talked about on the show we now have
links to books and articles referenced
in recent podcasts that are available on
our website
we also offer full transcripts go to Jim
rut show com that's Jim rut show com
today's guest is Nora Bateson president
of international Bateson Institute -
great to be here hey Nora great to have
you here Noor is an award-winning
filmmaker writer and educator her work
asks the question how we can improve our
perception of the complexity we live
within so we may improve our interaction
with the world
Nora wrote directed and produced the
award-winning documentary an ecology of
mind a portrait of her father Gregory
Bateson her work brings the fields of
biology cognition art anthropology
psychology and information technology
together into a study of the patterns in
ecology of living systems her book small
arcs of larger circles is a
revolutionary personal approach to the
study of systems and complexity as usual
on the Jim Rutte show I've read Nora's
book and I've watched her film and we'll
get to those but first I'm gonna ask you
a couple of introductory questions that
provide some framing maybe first we
could start off with what is the
International Bateson Institute you know
long history what are your projects so
the International Bateson Institute is
actually a who and it's a grouping of
people who have been working together
over the past five or six years on a
couple of different research projects
and the idea is basically to keep some
of the the work going that was started
by my father Gregory Bateson and before
him his father William Bateson and then
also I guess my sister's in on that Mary
Catherine Bateson she's not actively
involved with the Institute not because
of anything just because everybody's
busy
and what we are doing is looking at how
we can use some of the ideas that my
father and his father and others have
been generating toward looking at
research in another way and trying to
kind of go further how do we take this
further so at the heart of it there's
this idea of trends contextual research
so this word trends contextual comes
from Gregory's book steps to an ecology
of mind and it's a word that jumped off
the page at me and it was just so
helpful because it was this moment where
I I realized that well much of my own
work with complexity and context was
getting kind of stuck in the boundaries
of where's the edge of the context and
when I started thinking about things
that's happening in multiple contexts
simultaneously and in response to each
other
it opened up the possibilities for all
kinds of projects so right now we're
working on the beginnings of a project
on how little tiny children ages 3 & 4
both perceive and actually can do
abstract complex thinking which has been
fascinating and we did a project on
addiction and the trans contextual
process of addiction 1 on learning how
systems learn projects like that sounds
great and listeners will have a link on
our website as usual to the Institute so
you can learn more Nora mentioned her
father and her grandfather for those of
you who don't know who they are hers is
a family of great intellectual
distinction Gregory Bateson was one of
the great 20th century polymaths his
home base was in anthropology but he was
active in many other fields including
being one of the founders of systems
thinking and cybernetics her grandfather
William Bateson was the biologist who
was the first person to actually use the
term genetics to describe the study of
heredity pretty amazing huh and he was
considered one of the chief popularizers
of the ideas of Gregor
and all following their rediscovery
around 1900 very interesting to come
from such a family my own family is
quite the opposite
my father dropped out of high school
after ninth grade and my mother grew up
on a beat tenant farm in the swamps of
northern Minnesota in a house with no
electricity no running water or no
central heat she left home at the age of
14 so those are pretty much the two
extremes you know you know it's thinking
about that I said kind of like depth
versus freedom you know you've got a lot
of stuff for free
like for instance science as a cool tool
to learn about the world but on the
other hand there were some biases in the
directions that you went you know I had
to learn a lot more on my own but on the
other hand I was free to study and
choose what to be your thoughts on what
the great intellectual distinction of
your family is giving you as a as a tool
and a legacy for your life Oh Jim that's
such a big question we could spend the
whole hour right there but I want to
just to go back to where you started
because it could be that even though our
pasts are our ancestry appears different
it could be that they're not as
different as you think because there are
the trappings of the academic world and
the sort of the hubbub and the culture
of you know British Cambridge culture
but actually the reality is that William
and Gregory were both rejected by that
culture because they were fighting from
from the outside they were pushing the
system in ways it didn't want to be
pushed so I would bet that some of the
onboard experiencial wisdom of your
household was probably more in keeping
with what my family was up to then then
a lot of what was going on at Cambridge
and I know that sounds a little bit
radical but but the fact is that they
were fighters and they were trying to
get from the turn of the century William
was really working toward trying to
understand heredity as a contextual
mental process not just something that
was linear inside the organism and
passed down across generations but
something that was was visible in the
relationships and the responsiveness in
those relationships in an actual
environment and this was happening at
the same time that eugenics was the
darling of science and in the beginning
I think William like a lot of other
scientists I mean remembering that
eugenics started well before the turn of
the century you know it was it was gonna
be a altruistic thing you know eugenics
was gonna be how we could make better
society like Plato's Republic or
something you know what does it take and
then it turned out of course that the
more William was working with it the
more he realized this was an enormous
violation and a vulgarity and he turned
on his colleagues who were in the
eugenics realm and said this is a
violence against nature and you need to
treasure your exceptions that's a that's
a William Bateson meme their treasures
are exceptional and that it was in the
mutations that you could see how things
were responding to their contextual
environmental processes so the reason
this is important is that it it was also
a socio-political
act okay so it seems like we're talking
about genetics and science but remember
that what was happening in the Academy
was then getting put into the political
and the journal economic realms and so
William has nothing but suspicions for
the establishment to the extent that he
walked away from Cambridge when they
offered him the first chair and genetics
and went to start his own lab and to the
extent that when the King offered him
knighthood he refused Wow what do you
make that's pretty hardcore and he was
also one of the people who fought most
adamantly for women to be both students
and professors in the Cambridge
universit√© so and then my dad came along
and he too you know this is something
that a lot of people who are playing
with the ideas of systems and complexity
know this body of work as a really
beautiful intellectual romp of formulas
and theories and all kinds of wonderful
material that's been generated since
cybernetics and maybe before but when
Gregory was in New Guinea in 1929 when
he met Margaret the two of them they
were young he was 25 years old and she
might have been 26 and they were young
and they were horrified because at that
moment what was happening right at that
moment fascism was on the rise and so
they started writing letters to their
friends and this incredible grouping of
people who would later become some of
the participants of the Macy conferences
and they were fighting for what they
called a new kind of science and it
would be a science that would study how
the world is put together instead of
compartmentalizing fragmenting and
taking the world apart and they didn't
know what this was and there's all these
great letters there in the Library of
Congress if you never want to go find
them and they're lovely there are these
just earnest
young people who want to save the world
and they don't know what they're playing
with because it doesn't exist yet so
they're throwing these words out trying
to figure out what they're talking about
but under it is this beautiful passion
and the passion is about how to prevent
the trauma and secondary trauma and the
brokenness of sociocultural post fascism
world and that's what they were
concerned about so they thought that if
you could objectify anything it could be
exploited and so they were trying to
think about ways to study the world
without objective
patient so I you know I I find a lot of
inspiration in that sounds like they
were thinkers ahead of their time
another question before we hop into your
book in both the book and the movie and
some of the talks that you gave which
I've looked at also you use a beautiful
analogy of windows from which we look at
the world so that our subjective
experience is essentially a window on to
the world I think is the way probably
polarizing a little bit if you have such
beautiful words I'm less a beautiful
words kind of guy but then that you
never quite answer a question that I
always like to start with is what is
your view of reality do you believe
there is a single unitary view and that
we each have our own subjective
experience of that or do you believe
that the subjectivity is somehow tangled
up in the nature of reality itself that
makes any sense yeah that's that's
interesting I mean one of the issues
with subjectivity is that it implies
objectivity and it implies separateness
this is always a tricky one because I
think the best way to think about this
question is really having something to
do with matrix that there's a lot of
paradoxes in this so I might like to
think I have my own perspective my own
window on the world but when I actually
look at what's in that window it all
came from my context and my contexts and
the experiences of my life it's a
paradox really so are those ideas my
ideas is that perception my perception
or is it a sort of unique concoction of
contextual process and so you know on
the one hand yeah I can definitely say
Jim I am Nora and I am so Nora I can't
do anything but Nora that's what I do
right and you go around and you just Jim
that's what you do and we can't do
anything else but at the same time
where's the edge of Nora where's the
edge of Jim where do you begin and where
is it that your language or your even
your microbiome your culture your edge
pation your family your ideas your
brokenhearted memories you're like where
are those boundaries I don't know it
seems very fluid to me yeah we'll talk
about that it's quite specifically as we
get into the book but I the nature of
reality itself are you a person who
believes in a naive realism that there
is an actual physical world out there
that we're interacting with despite the
fact that it is complicated because our
subjectivity is actually part of that
world Oh what you're saying yeah sorry I
didn't answer that question do I believe
there's a reality out there yeah I think
I do I think that you know I think the
the tree ism is a tree and I think I
think there's a tree there but what I'm
perceiving as tree now that's another
question indeed absolutely and I think
we're probably Foursquare on both sides
of that because there are a lot of
people these days who at least question
whether objective reality actually
exists outside of ourselves and then of
course there's an error or at least I
would call it an error on the other side
which tries to minimize the impact of
subjectivity and it seems to be that
something close to a right way of
thinking about the world is both as is
so often the case right yeah there is an
objective reality out there which we can
never know in its fullness right and we
have a subjectivity which is I love your
models which is a window onto that world
and oh by the way that window is part of
the world right and as you say there's
somewhat tangled up and almost
paradoxical but hey that's just the way
it is we've got to work our way through
it yeah I think that the paradox is
really valuable yeah exactly
don't be afraid of it do not be afraid
of what seems like a barrier no I
because it's if you play with that
paradox if you live with that paradox it
allows you to kind of zoom in and zoom
out simultaneously and I think that's
probably the most productive kind of
thinking that I've ever experienced
because it allows for a kind of
strictness and a rigor but also for
there to be fluidity and blurred Ness
and a
humility of curiosity and care so I
think it's important to have both talked
eyes one of things I loved about the
book was how you kept that tension
between the liminal but also rigor right
it's interesting some people go too far
in one direction or the other yeah you
have this beautiful tension between the
two so with that let's hop in talk about
your book and the title of the book is
small arcs of larger circles available
on Amazon and we'll have a link to it on
the episode page as usual one of the
first things I reacted strongly to in
the book was but the mountainsides of
Big Sur California the scent of sage in
the warm Sun the salty fog of the
Pacific Ocean and the ancient redwoods
are the Bible upon which I swear my
truth I love that Big Sur has always
been this magnet for me I first
discovered it on a my first hitch cross
country hitchhiking trip I actually
hitchhiked down Highway 1 and slept on
some hippies couch for a couple days
that Big Sur and went all the way down
to LA and I always get draw back I'm
close to Big Sur I have to go there
because there's something about that
setting that just is like in the world I
know no greater place in some sense to
ring my bell and so I was very taken
with that as an early quote from your
book you've actually spent a fair amount
of time there habitude I have I I mean
when I think of this sort of impossible
question of what is home for me that is
home and I was there quite a bit as a
child we had a house actually up on
Gordon mountain and then when my father
got sick we moved to Esalen and those
were the days I tell you it was a very
different era of the early 70s up to
about 1984 I was there at least half the
year of every year so that explains a
fair amount about who you are if you
spent that much time at a place that
it's so powerful in every way as big
sewer that
explains it another interesting quote
right away which a little bit or ocular
like some unfair bits of the book are is
to be a participant in a complex system
is to desire to be both lost and found
in the interrelationships between people
nature and ideas could you unpack that a
little bit for yeah I think that I am
very curious about what it means to be
alive what what it means to be part of a
culture but also you know living in the
complex system that is my own body and
relationship with other people's bodies
and the ecology and just all of these
beautiful complex systems and terrible
complex systems in relationship to each
other always shifting responding moving
and you know you can't ever be
completely sure of what it is but you're
also not ever completely unsure there's
this business of being a participant in
life is its onboard it's in us right so
we we are both utterly confused by it
but it is the way that we know so it's
both of those things and the notion of
the complex systems that we're within
spans not just ecology and cognition but
also culture and social interaction and
I would say also interaction with
technologies and that somehow those
things aren't even separable so where
are we in that gym who are we in that
and yeah is there really a boundary
between the game and the player right
like well one of things I like to say
about complexity and how it differs from
reductionism is that reductionism is the
study of the dancer
while complexity is the study of the
dance and you can't have the dance
without the dancer mm-hmm yeah I like
that yeah that kind of come to like that
little line myself you know something
the you know next step in your thinking
that came out as you talked about
something called mental mono cropping
yeah I like I love that I'm gonna I may
well steal that with attribution of
course you know the idea of generating
ideas and singular fields that are bred
to be resistant to cross-pollination
goddamn right it is interesting how
medically they build these walls in
academia education media and social
structures present overlapping patterns
of compartmentalization why just one
concept of birth marriage death
friendship work economy right or wrong
right that's I love that sense of struck
such strong language you know I've been
associated with the Santa Fe Institute
now for the last 18 years and you know
we work really hard to work past those
boundaries but mam you get out to other
parts so especially academia those walls
are huge right but and yet we both know
they're entirely artificial yeah and you
know people base their entire lives on
them and you know increasingly the idea
of a profession within or outside of
academia is partitioned into ever
smaller bits of mana corrupt information
okay this is really dangerous it's quite
literally with the soil of ideas
and who we can be as human being where
we can what's got deep and it's one
reason I was drawn when I retired from
business in 2001 I was drawn to
complexity science because it's you know
radically oriented towards working
across all these levels as if they
didn't even exist but we have to fight
so much against the institutional
obstructions for instance government
funding from the National Science
Foundation we do quite well winning
those competitive grants but the process
is just unbelievably hard because if a
project spans multiple so-called
disciplines it has to be approved by you
know basically reviewers in all the
disciplines rather than having a group
of reviewers who are who are able to
look across disciplines it just makes
the whole process literally three times
harder and so much of our intellectual
world I guess it came from the German
university system is all generated
around the old joke about a PhD which is
knowing more and more
less and less until you go absolutely
every everything about absolutely
nothing well exactly and the problem is
that then when it's peer reviewed by
people who are inside those various
disciplines the of course it just gets
resized and the information that is
actually in the space in between is
readable - none of those silos because
it isn't there I mean what actually is
going to come out of those more a
phenomenon you know of one sort of thing
covered coming into contact with another
and then a new thing happens
and who's gonna check that which
department does that happen in the
liminal Department I'm gonna look up the
catalog of Harvard and see if they have
a little depart yeah but like the bet I
bet you lunch later and when they do
let's just give up okay Jim yeah exactly
it'll be bad but it's put a floor in it
at the Santa Fe Institute we're
constantly convening workshops I don't
know fifteen or twenty a year that go
across disciplines and typically their
three-day meetings that recur you know
over a period of years where groups
people from different disciplines
attempt to you know work on a problem
across lines and one of the ones I'm
familiar with is the ongoing work we
have done on the on state formation
looking at everything from biology to
linguistics the anthropology to
economics and one of the truisms of the
people who do this for a living I guess
you get to be a spectator most of the
time sometimes I participate in fact
I've even held some workshops but the
usual rule of thumb is you can figure
the first two and a half days is just
getting the people from the different
disciplines to agree on a common
vocabulary right exactly and but it's
very important to do that up front and
and of course people always slip back
into their own vocabulary but that yeah
that's that seems to be job one of
working on something truly what's your
word for it you have a better word than
any I've seen before and contextual
trance context well that's better than
transdisciplinary so - I'm so happy with
trans contextual I am - I just
five days ago I was reading your book
and so I'm gonna try to propagate that
meme see what happens yeah you know
first epic trance contextual is to try
to develop at least a subset language
that allows people coming from very
different places to talk to each other
meaningfully exactly and that is a
really interesting project because one
of the things that they have to do is
they have to actually speak not only in
their professional speak but they have
to actually speak in other textures and
tones of communication as well to get to
those other contexts so that's a really
interesting thing that I've been playing
with and you might have felt that in my
book that there's a tone mixture going
on because the these different tones
pull each other in two different windows
of meaning right they're like musical
notes mean something different next to
other rhythms right yeah one of the cool
things I'll just point out for the
audience the reason is you go by this
book is there's a number of prose essays
and examinations but between them are
some generally fairly short but rather
beautiful bits of poetry and I felt that
if you're gonna deal with the trans
contextual complexity of life then we
have to be able to explore from our own
different context of sense-making
what that is so if I want to think about
the complexity of climate science I need
to actually figure out and have some
sense of how that meets my emotional
responsibilities or or experience of
being a parent of being a spouse of
presenting myself to a group of people
yeah what it is to have a life right
that seems to be missing from things
like climate discussions all too often
or it's a discussion of numbers and such
and while that's important you know this
is going to become a dominant phenomena
about what it is to have a life and if
we don't think about it in that context
we're missing a huge part of the store
yeah that's it right there Jim that's
exactly that's exactly it
it's the issue I think the biggest issue
we're facing right now yeah I made a
note to myself that you know
anthropology is certainly a huge help in
somewhat getting over some of these
ideas about a single lake for instance
the words you used a single concept of
birth marriage death friendship work
economy you know anyone who's read any
anthropology at all knows there's an
amazing variety of ways that humans have
found the ability to live together right
and that's why it's so important for
people to read some anthropology so
they're not so tunnel visions and
thinking that oh yeah we got to have
this exactly this kind of marriage or
this kind of nature of work
humans have solved those problems
thousands of different ways over the
years and that whole tool kits available
for us going forward should be should we
have the nerve to look at it I think
it's probably one of the most important
things we can do right now it's kind of
ironic too because there's such a sort
of seemingly rabid allergy to having
cross-cultural interaction right now and
yet without it there's no way to find
the blind spots it's in those
relationships where you find that you
don't understand something the fun way
someone else does that you start to
discover entirely new possibilities of
ways of seeing and living and I think
people are going to find any sort of new
sense making new ways of living but
we're gonna need that if nothing else to
stir the pot not necessarily to adopt
other people's ideas but to recognize
that our own like you said tunnel vision
and these things they sneak right up on
you and you just don't see them coming I
have this this story that I often tell
about my one of my Swedish step cats who
was making a sandwich for breakfast and
they eat sandwiches for breakfast here
and in Sweden you cut cheese with this
cheese thing that you pull across the
top of the cheese the cheese sort of
plainer and I think in my life in
experience and living in the US and
Canada everybody owned one of those
things but nobody ever actually used it
because if you pull the cheese slicer
across the
top of the whole cheese then you've
taken somebody's a little bit of
somebody's kids who was gonna slice it
you know up and down and so he was
trying to cut the cheese and I said you
can find the pink cutter and he said I
can't find it I said oh just use a knife
it's probably in the dishwasher and he
bumped him he thumped in five minutes
went by and then he said it's not
working and I went in and he was trying
to push the knife across the top of the
cheese headfirst like it was the cheese
planer and you know it never occurred to
me that he was going to do that and it
never occurred to him to do it any other
way and sort of looked at each other and
thought well that never occurred to
either one of us
and the reason I'm bothering to tell
this story is that there's something
really important there which is the
opening of a possibility of recognizing
what you never considered and there's
just so much potential for new kinds of
perception in exactly that space and of
course you know what is a society or a
culture except a conglomeration of other
cultures and societies right I mean of
course I which this party here that was
a midsummer which is a big deal in
Sweden a midsummer party and they had
this little quiz about all the things
that are Swedish midsummer cultural
things the food the dress the songs the
rituals all this stuff none of them were
from Sweden and and so this business of
whether you study anthropology or just
to hang out with people and pay
attention to the way they think in
different ways than you do it seems to
me the only way out of the matrix yes
certainly very very good weight out of
the matrix for sure in fact
interestingly a guy I know Joe shabak
guy works in AI but he's also a good
general thinker about things he posted
something on Twitter recently which
caught my attention and he said you know
an ideal Society would be one that was
radically open to knowing all about
other societies and picking and choosing
those components that work best and
adopting them ruthlessly in their own
society and yet my response was yeah
that is that sounds perfect to me
unfortunately human chauvinism and
xenophobia seem to make that hard for an
awful lot of people to do yeah that's
for sure
what I think is actually I would push it
one step further which is to say that
what I learned from that was not really
about how Swedes think about cutting
cheese but how my own frame of reference
and perception was limited and that was
the important piece of information it
wasn't really about the practices it was
about thinking in a different way which
I mean where did the consequences of
that the little experience bubble up
maybe you know on the bus three days
later when someone stepped in front of
me I didn't think mmm I can't believe
this person stepped in front of me maybe
I thought about that in another way you
know so it's it's not a linear process
of what happens when you start to
recognize those it's not harvesting new
concepts it's actually it's inhabiting a
world in which there are concepts
everywhere that you might be able to see
differently or harvest as a musician say
you know amateurs borrow professional
steel and as we try to you know build
our society to adapt to the crazy rate
of change we have I suspect that one of
the best ways to find good piece parts
though of course you have to modify them
for our local conditions is to look what
other people have done right for
instance I am looking fairly carefully
at Sweden amongst other things for two
things one is their methods of the
genders working together in ways that
are kind of probably surprising to a lot
of Americans is probably the most gender
on the stereotyped Society on earth
today and yet you look at you know the
number of men and engineering number of
women in nursing they're actually higher
than they are in the US so what
to get past gender stereotyping you can
let gender reality have its way and not
be upset by it the Swedes have also done
some very interesting and subtle things
around how they have labor unions you
may well know that like 90% of Swedes
belong to labor unions but they're much
more cooperative and much less
antagonistic than American and much less
corrupt than american-style labor unions
so those two piece parts from Sweden
seem to be ones that at least seem to me
to be good to think about incorporating
into into other societies yeah it's a
it's an interesting thing I mean when I
first came here I really I you know I I
had this idea that this was a sort of
you know as good as it gets for Western
civilization you know kind of socio
political systems and I think I've
rethink that now Oh interesting
I'd love to hear about that well one of
the things that's been so interesting to
me has been to see how this because you
know there's there's quite a strong
social welfare system here and I of
course I grew up as an American kid and
I mean let's just face it in the States
you kind of grow up with the idea that
basically the government's there to
screw you over it's not some place you
go to get help or two it's it's not a
benevolent thing really it's there too
you know you pay taxes they buy bombs
it's you know so I didn't have a lot of
warm fuzzy feelings about the idea of a
state as a kind of parental body and it
was difficult for me to understand this
kind of blind what felt very naive trust
in this external system but also I
thought well maybe that's just me
because you know our our government
doesn't really help you it lets people
fall through the cracks and leaves them
on the streets so we see it all the time
but maybe this isn't different kind of
place and what I started to see
increasingly was that an interesting
phenomenon emerges
where I'd might have to back up a tad
here so prior to the big welfare system
coming in there was sort of the the
oppression of both the family and the
church and so the public state welfare
system allowed people to be free of the
sort of the tyranny of the family so you
could have another job besides the one
your father had right and you could
marry in a different way enjoy your
sexuality in a different way that sort
of thing I have a different religion and
the church as well so there were these
two institutions that were holding
people back the state freed them but
when that happened it that what is so
ironic but this notion of an overarching
well-being at a social level that's
supported by the state actually produces
a kind of individualism that I never
would have expected so people don't turn
to each other for help they turn to the
state and the deep cultural consequences
of that are really disconcerting you
know I had a good friend who was dying
of cancer and the state was offering to
give him care for eleven minutes a day
and so I turned to all his friends and
family and said okay so this is what we
do we just get together and we take on
meals and laundry and we you know we
bathing and we take care of him and they
looked at me like I had fallen out of
the sky and I couldn't understand what I
had said another one of those cheese
cutter moments right where I was like
what did I say there was still wrong but
I had suggested that we behave in what
eyes would have just leaned in to as the
fabric of community and it wasn't there
yeah that's unfortunate I mean this is a
trend that's been noted by some thinkers
is that and it varies a little bit
between the right and the left is that
what traditionally was done by family
and community is now done either by the
state or the mark
right and you know under more right-wing
places it happens in the economy and
left-wing places more state but it's a
balance between the two
but both leave out the organic family
and community and it's why I've kind of
gotten disgusted by both left and right
I think that whatever comes next
whatever replaces what we have today
really ought to be completely orthogonal
to either our current vision of left and
right because they they have missed the
organic they missed you know the live
part of what it is to be human and have
abstracted these functions to the state
a perfect example you gave that we know
why should you know late life care be an
11 minute increments that provided by a
bureaucratic entity rather than being an
organic whole offered by the family in
the community or on the US case oh yeah
okay you pay somebody to do this right
neither of those is what humans really
want they want conviviality they want
the organic another example that
reinforces that is the you know the
United States for all of its somewhat
right-winger II and at least on global
basis is by far the most philanthropic
country on Earth when I talk to
Europeans are always amazed at how many
Americans give money to charity I mean
and not just rich Americans is amazing
percentage of Americans give a
meaningful percentage of their income to
charity while the European more-or-less
to your point sizzle isn't that the
state's job maybe we have so much
philanthropy because our state is less
broad but on the other hand it provides
a much richer ecosystem for individual
decisions of funding decide what kinds
of philanthropy exists rather than
one-size-fit-all
bureaucratic approach so and all of
these are examples of ways in which
there has been a structure and then the
culture has been in response to these
various policy structures and this is I
think an important place to speak into
Jim because you know I'm with you both
the left and the right are wildly out of
sync with what actually needs to be
discussed there's so much to talk about
right now and there's so little of any
of it happening in the political debates
from either side
no one's talking about the things we
actually need to talk about and yet
they're glaring so it's an issue and and
I think this bit that we've been sort of
skating along around our whole
conversation here of where it is that
this mushy systemic sense making process
is fixing across multiple contexts and
between them and and how it is that we
go about thinking about who we are in
the world were in together because I
don't do that by myself I do that with
you right I do that in my community with
my family with my kids with my partner
who am i if I am NOT in in reflection
and respond right so I you know I think
for me this is a really it's a it's a
really important topic because so often
when we do get to that blessed moment
where we get to talk about complexity
and in terms of these things we're
dealing with whether it's economic
inequality or climate change or
exploitation or any of those things it
gets flattened again into a sort of a
map of separated time constrained
processes that are sort of in an
illustration like an engineering design
and the real sort of the juice of it
falls out and then we have these
responses which of course are human
responses they are are non-verbal cheese
cutter type confusions and I think that
so much of what we're faced with right
now is confusions that are compounded
with other confusions that are you know
me deep in centuries of brokenness
you're familiar with the game B concept
aren't you at least a little bit
I am yeah and I'm amused by it and I'm
trying to figure out what it is which I
think is the game B's that we're trying
to figure out what it is
right that's the thing yeah I resonate
with that cuz you've said centuries-old
and you know one of the one of the key
holdings of game B is that it's what
comes after game a which we think to be
centuries old and has you know
entrenched itself in the in these
grooves of a whole lot of things that
are producing things like the
transitions from family and community
the state and economy and for what
seemed like good reasons at the time but
we end up with such an alienating way of
life right and I think the the core idea
of game B is how can we solve these
existential risk problems that game a is
created like powerful powerful genetic
engineering with God knows what
consequences climate change nuclear
weapons how can we do that in a way that
doesn't lead us to the uber dictatorship
but rather a return to stronger emphasis
on the organic on the networked on the
non-hierarchical you know and you know
like all of us were kind of who would
look at game be we go what is it no one
quite knows what it is yet
at least we know what it's not it's not
status quo and we know some of the
attributes of it and it's kind of an
interesting and fun thing to be
exploring and necessary it strikes me if
we're gonna you know you know to get
back a little bit more seriously game a
seems to me to be driving off various
cliffs all at the same time it's a
pretty serious situation and one of the
places I'm seeing this game a game be if
you want to call it that which you know
I'm fine that's fun let's call it that
is between generations so you asked me
at the beginning of this conversation
about my relationship to the generations
that came before me and I said we could
talk about that for an hour and there's
something about being alive that has
something to do with the fact that maybe
we're just fibers between generations
and you show up with everything you've
got and you offer whatever shine you
have the Jim shine the Nora shine
whatever I have to give whether I'm a
musician or a
you know what paper maker or a scientist
or a mom or whatever it is I have that's
the thing I want I'm bound to give that
I learned something from the generation
that came before and I'm giving
something to the generation that comes
after and at the end of it all that's
pretty much all you got and for me I had
to really do the work to get to that
recognition when I was making that film
about my dad I had to figure out where
am I in this generational mess and the
the lineages were not just linear they
were going forward and backward and
circling and they were you know weird
and curly and unfathomable and
surprising and I they were outside of my
capacity to articulate them and now I'm
recognizing a pattern of a lot of people
in the sort of age range of I don't know
they're young but up to about 27 28 that
are really questioning what does it mean
to be a good person how do I be a good
person how do I show up what what is a
life goal like what how are they
supposed to even think about what that
is and for you and me we didn't grow up
in a world where the future was so
obscured as it is now
I don't know remember remember we grew
up under the shadow of the bomb all
right I grew up in a DC suburb seven
miles from the White House and you know
we thought there was a 50-50 chance we'd
all be dead by the time we were
teenagers I know but it's different
because I mean partially it's the
biodiversity issue and there's just the
sort of like well no matter what it's
not gonna be like this game a is done
yeah certainly seems like it to me and
so how to not placate or console people
who are asking that question with dumb
memes and to actually ensure that that
the complexity of that
question and those relationships with
integrity and with the a sort of you
know our own complexity on board you
know this is not that thing where you
just say oh honey you just follow your
dreams or you can do what you need to do
or you know don't take the world on your
shoulders or you just you know if this
is not that these kids have they've done
the math they get it it's over and they
they don't know how to place themselves
or how to be a good person in the
structures of our systems if there's no
way to get outside being linked to the
exploitation and extraction of
everything from child slaves to toxic
dyes to Roundup monocropping it's
everywhere every time you touch a piece
of technology or have a meal or get in a
bus it's it's everywhere and our like
David Graeber 'he's jobs you
know he makes a pretty convincing case
that a third of the people who work in
Western economies are just basically
doing ridiculous right and what
kind of life is that you know to spend
your life taking a piece of paper out of
the inbox doing something weird do it
put it in the outbox the person this
these day and age would be an email
would even be a tangible piece of paper
we've developed it a very weird way of
life that is also on a race to
extinction and as you say at least a
bigger number than ever before young
folks have now done the math sometimes
to get the math wrong I keep hearing the
world will end in 12 years which is a
lot wrong but at least they've got a
sense of where the vector is pointing
better than a lot of other people have
before yeah so this is this
intergenerational question and I think
that this territory is a really
interesting territory for if it's
systems change that's lurking somewhere
in the notion of game B that I think
that that intergenerational zone is a
very potent realm of possibility that
has really yet to be explored in as much
as it could be and it's been interesting
because I've been in circumstances
recently where I've heard you know young
people talking about
but this is actually really bad and and
seen the the boomers in the room jump up
to try to make it better all you got to
do is Aikido it or you got to do this or
you got to do that and just watched how
all those efforts to console and placate
and make that young person feel better I
hate saying that were a young person by
the way that's a really yucky word just
isolated them just left them alone in
the issue and so I would be interested
in exploring that more because when we
start to think about what's in the
social and cultural connective tissue
these under articulated expectations and
patterns of communication between the
generations are so strong for
continuance right so if we want
discontinuance I think we have to go
there on the other hand if we look back
at say this the mild discontinued that
came out of the 60s
it basically arose almost endogenously
from the baby boomers it certainly
wasn't negotiated with the silence and
the GI Joes the boomers just did it with
a lot of inspiration from the older
silence and I hope that the Millennials
and Zoomers decide to do the same hey
there's a reason boomers are kind of
rigid we're old goddammit that's what
people make it all and so you know don't
try to convince the boomers just
do it that's the advice I'd give to the
zoo person by the way there are lots of
us boomers out there who are are
listening and trying to understand which
is going on and can be allies but it's
not our job it's your job kids you're
the new generation we kick the asses of
the earlier generations it's your turn
to kick our ass goddammit
yeah and I think though that it's also
in the relationship between generations
because one of the things that happened
was of course you know the boomers had
to join the system and they did and it
didn't really make as much change as one
had hoped it didn't some areas it didn't
so yeah think about
you know gay rights what unbelievable
change has been since when I was a kid
were you know the idea of working-class
redneck America you know something
coming yeah we might know what it was
and doing like we're in high school and
when we did sort of vaguely have an idea
it was like the worst thing imaginable
to now or you know the even conservative
people are pretty much at ease with it
and gay marriage is legal all happening
in like 50 years quite astounding you
know it's one of the obvious fruits of
the 60s huge progress on civil rights
no not solved by any means and probably
the most important one I mean this is
one of my little self quotes which I
liked which I like to say when the
historians from a thousand years ago who
looked back at the 20th century it won't
be the great world wars it won't be
nuclear power it won't be landing on the
moon it won't even be the internet
what's gonna be the highlight of the
20th century is around 1975 the wave
finally turned towards the true
emancipation of women after 12,000 years
at least of hardcore patriarchy in most
parts of the world and again that change
has happened unbelievably rapidly and
again driven by boomer at least boomer
accelerated because obviously these
trends go back into the 19th century but
gigantic boost of energy from boomer
free thinking and hey now it's time for
the younger generations to do something
similar it's interesting because when I
was a kid Jim I was at these dinner
tables you know with all these people
and what gives me the spooks is that
they were having conversations that are
so much like the ones we're having right
now and I'm 51 so that was you know 76
78 that was a long time ago
it's 40 years ago and the changes that
needed to get made there were they
weren't really possible to get at and I
think so more and more you know I've
been playing with this idea of this
thing called warm day
right and one of the sort of theoretical
pieces inside the warm data idea which
is basically asking the question of what
is information if you look at a complex
system of complex living system from a
trans contextual perspective what is the
information how does the information
look smell walk talk feel how is it
expressed what do you do with it because
of course these it's not still it's hard
to define if you pull it out of context
you can do all sorts of things but if
you don't pull things out of their
contexts they are really hard to pin
down
and yet that capacity for perceiving
complex living systems seems to me an
interdependency seems to be to be one of
the most important steps to word getting
to game B as to generate as much
experience as possible with as many
people as possible around perceiving in
an interdependent way I stumbled across
this concept of warm data all I was
doing the research for this podcast and
it intrigued me but it's by no means
clear to me what it is and it may be
that it's just too early to have a crisp
definition but can you at least try to
put some parentheses around it hmm I
mean basically the definition is that
it's trans contextual information about
the relationships that are part of a
complex system and so it's just looking
at how they are when they're in
relationship so it's difficult to
measure things when they're changing and
if you pull them out of context you can
measure them but when they're in
multiple contexts simultaneously it's
difficult so it becomes very difficult
to identify and define and to lock down
and to repeat experiments and all those
things that were the sort of the
benefits of the Scientific Revolution
and that doesn't really work when you
want to understand
family you can chart the data on each
person but it doesn't really matter
because it's the family is in the
relationship between them and their
dynamic right yeah they're exactly so
that would be the warm data so I guess
the the issue is you know what kind of
information are we using what's what's
prioritized and how do we begin to share
that with each other but as I started
working with warm data I developed this
thing called a warm data lab and in the
warm data lab you have a group of people
and they explore a question that
involves a complex system so you could
ask the question for example like what
is health in a changing world okay and
there's lots of contexts that are
involved in that question it could be
any canonic context there's certainly
technology culture family politics
history technology art even there's
sexuality there's all sorts of contexts
right so the way it works is you have a
group of people in a room and they are
exploring this question and all those
contexts are laid out like at different
groupings of chairs and then people just
kind of move whenever they want to
between the chairs so they might start
off talking about health in a changing
world through the context of education
and then whenever they want to they move
to another place I mean health through
the context of economy in a changing
world health
letme moves to another place through the
context of ecology or family or
something and each time they move they
meet new people they're telling
different stories they're they're
talking across multiple textures of
communication so there's family stories
there's memories there's professional
knowledge there's jokes there's songs
they're in whatever it is that comes up
in that particular group which is
infinitely random as far as I can figure
out and what happens is after they've
changed contexts a few times they start
to have the experience of the
interdependency that you don't actually
change health
by adjusting any of the particular
contexts and how one then goes about
contributing to the health of one's
community or nation or city or whatever
becomes a very different question it's a
totally different order of experience in
that room where you have from about 12
to about 400 different people in the
room who have experienced that inter
dependency asking that question so it's
pretty cool and I'm really enjoying
what's happening with it it's getting
adopted by lots of people and it's
becoming a sort of a form of developing
community around discovering inter
dependency which is interesting and
unpredictable where it will go by the
way because I never know what's going to
come out of these things and where the
where the consequences will bubble up I
just never know but what I wanted to get
at was actually a theoretical piece of
this which is a I think where I want to
talk with you so I started there listing
all the theoretical properties of this
process and of course it includes you
know requisite variety it includes auto
places it includes patterns that connect
it includes difference that makes a
difference it includes skismo genesis
and all these different sort of
theoretical models are inside this
process but one of them that has been
really interesting to me lately
is this notion of abduction by which I
do not mean stealing children I I mean
the person meaning right yeah well and
how the person meaning got kind of
literally abducted by my dad and so it's
this idea that were you know we're using
one context to make sense of another so
we're we're getting so stuck is when the
sense making around a particular
experience is formed across and through
and within multiple contextual
experiences of language of a
education of you know money of science
of culture of all kinds of things that
are wreaking firming and affirming and
materializing various sense making forms
so we you know we're learning to make
sense of the health system through the
education system we're learning to make
sense of the education system and the
health system through the economic
system so there's deeply steeped
together and and kind of imprint it in a
kind of if you thought of it as a bunch
of sponges with paint like if all the
paint would be mixed together because
you can't actually pull it apart anymore
so I'm finding this notion of abduction
to be really an interesting piece and to
get down into that place where the
abductive process of sense making across
different contexts is where the matrix
has got us and how we begin to sense
make across multiple contexts
simultaneously in this moment that seems
to me to be really important just in you
raises we just had a major conference at
the Santa Fe Institute on the new
economics what comes after status quo
economics and it's a narrower field than
you're talking about but we've had some
very similar issues and concerns which
is you know formal university PhD
economics is basically applied math
right and the reality is an economic
system has got way more dimensionality
that you can possibly explore in plain
old math at least other than in toy
problems and so the question the group
was pushing on was what tools do we have
to look at high dimensional interactions
right that are frankly beyond our
intellectual ability to process I mean I
can't think about what's going to happen
when there's nine different dimensions
of interaction all of which are
important and you know all this may
sound very prosaic I think the lead idea
that came out of this
meeting was to kind of reinvigorate an
older idea which was simulation through
agent-based modeling where we actually
we can create software agents that say
exemplify all nine forces that are
acting on this individual be from lust
to status seeking to hunger to needing
shelter to competitive loss you know
wanting to compete and win and you know
to find some rules that seem plausible
enough to throw a bunch of them you know
literally millions in some cases into a
agent-based modeling framework and let
them interact and see what emerges
because I think the you know the thing
that's really really hard about these
high dimensional problems is that the
results likely to be an emergence and by
definition emergence is something you
cannot see in advance until it happens
exactly and if you go into it with a
goal in mind you've already truncated
your complexity exactly and I don't
think humans are smart enough to do
abduction in high dimensional space by
using their brains they have to find
tools to get there and cattle I like
this warm data approach of a have you
reduced that to practice do you have a
handbook for people that want to do warm
data well I've been doing these this
warm data labs all over the world and it
would be so fun to come and do them at
Santa Fe I think you guys would love it
yeah what we should talk about that and
then maybe we can also engage somebody
to help you reduce it to practice so
that others can use it you know one of
the not too much talked about at the
moment but in the original game be world
we had a concept called X in a box where
X could be anything and the idea was to
find tools that many people would have
used for and reduce them to a
customizable formula say a handbook for
doing a warm data lab you use it for any
kind of high dimensional abductive
process and you know get that out into a
form that's a live document where not
only can you as the inventor of it
continue to improve your handbook but
you can interact with people that are
using it in the field and you can learn
from their experiences as the community
together tries to improve this
well I have started a training course
because I actually felt like the hosts
needed to be able to see it working they
needed to be able to see the patterns it
doesn't matter if the participants have
it I mean I I actually kids use warm
data politicians are using warm data
it's going into communities and
vulnerable cities it's in Asia it's in
Australia it's in Pittsburgh it's
popping up everywhere it's really
exciting and I have trained more than
200 hosts now and but it's it's a course
it's a hardcore you know I like rigor I
like to go down into the territory
beyond where we have conscious verbal
intellectual control but I like rigor
before I go there so it's about a five
day course and it's a great course
because you can start to see all of
these processes alive in the lab because
otherwise people make they make weird
sort of errors of logical type they
don't really understand about how the
abduction is working they don't so the
house kind of needs to know what's going
down but the participants don't have to
know anything to take part of it they
can just take part of any level I
probably be better if they don't know
how the apparatus works right because
you'll buy us their behaviors I mean I
always do it one of the sort of
instructions that as the host you always
join it's not a facilitation
it's a hosted thing so I always join the
labs and meet everybody and go in and
it's I always learn something every time
I learn so much this was the big piece
for me gem was that what I learned doing
these labs is this that complexity is
something much more intimate than I
thought and it's interesting because I
actually am one of the few people in the
world who grew up with it in my
breakfast cereal right so if that's why
I wrote small arts the way I wrote it
was I figured everybody else out there
can write a book about systems and
complexity but what
I have been blessed with if you will is
that for me these theories were way of
life and I was always taught to perceive
the complexity in life in daily living
in the interaction with anyone and
anything that I was around and so it was
interesting that even for me this was a
surprise but what I learned was that I
had been teaching courses on complexity
and systems thinking for you know a long
time a decade or something and I never
got the results ever that I got when I
did an hour-long warm day to lab people
came out the other side and they got it
they understood inter dependency because
it was attached to their own memories it
wasn't a map on the wall or a structure
or new jargon it was something that was
abducting their memories across multiple
contexts and reconnecting the way they
were seeing the world at a fundamental
level and it had nothing to do with
abstraction it was absolutely inside the
experience of being human through
another window if you will yeah you know
it actually gets around the problem of
the agent-based model which it has to be
abstract this is attention doing
something similar to high dimensional
abduction without the abstraction yeah
it wasn't abstract at all and I just had
a 13 year old kid who I went through the
training process she did a lab with her
class in Australia and she said the kids
just loved it they wanted to do it all
day long and they did a warm day to lab
one the question of what is food in a
changing world and they had about eleven
contexts and they just went to every
single one and they were talking about
food and economy and talking about food
and history and connecting it to their
families and their own preferences and
their experiences and their incredible
if little kids can do it and people in
cities are doing yet even politicians
can do it the lowest of low yeah so for
our audience can we have some very
interesting people listening to the show
a lot of that's in the world changing
movement suppose someone wants to learn
how to do warm data how do they get a
hold of you for that purpose yeah they
probably need to just send me an email
go through the Bateson Institute or find
me in social media cuz I'm everywhere in
there and I offer courses I think I've
got one coming up in Ireland in February
and might have one in Pittsburgh in
January one in Brazil in January we'll
put a link up to wherever you tell us to
put it to for people who are interested
in connecting with you to get some
training and how to do this more data
thing because its own sounds really
interesting and if you can actually get
instantiated in the individuals a high
dimensional but not abstracted
perspective on the problem that would be
huge it's huge Jim it's so amazing and
every time it blows my mind I can see
why it's is what we kind of wanted but
we haven't been able to figure out how
to do otherwise it's kind of interesting
that we were doing it in the humans
themselves is probably we should have
thought about that duh
you want to not abstract it birds and
probably shouldn't do it in the
computers you'd probably do it in a
human right well that's exactly how I
felt was sort of like well duh but I
mean really I had every opportunity to
have already known this and I I was
still just sort of gobsmacked when I saw
it happen and watched the level of it
has to do with the fact that people
speak in multiple tones across multiple
contexts with multiple people if you
think of it as a moir√© think of all the
patterns that are overlay
and there's no documentation during the
lab because if you document then the the
cooking stops you know that you need to
be able to let those things swirl around
and connect and relink and reframe and
they need to keep moving until after the
lab and then there's a sense making
moment that's in the plenary that that I
call the samatha see moment so that's
this word for mutual learning but that's
the mutual learning moment where it's
actually at the group level the words
form around what has just been
experienced and not before which has
been a really interesting kind of
development of watching how this works
because some people at the end of this
hour and a half they don't have any
words at all for what they've just
experienced they're just sort of sitting
in the soup and other people they start
to find them slowly and then one person
will say yeah I noticed that the same
stories was coming up in different
contexts or I noticed when I sat down
that I had no idea what these people
were talking about that they had
approached it completely differently
than I would have or you know they start
to find the edges where they can begin
to understand what has happened and then
together they they work it out so the in
the plenary there's this kind of mutual
learning of how are we going to put
language on this experience we just
shared so they all had completely
different conversations right if you
were to get a transcript of it they
didn't have the same conversation they
were in different things what they did
was that it's exactly through
conversation space ever each injector e
different exactly so the pings of
recognition and familiarity are
absolutely not the same in each person
but the overall thing is the same which
is the recognition of well where's the
health how are you gonna contribute to
health are you gonna get a new exercise
plan are you gonna you know put new
iPods in schools are you gonna get a
Fitbit like which where is it and of
course it's in
space it's in the interdependency and
that's the piece where there's you know
sometimes suddenly this moment group
kind of gasp of hopelessness of like oh
no we don't know what to do in that
space because that isn't a space that's
the space of no space what do we know we
have to make something up and it's up to
us you know to my mind that's the
learned helplessness of people in gay
maze the first thing we have to crack
people don't realize frankly the world
is like butter you can cut the world
make it do what you want if you put
enough force against it right so many
people have just become helpless and
expect the world like you kind of like
your conversation about the state and
Sweden let somebody else deal with my
problems no we need to deal with our
problems goddamnit yeah and and we need
to do it by getting out of our roles so
that's one of the things that pops out
right away is that you know someone will
be an expert in something right
everyone's an expert in something and so
they know their script when they're
sitting in that context and they kind of
you know that they got it down but when
they get to it the next context they
don't have a script for that one so they
have to source their understanding of
that you know whether whatever it is
health in the form of economy and
they're not an economist and they're not
a doctor but they do have a body and
they do have a bank account right so
they have to drop in to their humanity
they have to drop into this lived
experience and connect it to their
professional banks are connected across
lots of different aspects and it's it's
the thing of really recognizing that if
we're working with complex issues we've
got to be working with in direct
response and this is a sort of a
paradoxical question of how do you
prepare an indirect response because the
second you try to solve a complex
problem by directly going at it you've
already missed the bus
so how do you begin to generate an
indirect response and that that has been
so exciting to see what people come up
with and the directions they take it and
these things that just come out like you
said it generates a kind of you know it
was the second-order cybernetics
emergent thing is happening that's very
very cool I think again I'm gonna call
out to people in the game bu world and
the rest of the social change world
somebody gotta take the door up on it
and get to get trained on her technique
give it a try and see see what happens
I'd love to see you know careful
documentation of how the process works
not necessarily documentation within the
process but an outer documentation to
really think about this thing is
possibly a very powerful phenomenon it's
a very powerful phenomenon and I'm a
little scared to write it up ah that's
that's good that means you got something
you know I've been sitting on this
pressure to write this warm data book
which I'm half done but I keep not doing
it and this is the reason I'm not doing
it is because I yeah you know this is
this is I don't it would be something
that I think I might need to do with
other people to try to keep it from
getting too I don't know I mean you know
we've seen what happens with a world
that metabolizes all good ideas into
ways of making money and getting control
and the last thing I want to be a part
of is finding a way for people to get
control of complexity or emergence it's
always what comes up it's like okay so
we have complexity great let's manage it
the worst case scenarios now becomes a
power tool for ad agencies right or
something I mean it it might be beyond
that but it's the logical types aspect
of it that kind of give me the
heebie-jeebies
I say a little bit more about that well
you know with Bertrand Russell's logical
types when you're picking the topic and
the contexts in a warm data lab you have
to understand logical typing and you
know that's math but it's also not math
it's it's you
it's sort of combination of Bertrand
Russell and my dad coming together to
think about what it means to not make
logical typing errors and and even when
you're doing abductive inquiry you have
to be careful what level your contexts
are on because if you get them at the
wrong ones you can make associations
that are all sorts of trouble and that's
not good so there are things that I
don't know yet
about this that's why you haven't
written your book I've had the same
problem when I'm supposed to write a you
know important essay about topic a if
I'm still learning about it at a rapid
rate it's assigned to me it's not time
to write the essay I know but the world
is so demanding right now of this work
getting out there because this urgency
and also there's just so much so much
human effort and money and just an
exhaustion of people's focus on all
these things that are actually
completely going nowhere and it's so
frustrating to watch it and you just
think oh I wish I could just give you
something that you could play with but
it's not quite cooked yet your
frustrations I got a couple of things
like that I've cooked it myself not in
this area but in other areas this has
been an amazing conversation and this
sets the new world record for the least
number of my topics such attitude a
conversation I usually get to about
two-thirds of my topic notes I would say
we got the 20% today but we explored
some amazing new space when I would if
you don't mind I'd like to ask you one a
little bit more bounded question that I
think is closely related to all the
things we've just been talked about in
the book you talk about leadership
within the paradox of agency hmm and one
of the issues problems and opportunities
certainly in game be and I think in all
people world changers thinking about
what comes next
is what does leadership mean in a world
that's probably not hierarchical more
network oriented you know aiming for
metastability not rigid stability what's
your vision of leadership going forward
uh Jim I I you know it's a cringe word
for me
but it is an important thing to talk
about and I I think that for me what
what I see is that that leadership has
something to do more with improvisation
in the sense that you can you know jump
in and jump out give what you gotta give
and get back and let somebody else give
what they have to give so there's that
then there's also I it's connected to
you a form of integrity that I'm
exploring right now which is a different
kind of integrity it's not the integrity
of you know the rules of right and wrong
it's the integrity of living in a world
in which we don't know we're unfamiliar
with the complexities that we're faced
with and in that complexity being in it
with humility and curiosity and rigor in
a way that recognizes this delicate
interdependency of life and so many of
the humans that have stepped into
leadership roles have abused it and so
many of the people who have actually
been working with systems and complexity
you know they're super smart in their
books and then they treat their kids
like or they you know that there's
not an extension of that care into the
details of everyday life which is
actually really a rigorous thing to do
to take that intellectual knowing and
theoretical knowing and lodge it firmly
in the process of getting from one day
to the next
yeah I think that's a key a key theme in
the game be work particularly people
like Jordan Hall I don't have you read a
his stuff but he's very much about how
do we take these grand theories from
complexity in other places and turn them
into a way of being that's authentic and
yet rigorous yeah I'm with him on this I
haven't heard him say those words but if
you said him I agree with him I thought
he said him quite that way but a lot
more words I'll tell you that I love
Jordan he's he's like best friends but
each
and can be a little bit verbose
sometimes but I'll say three words he'll
say 37 but I'm sure he gets it gets
nuances that I missed I'm kind of us you
know straightforward person of action
not necessarily a you know a subtle
thinker in the way he is but yeah I
think we're all working towards these
same things in our own way but throw
something back at you a little bit about
leadership one of the things we've
talked about in the game be world in
other places is the distinction between
position based leadership and role based
leadership we think of position based
leadership with you know your typical
I'm the manager or the XYZ Department
because my name is in the box that my
name is on the door while role based
leadership does hey group people trying
to solve a problem and for the next half
hour I'm gonna lead the discussion
because I know more about how to fix an
automatic transmission than anybody else
in the group but when the topic moves on
to how to fix the engine that's somebody
else's job to lead that discussion yeah
that's exactly what I'm talking about
you step in and you step out so no one's
the leader it's just a space for
whoever's gonna take the solo jazz solo
I love that okay that's it leader
leadership as jazz solo right watch the
guy come on with the hot or the gal come
on with the hot saxophone yeah and then
step back then step back let the drummer
have his solo right yeah I think I'm
gonna end on that note
Nora's vision of leadership as a jazz
solo within the context of all the
instruments having their own solos yeah
we're in this together so even when
you're doing a solo it has to be in
relationship to the other players and
the audio and the music and the history
and the music that came before I mean
that's the cool thing about jazz its
improvisational but it's not free
totally free when you're doing your solo
it has to be in the context of
everything that came before and it's
that thing it's the it's that place
where the experiences and the you know
the brokenness is and the beauty of you
shine through but also it's totally
contextual and trans contextual that
you're responding in that environmental
interdependence II that's the final word
right there I don't think you need to
say any more perfect all right
thanks a lot this as I said this is went
in lots of directions I didn't
anticipate but that's a good thing right
I thought every single word that you
said was interesting and I hope our
audience will find the same and as I
mentioned a couple of times there'll be
pointers the links on the episode page
to resources of various sorts ways to
get a hold of Norah etc so thank you
very much and you know I look forward to
seeing this particularly about this one
native thing I mean I wasn't quite sure
what it was when I read it in the book
but now based after this conversation
I'm gonna really follow your work in
this field I think this could be
tremendously transformational I think so
too and Jim it's been such a pleasure
[Music]
production services and audio editing by
Jared Jane's consulting music by Tom
Muller at modern space music com