[Music]
Australian average a very acrobatic
brilliant fiendishly portal yeah
Troy Hosea Eric Weinstein is Vlad near
my guest visited yay
Gary Weinstein illa garry kasparov jana
novotn√°
no he showed nyet problem Gary
door opens Lovitz oten prednisone er to
welcome you to the portal thank you much
so Garry Kasparov Jessie let's make sure
so I so my name was changed in 1975
because my father died tragically when I
was seven so it just it's he was just 39
and it was just leukemia and they
couldn't save him and I grew up with my
mother and her parents and in 1975 so
there was a family decision that you
know I I could change my name and to
carry my name of name of my my mother my
grand my grandfather so that's that's
that's a story so it was since 1975 I'm
known for the world of chess as a garry
kasparov ah I know that you're garry
kasparov in fact there are very few
people who need no introduction you are
one of them and I was tempted to give
you almost no introduced yeah but it's
been almost in perfect Russian so that's
their very kind
yes Gary you're known for many things we
could talk about your dominance of the
world of chess is world number one for
many years famous from top level play a
sort of a streak of dominance that's
like we've never seen
but if anything it's been really
remarkable to watch your career after
chess where you've taken on this
incredible role in a very confusing age
as a champion of human rights and I'm
not sure really which of the topics I
want to hit most whether it's talking
about automation and your famous
interaction with deep blue but I think
that the thing I want to do is I want to
try to avoid some of the questions you
get asked over and over
like who is the greatest chess player of
all time thank you yeah yeah it's very
grateful so so let's try to figure out
what that might have crowded out and
let's let's move on to the next sorts of
things so to begin with one of the
things that I'd like to talk to you
about is something that I'm very
confused by when you played deep blue
back in the late 1990s and the world 96
and 97 right sorry mid mid to late
nineties the world watched in a way that
it probably hadn't watched a chess match
since Fisher versus Spassky is that a
fair statement yes it's a fair statement
I think that as was the most visible
chess event in history right because it
was not just chess event it it was the
pinnacle of this human versus machine
competition that was so fascinating for
general public for decades this match
was and is still surrounded by a very
thick form of Mythology and again what
what to expect this was a machine and it
says people think oh it was unique
accomplishment because it's the dough it
was a dawn of AI look a beady blue was
not intelligence at all this was not
more intelligent that your alarm clock a
very expensive one 10 million dollars
apiece but but the truth is that the
machine that played chess in 1997 did
not have to be intelligent at all
because at the end of the day it's not
about being intelligent it's not about
replicating this human process they're
just it's to follow either way we're
making our decisions but it's about
making fewer mistakes and that's it
that's something that is is so it it is
actually most relevant a lesson of 1997
match and also remind people have won in
1996 right an IBM then chickened out
they didn't want to play the third match
because probe let at that time I was
still strong those pussies yeah no but
look it's a good business decision okay
as I explained in my book deep thinking
it was a good
decision because they look they knew
that in 1997 d blue was it's a very
powerful force but compared to you
either just two two machines today it
was just you know it was it was just a
novice I mean it is today to understand
what's happened over the last twenty
years
yes it's these deep blue in 1997 was a
unique project of IBM where as millions
and millions of dollars invested and one
of the largest corporations on this
planet today you can buy chess engine
online and download on your laptop and
this computer this chest device right
will be much stronger than Magnus
Carlsen the current world chess champion
right so and if you have specialized
hardware for the same you know engines
like stock fish Houdini
comecomecome order the difference in
strength between these devices right
specialized hardware and Magnus Carlsen
right it's about the same as between
Usain Bolt and Ferrari and Saudi Blue in
1997 was not that good so with this what
do we know if we if we took that exact
software and you guys keep track of in
some sense how good something is by
these a low ratings yes so what would
it's a low rating today be relative to
the top I think we can just add yeah
thank you very much for just bringing
these new numbers because audience
always likes numbers so my highest
rating my peak rating 28:51 28 2008
hundred 51 now Bobby Fischer's highest
rating was 2785 but in 1972 so you
always have to remember that you know
it's the inflation was and still is the
fact it's a relative system that it has
nothing to do with chess itself no no it
is basically you know you know you
perform well you add points you don't
perform well you lose points and the
point value predicts how likely you are
to beat so even you know if we play
against each other we have the same
rating so that's why you know and I do
let's say I beat you 6 to 4 so that
means I add
our ten points take away a little 10
points as if we're this now if you know
if the gap between us 200 points right
I think it's 230 points it's a shoe
score 80 80 percent I think that says
from the top of my memory God so it's in
its predictions based on the deep
difference in our in our rating right
and then so I do better than predicted
so I add points worse I lose points so
go back to this is 2 to my absolute form
absolute record was 282 28:51 Fisher was
2785 but remember that when Fisher
reached this this phenomenal height
right there were no players in 2700 or
and there were very few plays 2600 so
this game it was a huge gap so this is
2785 in 1990 72 probably was over 2900
today so they're probably my 28:51 in
1999 as well man was crossing highest
rating was 2882 now he's about twenty
eight forty so he's still you know
traversing this 2800 category right
there are only a few players actually
crossed 2800 these days and they're at
the range of 2028 ten twenty eight
twenty so so and it's when I played the
blue so I was 2100 plus deepu's
objective strengths was probably twenty
seven hundred plus but it's not about
objective strengths it's about how you
play in this very game and how many
mistakes you make now today the if you
have these chess engines on a
specialized hard right that will be
probably sooty four hundred it's amazing
for hunger it's amazing yeah it's this
it's again it's not because there but I
want to ask this different question
which is if we took the exact machine
and the software and we took it out of
mothballs from 1997 what do we think
it's a low rating would be today these d
blue yes the old deep blue like old
people i said it's this 20s maybe 2800
but it's not more because it's it so
magnus carlsen would be expected the
reason i ask it will be competition I
mean this is deep blue again I could
have been in the blue if we play this
showed match yes I would be a favorite
because I really learned a lot about it
the thing is that I thought was so
inspiring is that you talked about how
we learn from these computers that the
humans are getting its machines made
huge progress whereas since these
machines today they are so much I am Not
sure I can say smarter but is theirs
more advanced right and because don't
forget deep blue was in it was not just
a chess project it was a project of
parallel processors so they had 256
processors each of them was a mini
computer that could make 1.5 million
positions per second so combined they
could reach phenomenal speeds of 200
million positions per second 200 million
which again today it's not it's not it's
not less it's not impressive but these
these chess devices which we just
discussed on your laptop they will not
be faster than 5 6 million positions per
second so they're not as fast but they
are far more advanced because they don't
have to be that fast
it's not about calculating or alkylating
because chess is some people don't
recognize chess is mathematically
infinite or almost infinite game
functionally infinite refers potentially
infinite according to Claude Shannon you
know one of the founding fathers of
computer science the number of legal
moves in the game of tourism 10 246
power okay ten the forty-six power
that's again that's that steeds just
this number is just just it's cute
imagination right exactly yeah so it's
not about calculating only but it's also
about quoting word understanding and the
programs today they they're so much
advanced all right but love it there's
no there's no company there's no
question it's you cannot even touch them
so just because even strongest players
you know there will there will be badly
beaten now if you have a free chest app
on your mobile phone yes that's probably
as good as deep blue right thanks to the
Moore's law which is very impressive but
what I really want to get at is the
reason that chess matters to us and the
reason that we all thrilled to it has to
do with its legacy the way its interwove
entire society our culture our
storytelling even our language we are
constantly searching for chess metaphor
and one of the things that animates us
is the poetry of chess that wouldn't
when fathers and sons for example would
pull out you know games of morphe or
something and
to show something really graceful and
beautiful we would look to the Evergreen
game or the immortal game or something
like that
and it lifts our spirits and sometimes
we're really focused not on who won or
who lost but on the concept of
brilliance ease when does somebody do
something so unexpected and so daring
that they put themselves at great risk
and then managed to somehow extricate
themselves what I want to know is are we
in a position to program computers for
brilliance ease and poetry's rather than
simply brute force okay let's start with
your assumptions you can unreal you know
assumption others actually assertion of
an aura concept of us because you said
few times us okay yeah it's the now at
the era of globalization we should
recognize that you know us you know look
different in different quarters the game
of chess that you mentioned it's the
it's not the only game of chess that
does exist sure so and one that came
from AG india through Persia it's it's a
one of one of the versions but it's
India again we don't have any records
about India we definitely have few
records about the game played in in its
the records come actually from the Arab
world okay so what we know about
European chess let me call European
chess is that the game traveled from you
know from the Arab world to Iberian
Peninsula and the first book that that
presented the compilation of chess
studies played by you know in old Arab
rule shatranj you know much slower game
because the game of just always
reflected some sort of it's it's a
military knowledge of its time right was
it and it was King allegedly written by
King Alfonso the wise it's it's it's
originals captain is in escorial in in
Spain in 22 1283 and and then you know
the the current version of chess has
been shaped by the end of the 15th
century six early 16th century in Spain
with few extra editions in Italy and in
France in the next couple hundred years
that's European chess that's in
national chants got it but there is also
Chinese chess sure there is tied chess a
little some variation of touches that is
by the way it closes to original Arab
version shatranj so that's very suave in
game game and this is a totally separate
game called soggy Japanese chess by far
the most popular game in Japan far more
popular then and go okay so and and the
way this Japanese chess is please play
this probably reflects the way you know
the military operations have been
conducted over centuries they're one of
the key elements there that says you
always can bring a piece that you took
from your opponent back with a parachute
move or so and most of the pieces they
just move fast so that's it and straight
so this is it's it's it's it's it the
game doesn't doesn't have an end game
the way we have it in chess it's all
about attacking the king it's it's it's
like a slow-motion game but then it's
the moment it's the it's the both sides
they are they like the meet each other
the battlefield
it's a look like a samurai samurai it
just it's bloodshed
okay so this is like a metaphoric aspect
to which kind of chest exactly exactly
no but it's this but you said exactly in
the in the Western European you
Eurocentric world right chess has been
viewed for centuries as the as as its
like a nexus of of human intelligence so
that's is this it's it's saying oh he or
she play chess Wow
what is it it's it's it's because it was
like a mystery it's not surprising that
alfred Binet the father of IQ test at
the end of 19th century he was
fascinated by the way the chess players
mind was working so he believed that if
he could study the the minds of the
chess player to the brains of the chess
players he could reveal the ultimate
secrets of human intelligence it's very
interesting by the way it's not true it
says it's it's very flattering for me to
say that but yeah that'sthat's the great
greatest minds who always looked at
chess as sort of have you always test
have you always been a self-critical as
you're being right now is so critical
I'm objective is the the aptitude yeah
absolutely for playing chess is nothing
I was an aptitude for playing chess you
can it's like you know your capital you
know you have intellectual capital so
you can invested wise
you can invested poorly well I like the
idea that even IQ of course is not
intelligence it's a particular measure
of a something I don't know if you
happen to know him but I went to
graduate school in the same year as a
guy named Noah Mel keys who you know is
it's the main he's this rally chess
composer yes yes yes yes yes I just
because I I had a book in air of just
you know of the Bell it's there of of
the best Israeli chess studies yeah and
and I just that's that's why I
recognized well yeah but he was like the
youngest full professor at Harvard yeah
it's what he was a hobby but that's all
the great stuff but he comments on the
fact that he can only achieve the level
of chess master even though he's a
grandmaster in problem-solving and salt
and composing and so there's even there
there's like something very mysterious
because this is a sort of like a john
von neumann like level of intelligence
and he's commenting on the fact that
he's merely a chess master and so I
found that to be quite shocking and
surprising because I know how how some
how amazing know'm is look it gets it's
that's you know it's not yeah but you
absolutely about it because it's also
about competition you have to you have
to compete I mean I he's great mind
feels probably more more at home by
composing you know it's just easy
comfortably study you can think about it
so he can you know get there's no time
pressure
there's no opponent just you know across
the board you know no intimidation
exactly so getting back to brilliance
ease which I don't want you to evoke a
no no I'm not avoiding it because I you
know I have a straightforward answer do
you want to say what a brilliancy is in
your own language so that is not it's
before move move to the to to to my
definition of brilliance nature yes I
think that's the answer is no
straightforward now machines cannot do
it for simple reason because you don't
know it brilliancy and and and about
creativity
those are things that you know that's an
versus brute force right the way
machines operate they have been
operating ever since and they will be
operating for you know indefinite period
of time it's based on odds they know
odds they know patterns they can deal
they can operate
within you know within this like an
known universe something that they know
was in the rules that they either Dave
this they have been told about those
rules or the information that had been
provided for them but they always
looking for the best move
so brilliancy based on on creativity and
it means that yes I can play a very
risky at in the adventurous game maybe
it could be brilliant game maybe could
be failure yeah you have to accept the
the chance
you know sometimes significant has a
failure to create a masterpiece machines
cannot operate in this within this
predator how to encode the concept of
masterpiece okay no its masterpieces
it's it's it's something that you know
it is it still subjective is it is still
subjective because you know some people
you know it's it's not taste ya know
it's some games you know people say wow
it's it's amazing most likely these
games are just you know they include
some kind of sacrifices because people
always enjoy saying that spirit triumphs
over material so what do you sacrifice
pieces you know here and there all right
right left and center and eventually
made opponent's king that's the that's
the most popular console masterpiece but
you can have a very slow motion
positional masterpiece you know by just
adding you know disadvantage micro
advantage after and one after another
and strike strangling your opponent it
could be a mixture of that so but again
you for example described the current
number one Magnus Carlsen is a mixture
of Karpov and Fischer yes and in Fischer
was the obvious sort of virtuoso at the
level of masterpiece but you pointed out
that Karpov was a master of maximum
efficiency of the power of an individual
piece to do the most with the least yes
absolutely and Magnus is is this lethal
combination of two because Fisher I
think it just it was it was a rough but
his I mean sheer energy he could play
until the last poem you know this is
basically squeezing you know water out
of a stone now Harper was good either
just in in in getting the maximum effect
out of the minimum you know resources
e-e-e are available but he was not as
consistent as Fisher not so pushy he
it's it's it was more relaxed so Magnus
brings them together and that's you know
he has carpals ability to you to
maximize the effect of his pieces but
also he will play to the very last point
the very last move as Fisher did right
and okay so I think what you're telling
me is is that we are not yet able to
figure out how to encode the concept of
brilliancy so that we may lose to these
machines but that the poetry to be
extracted from chess at one level
belongs to this positional brute force
aspect and another belongs to something
that's ineffable that we can't quite
touch look yes it's the and I and I took
your point about the sacrifices that
that's a sort of an obvious version of a
risk this interesting thing is the it's
the the latest chess computer prodigy
growth all for zero that's the the the
program run by demis hassabis and his
team it's the deep mind team that is
working for Google they succeeded in
impeding the best go players ah then
they just they came up with this concept
of alpha zero which is you know starting
from the scratch so the machine knows
only the rules what is God what is chess
what is a Starcraft any game and then
you know it plays against itself it
learns from which old experience no
human contamination which is very funny
because that one definition of genius is
the fire that lights itself yeah but
it's but but yes and and it it it played
against stockfish against is one of the
strongest chess engines and it did it
convincingly a number of times but then
stock fish got better yeah but it's
still alpha zero still dominates the
game now okay when we look at these
games you know and that's the first time
when I thought oh wow I can learn
something for this machine's alpha zero
played chess more aggressively contrary
to our expectations that stronger
machines will play dollar games more you
know just it's the slow-mo games because
they every sacrifice can can be refuted
so that's why machines they don't take
too much risk but
alpha zero contrary to our beliefs you
know played very aggressive chess
sacrificing material and and and being
bidding stockfish machine not humans
it's by just you know always being one
or two moves ahead in anticipating
what's coming next
now it's I use words sacrifice yeah but
for deep for for machine for alpha zero
it wasn't a sacrifice alpha zero thanks
to its massive experience through these
660 million games six zero sixty million
games like yes itself so it generated a
bank of of data services which provided
its you know better understanding of
patterns
so when alpha 0 is sacrificed
quote-unquote it is we saw it as a
sacrifice it for alpha zero it was the
transformation of a material pawns or or
or pieces into other factors that were
more decision or moment exactly the
minute
so and it's it's it's it's and it's
amazing that it's alpha zero that that
had you know just look at the fuel
positions it's about one percent of what
you know when you look at the ID at the
number of positions analyzed also stop
fish it was far more prescient
in understanding what's coming next
again playing without the material stock
fish you know it took you know one or
two moves that you understand what's
coming because it looked and it again
it's not that it's the combination was
winning it when alpha zero made
sacrifices yeah it was not a forced win
because stop fish would have seen it as
well okay but it's it was you know it
was again deeper understanding of the
game based on on on on it's it's a
pattern that it it was able to design
out of these sixty million games but in
general I would think about really you
can imagine me telling you what a
brilliance is it's ridiculous I don't
know I don't know exactly really games
but it's but one thing I might define it
as is anything that where there would be
a body of conventional wisdom and then
there's a move that is deeply weird
relative to that expectation so for
example a move that doesn't seem to
develop anything it's like I almost a
waste a throwaway move could also be
brilliancy if it turned out that that
unlocked something nobody could see yeah
yes anything that surprises people right
it's good brilliant so you know maybe
one of the most brilliant moves based on
your definition sure I ever made was
game 24 I played Anatoly Karpov it's it
was a unique moment when you just you
know it's it's I had to survive this
game and Karpov to win the game to to to
retain his title right one you point
ahead and it was the last game of the
match and carpel had a very you know
potential very strong attack and I found
a move that was totally illogical by the
way ever since this game is this this
idea became with a part of the defensive
a concept for okay for black but at the
time you know it was just it looked so
ugly
because you don't put this rooks you
know just something just in a position
where it has no other moves around by
you by your own pieces but it was not
about you know it's not about attacking
basically it was a very good
prophylactic moves because it prevented
big threats from from from white and it
had to force carpenters are looking for
other plans so you know it's and I was
very happy when I just I don't know I
made this move because I just didn't
understand how else to defend it just
was so much against you know what I
learned but that they made him move and
I remember when I just you know it's
this is when Harper came to stage he
looked at this and then it's great
another great player he realized that
he's move basically killed he's
attacking in a structure and it's it's
and and he had to actually start
regrouping pieces wasting time and he
just adding yes it's definitely it's not
just a strong move but it was so unusual
move looking weird but it's it shoot
Karpis confidence and and and he quickly
made mistake allows the game that's
fantastic
okay here's a question that I've never
been able to ask and maybe if it doesn't
make sense you'll help me formulate a
better one I guess when we lost
I mean checkers was solved yeah chess we
lost with you in it so Gautier okay okay
but the question is after go I sort of
expected something to happen that didn't
happen I expected someone
start trying to create a new game which
in which humans would still have an
advantage that had the deterministic
characteristics and everyone seems so de
motivated by this experience like what's
the point why are we why race it's like
trying to continue to be a better number
multiplier in an age of computers
there's no point have we become
demotivated is anyone searching for
things that show off and accentuate what
humans still do better than any any
machine it's a very important question
and it's just it's I think you just so
it's like home run because it's that's
that's a question that's in different
modifications I hear all the time since
I now speak three times months the
conference's it's it's about AI it's
about cybersecurity and about you know
human machine collaboration and in about
vanity yeah
the the answer is that it's we're not
demotivated I think we're more pragmatic
we simply understand that it doesn't
make any sense
because it's not just chess or God it's
a Starcraft it's Texas Hold'em poker
it's in you name games you know and it's
it's at the end of the day machines will
always prevail so to make it you know
easier for my audience to understand I
always tell them that every game can be
described as a closed system and if we
have if you build a closed system
eventually computer will always win
exactly okay yeah that's it
so the human strengths is not you know
is not trying to compete with machines
and closed systems because if we know
how to do it machines will do it better
well and not because they're perfect
again that's important they will never
reach 100% perfection it doesn't exist
in the universe but they will make fewer
mistakes so machines will always you
know or outperform humans by you know by
minimizing number of mistakes or it's
not just a number of mistakes machines
do not make blunders so they get the
gravity of machines mistakes
or inaccuracies right it's not as you
know sometimes humans could do something
really stupid have you ever looked at
the history of electric guitar no so you
have these very weird players I'm just
gonna riff off of your open versus
closed games we're probably the first
great electric guitarist was a guy named
Charlie Christian but he was really
playing the guitar and it happened to be
electrified by the time we get to people
like Jimi Hendrix and Eddie Van Halen
whatever we thought the vocabulary was
that we were restricted to in the
instrument they showed us that the
dimensionality of play was so much
greater than we had ever considered for
example by bringing the amplification
into the instrument and making it part
of the instrument or with Les Paul
creating the instrument as the recording
studio not just as the instrument and so
eventually these become closed games but
there is something about and to just fit
with the theme of this series the search
for a portal out of the closed game into
a higher dimensional space where
something else is available like people
talk about hearing eddie van halen for
the first time and their guitarist and
they're thinking i have no idea what i'm
listening to how do those noises come
from that man are there any sort of
innovations like that that you think
where computers can start looking for
ways out of the closed systems into
higher dimensions I don't think so I
think machines will not be able in a
foreseeable future if not indefinitely
to understand how the transfer of
knowledge from one closed system to
another can machine ask questions yes
they just don't know what questions are
relevant well so I give this example
quite a bit but there's a very powerful
concept in pure mathematics of taking
square roots of various objects where
like with with real numbers it's quite
clear what a square root should be but
even when you get to the negative
numbers you you end up having to go
outside of the real numbers to answer a
question about the square root of
negative seven and you can take this
square roots of rotations you can take
the school
determinants of matrices and you find
these structures that nobody knew we're
hiding there so one of the things we've
learned in pure mathematics is that
there is a way of going from a closed
system into a larger closed system and
that one moment the closed system
reveals itself to be open is that
something that you imagine
no again as I am not sure it's the it's
it's a legitimate comparison because
it's it's it's it's heroes it's a
decision-making it's in math you know
there's there are answers or math you
know just it's it's one or another you
know you have an answer and it's it's
it's it's it's not as straightforward it
could be now just Krug but at the end of
the day you know that this is there's a
solution game of chess is not or any
other game it's not math it's not you
know there's no perfect so the Hardy
disagreed with ugh Hardy wrote that
chess is real mathematics but if a
trivial kind in the sense that he didn't
mean trivial that it was easy or that it
wasn't beautiful he meant that it didn't
connect to anything else because they
were the rules were artificial and so
what it told you about was simply
internal to the world but they said but
again it says in Matthew have perfect
solutions in chess sometimes have
perfect solutions but in most cases it's
based on your assumption so is this and
it's it's you know the the again
machines will always win not because
they see the perfect solution again ten
to the 46 power number of legal moves
but because they make fewer mistakes
right so there will be closer to
perfection than humans right so it's the
what is much close or just close it
doesn't matter so there will be always
ahead so same with every other game so
all you need is to provide machine with
the rules and machines will start
operating you know just on their own by
by creating their data though I have to
say that it's today alpha zero is still
quite an exception most of the machines
today 99 percent if not 99.9 percent
they are doing not transformation but
optimization
is still you know operating with human
generated data but the future I've no
doubt it's for alpha zero type computers
you know they they will be it's it's
like you know computer with AI
algorithms
and the the it's there will require some
form of human guidance it's I I always
call this you know the future computer
experts shepherds so they will be
nudging the flocks off of intelligent
algorithms one or another but it's it's
still you know they will still need to
be nudged so it's it's it's again moving
from one system to another it's it's one
closed system to another closed system
will require human guidance what is very
important for us to recognize is that
our role percentage-wise is shrinking
yeah but it doesn't mean that we become
expendable so actually I think it's
we're getting we could become even more
important in this human collaboration
because we will be deciding how these
massive brute force yeah I worry they
will be moved with a right or left or
whatever up and down well if I'm honest
about that the way in which I receive
what you just said is that in the short
term I think we become more important
because the least interesting things are
taken over by the computers and then if
we're smart we invest in what it is that
we do best which is often this act of
brilliance induction opening a closed
system into a larger one which
temporarily opening it up and that's
exciting
however I do feel that this is a
short-term win for Humanity one short
term to be well I worry that this is on
the order of decades not centuries it's
you and me it's probably not a very
short yeah it's look why do we go too
far so this is again we you know the
strengths of humanity was always to to
respond to the challenges that we are
not I here now yes
table right um I don't want asked you
spend time I would say waste our time
debating what what can or may may happen
may not happen 30 40 50 years from now
we have challenges that we should
address right now and I think that the
universities it's time for us to and
stand how we can maximize the the the
benefits out of human machine
collaboration well okay uh so I had a
very funny interaction preparing for my
interview with you today which is that I
spoke to two brilliant young women one
of whom just released 25,000 new stock
photos of people who don't exist
generated by her AI she's a PhD from
Berkeley the other of which is a
brilliant musician but arguably also one
of the world's most stunningly beautiful
women as a supermodel and I noticed that
the elo system that you use for chess
can be used in any situation where if
like if you asked well who would be who
would people find more beautiful person
a or person B and then you have a
prediction so you could use an ela
system and I asked my friend the
supermodel and name is Charlotte Kemp
Muhl would you be willing to subject
yourself to a Kasparov versus the
machine type competition where my other
friend will attempt to generate
photographs that are even more beautiful
than any human being who has ever been
and we could try to figure out what the
elo rating is for simply feminine beauty
now that's a very different thing than a
computational problem on the surface it
may be a computational problem under the
hood but what happened when I started
looking through the friends catalogue of
stock photos is that I could see that
you could very easily fall in love with
the images that she'd generated even
though they correspond to no human being
they were filled with emotion you know
grace whatever you whatever it is that
you associate most with being human and
yet she knew exactly how they'd been
generated from her neural Nets that's
pretty disturbing in some ways would you
not say so it's you talking about images
right still even still images still
images now you need just for proper
relations you need more than still
images well that's true but you the idea
achieved she's able to animate a lot of
these first voluntary oh yeah that's
that's that's that that's becomes
interesting right moment you start
animating crisis that's it and then a
couple of our friends
Jordan Peterson and Joe Rogan have done
have put so many hours of data of their
voice into the world that we can now
generate their voice so that they can't
tell the difference between what they've
said and what the machines so we're
we're starting to get to the point we
also have programs that write sports
stories simply from the statistics that
come off the games in a credible fashion
it's a date right what's the but look I
do you know what you know what's here is
that we've associated various things
with our humanity and I think your point
about chess which I just think is great
is don't make the mistake of holding
those associations too tightly because
the machines will let you know that some
of this is not having to do with being
human at all yes it's the the
decision-making process is not you know
it's not just human prerogative forever
right so it's yes we used to think that
you know it's these machines could do
all sorts of work but not you know not
to challenge our cognitive skills right
at the end of the day it's what's the
difference so is this it's T it's again
it's it's machines could could help us
in just making progress in in what it's
in in in the field of physical exercises
or mental exercises do again it says
it's if you look at the statistics is
that is this I think is the Mackenzies a
report of 2016 u.s. job market show that
I know it's the only 4% of working
activities yes required medium human
creativity
well 4% yeah so it means that for over
decades we have been trained people to
work like machine like machine and now
now were shocked that many of these jobs
they they are just you know they do my
presumably jobs they already dead they
just don't know every repetitive job has
that character but I see but it could be
it repetitive jobs does not necessarily
you know it's it's it's a physical one
it you don't know it look at ever wrote
repetitive jobs you know it's your race
radio it really easy ones intellectual
right and and when people say oh yeah
but these many of these jobs there
just in in grave danger right but you
know what it's thank you for managing
radiology sure so this is yes you know
we know that human machine collaboration
right you know shows better results than
either wanna do that either one
individual so that means that you know
you will have some experts and from my
experience in Aaron chess in combination
of human plus machines right you don't
need the strongest minds so the most
talented players working with machine
but someone who knows enough to give
machines solace it's it's like it's to
guide machine not interference memory
superior knowledge so that's why you may
not need a top professor but maybe you
know an assistant professor maybe even
experienced nurse - right - to work with
this machine oh but I hear you know time
and again thousands of jobs you know
there will be at grave risk maybe
they'll be lost and it is - well-paid
jobs yes but what is the what is the
other side of this well on this point
the jobs will be lost but the cost goes
down more people could have access to
that and when you look at the number of
lives that can be saved yes in this
country or especially in the third world
countries developing countries yeah
so then you know all of a sudden you
understand that this it's while certain
groups of people could be in danger
because their computation worst and and
and and and machines they bring in you
know you know have a canal in our
professional routine but as a humanity
will always win well but isn't it weird
how many of us are seeking drudgery that
we wish like you watch what happens when
you liberate people and you find that
they go back to these games on their
computers that they play repetitively
you know that there's a way in which
humans we had always thought we wanted
to be liberated to do creativity but
there's something terrifying about
creativity and many of us actually seek
repetitive activity which anesthetize is
us and arguably we're happiest when we
start behaving in a way that is machine
like again but it's the it brings us
back to us that bring us back one human
yes because you know it's the you know
it's instead of talking about killer
robots to terminators metrics and other
horrors produced by Hollywood so just
you know it's your neighbors here
so brainwashing yeah generations of pay
no attention dynamic yeah yeah it's it's
it's quite primitive yeah but it's it
why don't we talk about in about humans
using modern technology yes HAARP other
humans because humans still have
monopolies for evil right yeah
and it's and I think it's far more
important now to understand how this
modern technology that has been designed
yes in theory to make ours better have
been have been would say it's a more
used right to undermine the very
foundation of the free world so what I
that's a great opportunity to transition
because if there's anything that I'm
more interested in than talking about
computers and poetry and all of these
things it's this bizarre moment that we
find ourselves in in the free world
where I've never seen anything like this
in my life it appears that there are
almost no adults left in the system it
appears to me that there's almost no
institution that really cares about
ground truth and it appears to me that
we are right now in the process of sort
of abandoning everything we'd built up
for the most trivial of reasons and I
don't know whether you subscribe to this
but the transformation of our country
intellectually to me since slightly
before the election of Donald Trump to
the present moment has been the most
unexpected singularity in terms of the
ability to hold conversations to analyze
what it is that we in fact hold in
common our sense making apparatus
appears to have been broken down and a
large number of people don't even seem
to be aware of this and I don't know how
to explain how many different clusters
of beliefs have now cropped up which
appeared to be incapable of
communicating with each other you seen
the same thing yes yes and I've been
worrying about it for quite a while so I
wrote the book winter is coming
just you know before the presidential
elections in 2016 and unfortunately it
is worrying nobody understood it no
nobody wanted to hear this because it
seemed that it's just like a
so far away yeah the book didn't mention
Trump or Syria but you could read
between the lines that is this because I
really talked about Putin and about his
threat to the to the free world so he is
warned the free world that is just it
was just a matter of time before the
techniques that have been developed in
Russia and tested in neighboring
countries and in and in other European
countries there's these techniques would
be used to undermine American democracy
and also I talked about the growing
vacuum in the world that was a result of
the free world led by the United States
to depart from its leadership role after
the end of the Cold War so it's yeah
it's easy to say it's everything is
about Donald Trump but when you look at
the Donald Trump phenomenon it has roots
well this is a it's a symptom it's a
symptom that somehow Trumpy now just is
demonstrated that the system was already
so weak that is that it could it could
have Torsen so unqualified to win
elections by the rules I mean that's
it's yes was foreign interference with
other thing about you big you're exactly
the adaptive landscape if you want to
take the evolutionary metaphor was
created and then suddenly there was a
creature that's but then that says
before we go to Trump we should
understand so why the system was so you
know it was weak enough susceptible
susceptible yes just to to our to
succumbed to to Trump's it's not even
evil genius I mean just it's it's a man
it's just intellectual it's always
insulting yesteryear what is inside it
but it's but you know the man show you
know just it's so known as unqualified
but it's just it's if you asked you know
people to describe a potential threat to
US democracy yeah you know twenty years
ago so what what could be this the image
of this array of this villain that would
be threatening video the very foundation
of American Republic you could come up
with somebody very intelligent you know
very slick you know just it's I mean
more likely you have somebody like Bill
Clinton so that's his type you know very
intelligent and well-spoken charming
charming but the Trump so but so now
let's go back don't know just just so
you know I did right I think it was in
2013 an essay warning about what I
thought was going to come up based on my
understanding
wrestling and professional wrestling is
in some sense something that mirrors
some of the techniques that may have
been developed in Russia because the
propensity to suspend disbelief is not
well understood by many people who have
a rational enlightenment oriented bent
but I still want to go back to nineteen
192 sure because it was the end of the
Cold War it was a moment of the greatest
triumph of the free world Soviet empire
collapse Soviet Union seems to exist and
relatively peacefully yes it amazingly
amazingly yeah there were few wars in
air on the perimeter here's a lot of
Union yes there was a very bloody war in
former Yugoslavia but still you know the
post you know the human cost for for
collapse of the evil empire was
insignificant compared to what people
expect it you know would be it would be
the outcome exactly now and in 1992 one
of the most popular books best-selling
book was the end of history by Francis
Fukuyama and I have to say I shared the
same expectations about you know the
triumphant continuation of of the
history of the free world and it's it's
liberal democracies one and and the rest
would be just you know chaos doing some
great things but never never never to
war again about about threat to the free
world coming from dictators and other
read oh wow that's that's what we
expected 91-92 it's not what I expected
but ok 91-92
not no no no no I was I was terrified by
the fact that this is what was claimed
because I had thought its how is it that
a country like the US which is needed
counterweights in order for it to be
like you know you and I both have a
Jewish component in our background
there's a weird way in which
anti-semitism if it's at the if it's too
low we stop being very Jewish if it's
too high we're an incredible threat you
have two separate ethnic Heritage's
which show you how vulnerable and
precarious life can be somehow what
terrified me was the idea that we were
gonna take a bipolar system
represented the Cold War and suddenly
remove one part of it without any plan
as to how to manage this okay that's a
good point now first of all removing you
know evil component of this dichotomy
was a good idea I grew up in the Soviet
Union that what was bad right is that
you know it required a new plan it did
he did and nobody wanted to talk about
that's the wheel at first
now I understand now being in money
money money back okay I you know I know
exactly so what was wrong actually I
knew about it or a few years ago so in
1991 1992 it was America's role to start
reconsidering you know its global
participation know Soviet units what's
the plan and one of the most important
things was to address the reform of
United Nations because United Nations
was built in 1945 as a success or fail
rig of Nations to prevent an open war
open military conflict between USSR and
USA be ready to superpowers it's about
it was all about freezing conflicts and
it managed there were conflicts but it
did its thanks God you know there's been
very it's been ridiculously success
there in 1962 it came close with the
Caribbean crisis but it was basically
basically for a couple of weeks it was
there was no real threat of war more
three and and and global it amazingly
quiet again for if so yes you look
around the world so this is you know
they were the wars actually moved from
Europe yeah other continents yes well
but there was a Korean War there was a
Chinese Civil War you know this is then
it's like I hate to say it this way but
Europe is Vietnam Europe is one of the
world's most dangerous places and we
don't think about it that way because
we've had this period of stability that
has been a normal you you you get Europe
you know that that had Wars for
centuries right you know was pacified so
thanks to these united nations concept
of you know finding compromise to
systems yes they were fighting each
other but mostly proxy wars right around
the world yes that's why we had this
James Bond movies you know and sometimes
even James Bond cooperated with KGB
officers to fight global evil so it's
the its it again we knew how to live in
this world now 99
one you write so it's just you know the
Soviet yuna's gun so what's next it's
the it's the idea that evil you know
disappears it was dead wrong because
evil can be buried for a while under the
rubbles of Berlin Wall but the moment we
lose our vigilance it sprouts out so the
United Nations that was built to freeze
conflicts right was not was not there to
solve solve problems and we need it we
need to start looking for in a solving
problems we need it I believe an
organization that would be rather called
League of democracies you know just it's
actually it's it's a late Senator McCain
used it but I have to say used
separately
it's an organization where the members
will not be just paying lip service Mary
Morrissey so America had to come up with
a plan like in 1946 rebuilding Europe
where a global plan of of spreading
democracy and freedom and and and and we
almost instantly got stupid but it's the
it's the then it's but again it's a
human nature it's very difficult to tell
people that you know that that
recognized that for nearly half a
century there was an existential threat
you know of potential threat of the
nuclear war and those who remember 1962
crisis and Vietnam war so oh wow it's
all over so why don't we just you know
you celebrate why don't we get rich why
don't we just do other things
stop worrying to other rest of the world
you know it's sometimes I think that is
if the Soviet Union collapsed a year
later
yeah probably Bush 41 could be reelected
because I think one of the reasons
Clinton you know won the elections is
not just Ross Perot which was important
factor but but but the Republicans lost
that big heart so yeah whole war was
over so why do we need Bush and in an
economy stupid motor right in one the
day where we turned inward exactly now
it's it's basically America was still
there because it was the only superpower
but it lost its you know its role as the
you know as the stabilizing factor
because look Clinton 1992 you know you
want elections in 2010 a year 2001
general he walked away 1992 America was
basically in the position to do whatever
is make you know make any any any
suggestions that others had no
but to accept in 2001 early al-qaeda was
ready to strike so that's its we miss
Tina we miss this this year's and also
something else happened in eight years
Russia moved from very fragile female
democracy into the first you know it
into the next stage that that that would
be eventually dominated by KGB in year
2000 Vladimir Putin became Russian
president the fact is that you know in
nine years after the statue fell into
the rilski the founder of KGB has been
removed from the bank a square less than
nine years
volodymyr protein became the president
of russia i lived KGB lieutenant colonel
who immediately said that the collapse
of the soviet union was the greatest
geopolitical catastrophe of the 20th
century who immediately returned Soviet
anthem to make a symbolic gesture who
proudly said that there were no former
KGB officers once KGB always KGB
quote-unquote so that was already a
warning sign that things changing so
this was another confusion that I had my
model for Russia is two separate things
we Americans often don't say one it's a
barbell culture it's got the highest of
the high culture in the lowest of the
low and two because of this in some
sense there's a fractal nature to the
Putin's it's like Putin's all the way
down there's always a sort of a look for
strength and leadership of a kind of
uncomfortable way not just at the very
top it's the but it's yes the the
uniqueness of Putin II putinism Putin's
regime was that it was not based on any
ideology traditionally Russia always you
know followed some sort of the grand
idea well I'm PI or communism can I try
one and then you tell me why it doesn't
work D humiliation no absolutely no
absolute nonsense
it says they used it they used it they
used it for you know it was a propaganda
stick but it's just it's not you don't
think that there was a need to restore
some kind of sense of identity I
remember people talking fondly about
Stalin I thought it was very confused in
any last year of Yeltsin you know they
started you know just you know playing
was his nostalgia right because KGB was
playing a bigger and bigger role you
know go
back to early 90s in Russia after
Yeltsin shut down Russian parliament in
1993 though I had no thin person Russia
Parliament and I thought Yeltsin was
right because they were full of
Communists and nationalists but he
ruined just you know the balance of
power that was just building up in
Russia and it was again since 1993 it
was all power of executives and the
Russian Constitution that in theory in
adopted 993 was a good document gave you
know enormous power to the president if
he wanted to abuse it it was just it was
ill on paper look good but it it almost
it it almost eliminated you know the key
key elements of checks and balances of
the control of the of the executive
power which is in Russia traditionally
was just you know was was dominant force
and in 1994 the first Chechen war
already showed that the country was
moving in the wrong direction and 1996
elections was already it was free but
not fair
and then then selecting his successor
which by itself is not democratic
process selecting dress nominating him
Yeltsin came up with a Nelson's family
not just immediate family but family as
the as the group of his advisers closes
oligarchs the circle oligarchs they came
up with a KGB lieutenant-colonel so it
was more about preserving the enormous
wealth that it concentrate at a time the
humiliation was just you know it for the
for the general public but it's it's the
Russia under Putin you know the
strengths of Putin's regime is that they
don't care about ideology Putin Putin
could become nationalist could become a
sort of the populist could be
imperialist at the end of the day he
doesn't care what one is power and
wealth exactly it's all it's it's more
like a mafia state that's why I say that
every country has its own mafia in
Russia mafia has its own country so
that's that's it's something quite
unique and there Putin believes in only
in power of money and he just discovered
at a point quite early in his presidency
that money can buy anyone anything and
and that's the problem for this was a
free world losing Russia also losing
losing Soviet Union as an existential
enemy right so the free world lost its
sense of danger so it is
it's Oh now let's you know let's let's
make deal so who cares we are you know
we are invincible well we keep looking
for a new Soviet Union me whether it's
China the environment Islamic terror
we're trying to find it
yes but if free world you know is much
weaker you know I remember it's it's few
years ago I spoke to one of my friends
in New York and we talked about it says
after my book was published winter is
coming and we talked about challenges to
the free world and I said in 1948 Joseph
Stalin wanted to take over West Berlin
it was it he he announced a blockade run
Harry Truman they said you know hell we
defend West Berlin it was a biggest
inner boldest decision that American
president could make and for 11 months
US and British planes supplied was
brilliant with everything it needed to
survive and Stalin decided against
shooting shooting this plane so he knew
that Harry Truman was not a man just due
to that like exactly so and I said look
Harry Truman faced
Joseph Stalin and this is Russia today
not Putin Joseph Stalin Russia today in
2015 is a pale shadow of a matter of of
Stalin's Soviet Union a militarily like
an homage salute and you know what what
he said quite sadly you know sign and
said yes but America today is also pale
shale this America of hair this is the
horrible truth which is that in a weird
way Putin appears to be relatively in my
way of thinking one of the most skilled
players left on the chessboard
no I just I have to disagree please I
would defend the integrity of my game so
Putin is not a chess player
no sir sorry sir he's easy Napoletano
its assists it's the Putin Putin doesn't
create these opportunities he uses them
so he grabs them okay let me say it
differently
Putin strengths is is is is a witness of
the free world
yes but the KGB had a tremendous amount
of know how it was resident within that
yeah but no how is fine but KGB and it
has enormous amount of cash
yes Vladimir Putin controls more money
than any other individual in history
richest richest man
it's it he's when when is people say oh
how rich is Putin Putin's put in this
mega rich but is it's not you know it's
not the same kind of wealth that you
know that's like a black gay or
powerslam or bezels or wear because it
all depends on him staying in power but
when you look at the amount of money
Vladimir Putin can move directly or
indirectly you're probably talking about
something like a 1 trillion dollar
system one trillion dollar yeah it just
you you add Russian and no budget you
add Russian so in a Russian hard
currency reserves the fortunes of some
of the top Russian oligarchs ok to the
Putin but he's skilled he's ruthless
he's a single decision maker and he has
this level of control over resources yes
there's no I know equal to that unless
it's the Chinese no no it's yes more
power probably than seeds in pean
relatively to can't to to to the country
because seeds and beans resources are
just incompatible to Putin what he
farmers it's just China is much stronger
than and I think seeds in pain and
Chinese Commons they're very happy to
see Putin creating these problems
because it you know it helps them to
shift their attention
China is a strategic threat if you're
using chess line right long-term
strategic threat okay
so Putin is more of a tactical threat
but right now this is you know that's
this is a real threat because if your
king is on the threat of being mated you
guys think about long-term consequences
of the endgame all right well so let's
hit another chest terminal and then I'll
pull the ripcord if it doesn't work
there's a concept which not everyone
knows called zugzwang yes where where
you are in a situation where you prefer
not to have to move because anything you
do actually put you in a word I don't
you have to move why do we keep acting
as if we're in zugzwang yeah that's let
me go back to what I said a few moments
ago
Putin strengths is our witness yes Putin
is good at looking at opportunities like
and then and he strikes he doesn't
create them but the moment he sees
witness it's animal instinct you know he
goes for kill right so why whatever
Putin's in Syria because America walked
away
because I marry create vacuum there so
when you look at the added global map
why putting zero there because the free
world you know blinked didn't want to
interfere and that's what we learned
I hope actually I was wrong had to learn
from the nineteen series it's the if we
see rising dictatorship yes and and
brand dictatorship that is challenging
the very foundation of our of our world
and we know we have a choice of
confronting it early or postponing the
decision trying to appease a dictator
every day every week every month every
year of a delay pushing the price up
well this is what's very scary to me
about Tulsi gabbard's candidacy which is
that she's pushing this concept of
regime change Wars and she's trying ya
know after Yunus I'm you know a moment
he mentioned the name so I almost jumped
on my chair or I don't understand is the
Democrats will not allow any any any
climate change denier on straight
rightly so how they allow a genocide
denier on stage I mean she's just you
know she acts a like like I don't want I
don't know all about the details of your
relations Assad or Putin but she's
supporting the most brutal dictators on
the planet and she what do you think she
thinks she's doing I don't know what
she's doing you know I and I'm not
hearing another business of analyzing
you know he's the reason the payroll or
not I don't care what is she saying and
by the way yes I'm following look at it
you know she has presented here and
there babies babies know what stage and
it's and and she's not confronted she's
defending Bashar al-assad you know one
of the one of the worst dictator who use
chemical weapons she's denying it I
didn't hear any Democrat taking her or
not so in saying except what how do you
do it here and it's it and that's in
this for Putin is a bit Gary what's
going on in some sense is just as you
were saying in 1991-92 we started it's
the economy stupid as if the rest of the
world went away we were gonna just
abandon all of our opportunities
obligations what-have-you we're now not
capable of formulating an America that
makes sense as a continuation of our
previous said you said again this is
it's it's the it's um
from 1946 to 9091 was the thing no it
says it had certainly no policy that we
followed your Harry Truman set up
certain rules and institutions and then
you had Republicans Democrats
Republicans following the plan and it
led to a victory in the example because
the strength of democracy yeah it's it's
a strategy again using chess terms
because you can rely on continuity you
can change administrations and but you
still have the plan it could be could be
some deviations you know there could be
now just you know one way or another you
know something could be more aggressive
more in a more defensive but at the end
of the day what we were if we were
trying to become captains of the same
team now it looks like we're gonna be
Capitol different going back to 91 90 oh
yeah American foreign policy came you
know more like a pendulum shifting you
know one side from one side to another
based on who is in the Oval Office
there's no Clinton Bush Obama trump this
it's this is in the rest of the world
into to the rest of the world is
watching about whatever and it's just
it's and it's it's paralyzing fear
you're looking at a car that's swerving
exactly in the lane but people used to
know that America is there whether it's
you know you know its Eisenhower or
Kennedy or Johnson Nixon a for even
Reagan Carter so Bush America was there
okay so now all of a sudden it's you
clear longer rely on America but there
it's you have massive collided its its
vacuum holes right and you know
Millennials have any intuition of where
our passion is coming no no no I'm
saying something has broken in terms of
our collective understanding of
ourselves we are having the most
irrelevant bizarre non fact-based non
theory based conversations like children
but you said no one fact-based that's
one of the problems that's what Putin's
of this world want us to forget history
so easy now now you're talking about
World War two and so who cares it's not
relevant it is relevant oh my goodness
because you know we we could see now
that is how you know Putin is basically
no just it's it's conquering the not
territories but you know but it's it's
actually it's a contrail minds by
conducting very successful equipment so
let's go to that what is it that the
Soviet Union and then Russia understands
about the human mind that the US needs
to understand ASAP but cannot figure out
how to teach its own people look I don't
think that we can compare Sony's
propaganda and Putin's Putin's machine
propaganda machine for simple reason
Soviet Union had had an idea and I took
your point it's ideology safe again look
my mother she's she's 82 she was born on
the style in 1937 so she still lives in
Moscow she heard it all Stalin
Khrushchev Brezhnev Andropov Gorbachev
and she's watching this television and
she keeps telling me that it's Gary
it's much worse than ever because it's
much worse than anything it's because
before we had some ideals yeah there
were false ideals but it was it was all
about bright future every ideology has
its future it could be horrible idea
even like like Nats ISM but again they
try to sell you the image of the future
okay Putin doesn't care about the future
it's the Putin's ideology in Russia it's
more like a cult of death it was
surrounded by enemies and you have to
rely outside confusion everything is can
use its yeah and they discovered that
you know instead of selling an ideology
where it's always vulnerable right at
the moment I give you the ideas I'm not
so sure it is it says no you can't tell
what the ideas are everything slips
through fingers like Quicksilver so it
says in 2004-2005 yeah so you know it's
um they had to make a decision yeah how
to fight Russian oppositional Internet
yeah I just said the time where I just
was about to stop my chest the career
and as I tried to help Russian
opposition here early Morley's yes yeah
I'm a girl early forties in 2004-2005
and they made and call it ingenious
decision that's based on the KGB
experience instead of following Chinese
model firewall clothes you know just you
know make people starve of information
traditional dictatorships they said how
about doing it's exactly the opposite
you know it's
it's instead of you know closed in
closing every nutball so what about the
flat of yeah flooding in this
information by Justino are creating so
much information here and there so for
people just to get lost and you can have
prop the newspaper from page one story
that everyone must follow nine o'clock
news or you can start you know just you
know dividing this this this story in in
too many poor business elements and
start spreading them in the true stories
okay so this is that zero it's so this
is now all through our countries they're
coming from Russia yes it's this in 2005
like the transmission mechanism 2000
aget super depressing I want to get to
this say they they decided just the d√°il
start creating these fake websites right
well nice when I say fake websites a
real website sure but they looked like
you know very liberal web size they
talked about certain things they could
even criticize Putin yeah some of them
you know this but is they always carried
a little bit a piece of story here and
there but you and I have been talking
very critically about Trump and the
Republican phenomena as Manhattan this
landscape part of the problem we've had
is that the the Democratic Party went
kleptocratic in the center and started
pursuing policies that started like
let's say widening the Gini coefficients
so that we had greater inequality and we
started experimenting with our own
American style of nonsense so right now
we have a situation in which let me give
you my feelings I've been a lifelong
Democrat I don't trust my party as far
as I can throw them I don't trust the
New York Times Washington Post
I don't trust Fox News and the
Republicans obviously because that's
transparently wrong there is no ground
truth there's no place to go and people
are tuning into this podcast and look by
the way I'm gonna force you to come back
to this podcast cuz we need more time
right now we're mostly talking to
Millennials and the Millennials are
hungry because they have an idea of we
came in on this game we have no idea
what we missed everything makes no sense
where can I find some concept of
overarching continuity to make sense of
a world that is disintegrating in this
is the toilet okay it says there's just
just let's finish you know
this story about fake news and trow
factories
that's what Putin created that's what
KGB created and they recognized it's far
more effective man let's say they have
to do is Garry Kasparov's
yeah you can go off the Garry saying oh
is this American agent he's just you
know he's a bad guy isn't working for
CIA for Mossad whatever some people who
believe snaps in now it doesn't look
here sells drugs he sells good you read
many many many intelligent bills and now
is a CEO as a great you know Soviet
champion in this is probably most
decorated Soviet Russia Natalie history
now so for them it's a different story
you know this they managed to create you
know this it's a fake you know debates
you have a whole page yeah that is it's
totally you know just designed you know
elsewhere but it it comes to its own on
a social media somebody says Garry
Kasparov is a bad guy and then
somebody's coming no no no no no no he's
a great guy he's but you know I'm not so
sure and it says and then you have a
whole if it wasn't thinking problem no
no no I wish I'd pay this know is this
it's the most typical one was Gary was a
greatest champion but unfortunately he
got its you know it went to his head so
is it it's and you understand this
people might refer to me and I get right
but I could see right like as if I could
possibly be the or there's the level of
nonsense
but you'll never have known since
because people again I says there's no
gravitas this is it's you know for us to
understand what is what is right is this
you need opening what is what is Ground
Zero well yeah nobody has been kept
aside like you keep a fire extinguisher
under glass in case of emergencies
there's no adult that's ready to go when
things get bad they recognize that is
the the new social media could offer
them enormous opportunities to spread
these fake news because there's one way
to tell the truth many ways to lie so
it's that typical story was with Emma
it's it was mh17 D the Malaysian Boeing
that was shot by Russian missile right
and it's they you know they didn't care
to provide you know one one narrative
that could could refute the that's the
the the widespread conviction here in
Russia what they did they spread all
sorts of news and and one day on Russian
television on to defer
channel yeah there are two competing
stories right just and with experts yeah
diagrams again who cares if it's if it's
a ten different lies people say I don't
know just you know it forget if it's a
needle in a haystack and they always
give you a haystack you know in 2015
yeah I said that if to Facebook that
your business model
yeah is the honeypot for Russian bear no
killing yeah because it was so obvious
you know they said it was ideal
opportunity so this is how to use it use
choose to to affect people's mind with
information that could be most you know
sensitive well this is the this is a
very strange thing is that I know these
guys in Silicon Valley they're very
smart in a very limited way and they are
so childlike it's this I understand that
is putting already had a machine it the
before he attacked America with this
year news industry right so here it had
10 times its own telly take Russia then
russian-speaking minorities in if in a
neighboring countries right then Europe
so attacking America was just a matter
of time and I don't think Putin you
expect it to be so successful because
the way the Russian propaganda handle it
I think they expected Trump to lose
elections narrowly yes that's what the
expectations and that's why I Trump
already repeated
the the Russian narrative rigged
elections how many times from said
rigged elections the thing that you did
which is very interesting you said look
all you need to know to impeach Trump is
one thing which is how he handled
Ukraine now whether I agree with you or
I don't agree with you your point was
look it's very important not to get
caught up in very complicated stories
let's keep it super simple so that you
can just stay on one point is that fair
representation really I think that's by
the way I think he he he had other
impeachable offenses he knows so bet but
your point was but if you stay win this
battle because right now the moment you
accused Trump of numerous crimes that's
I believe he committed it will be very
very easy for we can see the for that
for for Trump's defenders to sort of to
to to sort of dilute it is Michael Carey
that has that has to do with the
corruption in the in the Democratic side
because you can see
that the New York Times and The
Washington Post are not behaving as
honest actors and it's very clear at the
moment that they're not you have this
different problem which is I can't like
I spent almost all my time criticizing
the left not the right
not because I think the right is okay it
absolutely isn't but because if the left
continues to pursue these petty
transparent ridiculous mini propaganda
operations we've undercut our own
credibility in any place the connections
all the sudden what I hate most is
hypocrisy and as this now you know in
the next democratic debates
I will hit one question yeah every every
every demo really hopeful onstage if it
was a simple yes or no will you will you
authorize sell-off lethal weapons to
Ukraine yes or no because you trumpet on
traumas on trial for that will you or
not I'm afraid most of them will say no
and that shows the hypocrisy that's it's
Kenna's at the end of the day trans
foreign policy just don't kill before
that not so different from Obama's Trump
the motivation is different but Obama
retreated because of his beliefs it's
like a ideological retreat Trump doing
these things for profit but it's but
unfortunately not the outcome you don't
believe that Trump is under direct
control of Putin or does it matter but
that's okay that's it's I said
for-profit yeah you know Trump is a
Russian asset I said it many times yeah
and is it whether you understand it or
not it's another story
Trump is Russian asset I don't even have
to know all the details your point is
that the incentive structures I grew up
on the Soviet Union and I just I can I
can repeat it time and again
I met enough KGB Colonels yeah and I
know how these people look at you yeah
so the way pit buton looks at Trump is
the way KGB handler looks at his asset
he looks at NorCal at McCrone with a
contempt it's a contempt because he he
believes he can by anyone on this planet
unfortunately they like failed to
everybody but the way he looks at Trump
the way they act yeah it's this it's it
this this this you know this wry smile
and this is not a smirk
Trump is an asset he believes the Trump
for some reasons will do whatever
and by the way they were it's the Trump
you know it's when people say how can
you say that now okay yeah I didn't know
when the Democratic Party asserts that
Donald trum buddy inside of the
traditional left-of-centre media or
political apparatus starts to assert
that Donald can Trump is under the
direct control as opposed to the
incentive control like even to advance
at the end of the ages trumpets look
you're not actually my point what I'm
trying to say is there's a problem right
now with we can't form a sense making we
came from a story that enough of us can
participate in just start actually
dealing with our real problems we're
just in freefall and whether or not I
sign on to everything that you say about
Trump or not I know that if you and I
have enough time we can at least figure
out what we agree on but agree on what
the theories are we have another common
denominator so that's as clear this is
from our conversation you may disagree
with many things but at the end of the
day we know where we are where we stand
so our disagreements would be more of a
tactical not a strategical character yes
so what I'm concerned about is that
right now we're a sitting duck because
we're not actually be there there are no
adults that I can find anywhere on the
stage because again it says it's the
it's a it's the again America has to
reinvent itself I mean it has to yeah we
consider what is America's role and this
is and again it says you go back to the
democratic debates they talking about
things that they they might be very
important it says I understand you know
you should talk about health care you
should talk about other issues that are
important you know for America long term
but right now you have the foundation of
the Republic is in jeopardy
you have Trump ohi's I don't know I
don't want to repeat it he's Russian
acid but it's let's say he's not but
it's it doesn't matter your assertion is
but look at it wait look at what he what
he has been doing is you know if he were
Russian acid what he could do
differently so this is it's the it's
even even he's you know he's famous
betrayal of Kurtz
infamous with detail of Kurds so he
spoke to earlier on this October 6 on
October 7th Putin's birthday he
announced greatest American retreat and
it's
next couple of days Russian television
was celebrating this the pictures from
Americans camps was food on the table
saying Americans were running away
because our great leader you know keep
push them out so that's the sue another
coincidence I always say I believe in
coincidences but I also believe in KGB
yeah and when it's everytime you know
what about cases and Trump it ends up
with Russia Gary why are you still alive
it's a good question yeah so so are you
here because you're still useful to him
look I you know it's it's it's
everything you know has its price so I
think again I tried don't to be just an
easy target I don't go to Carrie I don't
believe this for a second if he wants
you gone he's guiding heavier guy thank
you very much
so my wife will be there happy to hear
that no no not look so but is this the
come on we're having a grown-up
conversation yeah I know that's so what
you know I I say what I say at the end
of the day again it's the it's its voice
yes but look if they won't be gone I'm
sure you know they get they can do it so
it doesn't change anything my behavior
yeah I noticed that yeah so that's the
but by the way I just want to say how
much I admire that okay again it's it's
would it help so people so I don't think
you could do anything else nobody s I
have to do just you know do what you
must so be that's what I learned you
know as a kid from Soviet dissidents
yeah because yeah it's the and and again
it's just going back to this is it's not
you know Trump is a symptom okay let me
um shows how you know as following your
point in right that's it's how this
society how this great country lost its
way and it's and that's why Trump Trump
Trump is you know he's still there
so you and I have a mutual friend in
Peter Thiel were you very surprised at
Peter back to trump disappointed yeah
but look he's a businessman I understand
why he did it I think it's just it's a
wrong decision it's bad for the country
so maybe good for his business but it's
the I mean from day one when I heard
about it I I was unpleasantly surprised
because I you know it's not again not
just saying things now you know from the
first day of Trump's campaign he have
been his MO one of the most vocal
critics yeah by the way speaking about
the media please one of the reasons
Trump was there is because New York
Times and Washington Post and a CNN they
liked him
from he resuscitated their business not
only business model for 16 years yeah
the Democratic Party right has served as
the political branch of Clinton
Foundation right it was one goal to let
unelectable woman to to the presidency
on States in 2008 she was to Obama that
had to be eat but they dig tried again
any I mean Joe Biden would have trashed
Trump in 2016 so Hillary Clinton was the
only chance for Trump bet they wanted
Trump because they knew Trump was the
only person she could beat she would
have chips who said no chance against in
it's a model Republican so they wanted
Trump right so this is again it's it's
it's and that's why Trump got all this
free publicity
in hundreds of millions if not billions
of dollars of free publicity and they
could have killed Trump when he attacked
John McCain if the CNN of this world
wanted to go after Trump in in in summer
2015 they could have good I agree that
maybe they could have sank these sheep
you know just before it left horrible
another question Jeffrey Epstein died
under bizarre circumstances and the the
amount of follow on on this story the
entire world wants to know is there a
tighter the intelligence community I
don't see papers getting the denials
from intelligence communities I don't
see any very significant attempt to talk
about whether or not like all you need
is to get somebody to say this person
was never an asset they were never under
under US or foreign protection what do
we learn when things that are supposed
to happen because they would sell papers
there of interest to everybody and
they're the natural thing to do simply
don't happen in full view of the world
look it's the give it you have an
explanation do you think this is
interesting or not and let's you know
it's it it always happened before but we
didn't have the same knowledge so that's
the only difference is now there's this
people died in people of that of that
type
yeah they're absent they used to die in
prisons under suspicious circumstances
for decades if not centuries but only
now we know about it but at the end of
the day who cares because you can look
public you know it's attention yes
tomorrow I was murder-suicide or
whatever doesn't
mean that much that's not the issue the
issue is is that it's like dark matter
you don't detect it directly you see all
sorts of other things behaving bizarrely
around it and so you know that there's
something there
look we know it's something's there
because again it's it's the while while
we have so much information available
again our attention span is so short
that you move from just one one thing to
another
so is this i'm i'm i wonder how many you
know how many listeners he will
immediately pick up jeff rapes time
there were so many scandals and that's
what Trump knows you know he knows that
you know if he's tried for one you know
one you know treason think it's it's
it's bad but it's but if he's tried for
ten Gary where we have a matter let me
just tell you we have an amazing
audience we have the people who are
attracted to the show but but it's
amazing how many things people forget
because you have a new scandal you know
that's no I understand that but I'm what
I'm trying to say is that the people who
are tuning into this are people who are
they're sick of being in the matrix they
just they want out and that's why it's
called the portal because they're people
looking for an exit from the confusion
so I'm gonna tell you this you are
coming back to this show because I am so
not finished with you it's been a
fantastic when you say it's not finished
you know that's you and I is there
anything you want to talk about about
RDR before I let you go and send you
along your way no it's the it's I of the
Trump election say with some of my
friends you know I called them you know
refugees from The Wall Street Journal
like Brad Stevens mags both Marc Klaas
well so those who just couldn't you know
couldn't stand from so that's day and
few model Democrats in New York so we
got together and we decided to come up
with an organization we called it renew
democracy initiative so our di dot org
now as a website I don't invite me to be
the white that you know just is this the
it's and the idea was that you know this
is it's a net I use my own experience
that democracy is under Ginn exist it's
it's it's it's a great danger it's a
great threat when it's attacked from
both sides from radicals people
sometimes they think that Oh Hitler won
elections in Germany he never won
elections he knows it's not a majority
the
best result of Nazi Party 1932 was just
over 37% but at the same elections
communists made nearly 16 yeah which
means half of the job mana have a German
corporation rejected rejected a
democracy so it's what we saw is as you
know it's a Trump's brutal assault on on
liberal democracy and our freedoms but
at the same time we saw the growing
power of the far-left so-called
progressive wing attacking the very
foundation of the of the free market and
these two forces they are just here
threatening to dilute the very
foundation of American substances why
it's important to get rid of the
kleptocracy in our Center it's because
you need a central that is
intellectually have been shouting for
four years
yeah for more than a decade all right
too big to fail gains the very principle
of capitalism I you know I said it as
many times once I think it's ads it was
the Cato Institute and that's Milton
Friedman Award for let's have bolts of
rubbish in 2013 I did a keynote yeah and
I said that this Ephrem small business
in North Carolina is bankrupt it goes
belly-up so much Goldman Sachs so that's
this it I mean the whole idea that you
know you can use taxpayers money
supporting supporting big corporations
because they are you know indispensable
but they grew up on bigger now
so as that extent to Harvard should
Harvard be allowed to fail should for
example the Democratic Party be allowed
to fail financially as you know Donna
Brazile is asserting that Hillary
Clinton was essentially the only thing
propping up the Democratic Party I don't
know this is it's the it's this is the
ginn we people who say capitalism failed
us I say yeah in capitals hasn't failed
us we failed capitalism okay violating
fundamental principles of free market
which is you know you bankrupt right you
fail right you're out of business
somebody else will replace you that's
what's the whole idea and right now we
just it's it's it's all about your
connections to the government it's all
the connections to to to those who have
money and power and you could see that
money and power they just you know they
are getting closer and closer it's it's
almost you know which organizations or
you put other than our there what are
you putting your faith in nobody's look
you know if you think Soros is a
positive force so is a partisan force
that's a problem you know the idea was
our di was cheap to bring people on both
sides so it's we have
now that brings people from both sides
to former senators Heidi Heitkamp and
Bob Kane from Nebraska so okay both
Democrat Blue Dog Democrats right the
idea is this and we're working with
donors many of them are just you know
are former Republican Republicans
looking for building something in the
center because it's the the problem of
the United States but also you look at
the United Kingdom look at Europe the
problem is that the the radicals from
both sides they gaining more and more
power by dragging people out of the
center it's what I call the phenomena of
Spanish Civil War when you have you know
it's the soldiers calmness on one side
and fascist on the side and as somebody
who wants to stay in the middle no no
Reuben do you think you must take like
an a-frame roof yeah and the a-frame is
getting more and more peaked it's so the
idea is that only the most agile people
can still dance it's not American
American the two-party system in America
always you know served as the shield
against radical is great one party went
too far like red water landslide right
McGovern Nona left landslip right so
right now you have an elections
potentially like rights what do you have
two radicals yeah and this is and
there's so much room in the center now
do you have anyone that you like on the
Democratic side look again it says it's
the way I look at this at this elections
is that it's all about defeating Donald
Trump so you have to make these
elections about dog from you have to
look for the best candidate who can win
you know a win against Trump and just
that one thing who would that be the
best chance of winning statistically Amy
Klobuchar it's very clear because she's
she's exactly from the area where the
elections will be decided in the Midwest
she won in Minnesota 2018 reelection by
by by carrying many districts that Trump
won in Tucson sorry again it's about
winning collection what do you think
about if we get these candidates away
from this typical CNN MSNBC our roots
it's a look I mean I used to be a chess
player and it's and it's this election
but but I always knew that learn from my
mother it's not just about winning it's
about making the difference but this
election is about winning and saving the
Republic if Trump is re-elected yeah
it's the I mean the consequences cannot
be I can't even predict him Naida will
go bust Trump will withdraw from Europe
and he will destroy every foundation
well the game
of him not worrying about re-election we
don't have no idea what that looks like
absolutely so it's the so that's by the
way you have to know that a lot of my my
audience is split a lot of them put up
with my anti Trump stuff because they
they believe that I'm at least trying in
good faith right I don't always
understand how they look at this and
they say that this is normal I don't get
it but you see it's it's just you know
the Trump's ability to corrupt others
you know this I mean look at Tony
general yeah I totally general now it
sounds like identical warrior right when
when when a Tony general uses words the
left or right he talked about left you
know what's violating the law that's it
you know that's it's Trump's succeeded
already in in three years you know brace
by destroying or what I was left of
American image abroad and and also in
the country we don't have a shared idea
of what where we are what's going on and
what's relevant
we just don't that's why it's about
restoration and that's why you need to
make sure that Trump is defeated and
this elections but it and you cannot
have a candidate that coming up with big
was it very big idea yeah but it can't
only be defeating Trump up just be
honest with you if the if the left of
the United States does not stop with its
propagandistic bullshit there's no way
we are going to be able to put things
back together cannot you cannot come up
with a big socialist ideas because
that's right that's Trump's only hope no
kids
praying you know for Sanders also the
question of denying things like if
somebody shoots up a parade route or
something and shouts Allahu Akbar at the
end there will be a democratic attempt
to not talk about what is basis this
weekend as this that's going back to the
question so I wonder here I want to hear
what they say about foreign policy
because Trump is big Trump is on trial
now he will be impeached in the house
for he's you know for his crimes you
know for foreign ports related crimes
right and they don't talk about it is
they talk about something else
so the country they want the country to
believe that Trump was guilty but we
don't hit here what would be what would
they do different right but if the
Democrats for example pursue things
where Trump actually isn't guilty
somebody is both guilty and not guilty
of things that is
any attempt to prosecute things
frivolously which we will see right is
going to result in this loss of trust we
have to do something about trust and if
we don't have some yeah bingo
I mean it's a must trust important yes
Gary you got to come back to Los Angeles
thank you so much fun I mean it is
there's more to talk about you know
capitalism social there was the one
experience
look my bladder can go on forever it is
now 5:30 which is your heart yes so I'm
just trying to take care of you you'll
come back to the portal as I guess thank
you absolutely fantastic okay that's the
Rose needs very executive IOT you've
been through the portal with the
inimitable Gary Kasparov it's been an
incredible journey Gary thank you for
visiting us take care of yourselves be
well please subscribe to the podcast
wherever you listen to podcasts on Apple
stitcher Spotify what-have-you and go
over to YouTube and make sure you find
our channel click the subscribe button
and the Bell to be notified when our
next episode drops thank you very much
[Music]
[Music]