before there we go okay so it's funny
even as I said nice to meet you it
occurs to me like I guess I guess we can
now call virtual I guess we can call
virtual encounters meeting now right I
think we're at that point I guess we
have to because so much this takes place
at a distance if we didn't presume that
then then we would have to confess that
we never met any we never met each other
at all so I guess this has to count this
meeting exactly you know it's funny
because I actually I think what you're
saying is really deep the the just the
fact that we we can't quite tell whether
they're called this meeting or not yeah
there's something going on that wasn't
going on ten years ago that all of a
sudden is going on everywhere I don't
even know if we know at all what we're
doing or what this means ah yeah i
foiiow echo that I sure don't I have to
admit though that this you know what you
and I are now doing and what I mean this
is only the beginning of my exposure to
this this de squiz ative arena of the
internet that John has commended me to
but I have to admit it kind of in spite
of myself really that it is forcing me
it's forcing me to relitigate some of
the apprehensions I've had about online
discourse writ large because I've been
so wary of it because I find it's it's
like it's
there's this interesting thing that
happened I think in the last decade or
so whereby you know formerly I'm kind of
simplifying this a little bit I suppose
but formally it's almost as though there
were sort of two arenas two different
kinds of arenas of discourse one which
was casual and unpolished and and
spontaneously social and another that
was more rigorous and reflective and
refined and that was sort of the
published media right published
discourse not to say that it was all of
great quality but it had to go through a
certain amount of it had to it had to be
put through a filter of a certain amount
of editorial reflection in order to then
emerge within the public sphere and it
seems to me that what the event of
social media did is take these two
arenas and just collapse them together
so all of a sudden everything we do in
this virtual landscape is published in
effect so all of these casual social
discourses which are often bumbling and
fraught with mistakes and fraught with a
certain amount of social clumsiness and
improvisation all of a sudden are lifted
to this publishable medium right and the
collapsing of those two worlds is
something that I think perhaps we were
not prepared for and we're still trying
to negotiate through it and I have to
say this this this these conversations
that you've been having and with John
and with all of these other
interlocutors are probably the first
example I have seen whereby the
collapsing together of those two worlds
has availed itself in service of knowing
and service of something valuable it is
the first time I've seen it which is not
to say it's the first time it's happened
because you know goodness knows I don't
I don't see everything yeah but but that
alone just impresses me it's not sure
what to do with it right
I I I think the thing we the the sense
of reflection impression that you're
expressing there's this way in which
there's a way in which there's there's
like there's something going on that's
different and there's an awareness of
I'm hearing you say there was an
awareness of something that used to
happen historically but only happened
privately and it took a lot for it to
happen publicly if you could get it
there and once it was public it was so
framed in a sense that the awareness of
being in the public was integral to the
message right right right and and then
then and then all of a sudden you're
saying what does it mean to have a a
clumsy conversation that was owned was
always already pre supposed as private
on some pretty much every respect
related to be in a moment be broadcasted
and literally for everyone's consumption
in the moment but then to have that
moment to be able to be played over
again through history at anybody's own
this other dimension which is really
interesting is that that it's not TV
right where you couldn't miss it right
that's right yeah it's not like an event
it's a a record of conversations that
historically have always been this
enactment right right of anything cuz
that's the thing about conversation is I
don't even know what I'm gonna say
that's yeah what makes it private I
would imagine because public is always
like you know you had a speech or you
had some kind of presentation or at
least you controlled the scene enough
right right to be in consideration that
you knew what you were gonna say so you
can manage the listening or like speak
into the listening or something but here
we are that's right no I exactly exactly
and what you say about it sort of being
it sort of has this now recurrence
across time yeah it kind of demands that
we relinquish the control and the
management of it in the way that we
otherwise would have and it no longer
belongs to our sort of we have to we
have to we have to give it up we have to
offer it up I suppose there's a certain
amount of yeah offering ourselves up and
it up in service of
whatever it then is subsumed into
totally in the it right that we're
offering up it's still quite mysterious
to me
absolutely absolutely yeah and then how
it how it yeah it's it's so interesting
it's like not only this particular
instance of it but then the string of
its that coalesce into something of a
broader scale this this these pocket
discourses that quite obviously are
becoming threaded together and enmeshed
within something something of a gestalt
you that of course we can't see being so
embedded within it but it's I find it
humbling in a way that I actually find
really helpful um as it so well because
it's so complex because the because the
the picture hasn't really revealed
itself to us yet and I mean maybe won't
maybe won't in any kind of comprehensive
way right perhaps by definition it can't
and that I think in terms of assuming
some very very very modest role within
this unfolding picture kind of is
helpful because it dis abuses any sense
of self-importance in the matter it's
like you're you know it's like offering
yourself up to a doula a teemed activity
whose destination is unknown but is
intrinsically meaningful by virtue of
identifying with the discourse becoming
the discourse and losing yourself within
it and then having it core back into you
in such a way that you play but a role
but then you kind of take it on in full
yeah yeah anyway I find that that did
that sort of the way it sort of disarms
the what the ego centrism that people
usually bring to such things is helpful
very helpful yeah there's like there's a
well I know John and I talked about this
of in our first interview or he he was
talking about it there's a new kind of
vulnerability my ass that that I can
actually have something
that I share my mind in this is a
spontaneous way and we have this
interaction right and that other people
can watch it and then they can come to
me and I have this awareness of they
have so much they know me so much way
more about me yeah
even more their name right there is a
certain kind of like new kind of
vulnerability that I don't think was
possible except for maybe you know not
even that luck like movie stars maybe
experienced that but in such a such a
constrained way in a certain sense
because it's like so much is revealed in
in the spontaneous whatever calls to
speech like the way we listen what
occurs to us what our attention goes to
like how we're affected by each other
yeah yeah do you think about like what
what I often this is what excites me
about this right because I think what
we're doing is a is right now and and
what I've been doing and what Jon's been
doing on the Internet in other words
these long-form meandering conversations
right these discourses that that build
on each other right that other people
have and talk about there are other
discourses that they watched right
there's a this is one of the few places
where it feels to me or it's I don't
know if if you yeah it does feel to me
but I also wonder if this is one of the
places where technology actually brings
forward something that is cannot be
technological eyes right no they can't
be the thing I one of the reasons why I
think circling has really come to being
is it it's is that it highlights the
inner subjective eye thou relationship
right now it happens to be one of the
places that it doesn't seem like you can
in frame it in the high daguerreian
sense right know you through optimizing
you right or looking at you or having a
bunch or being informed by you I know I
know you by being in some way changed
right
in the thing called understanding you I
alter my understanding of myself to
greater lesser degrees but that's how we
got our identity right is in this right
this sense so what does it mean
when you think about it to have these
very deep dialogues right long-form no
one knows what's gonna happen or the
outcome is gonna be and you get to list
like people get to listen to people very
deep thoughts and you co thinking and
listening are so coupled cuz you can't
you can't think and listen at the same
time
I heard you say that I think in a
conversation you had with Paul and it
just what a beautiful way of putting it
that's exactly right that's exactly it
yeah that's what you it's if what you
were describing about meeting people and
having them know you having this sort of
an asymmetrical relationship right
perhaps when you meet someone that has
been observing you on these videos as I
have been for instance and and up until
the point of actually meeting there's an
asymmetrical knowing because you're in
you're you you're known without perhaps
without knowing the other person or
conversely if you're simply watching
someone I'm on this platform you're
knowing without also being known and
there's a sense in which you cannot know
in the sense that I think we both mean
no you cannot know without being known
right there's an essential and
indispensable indispensable mutuality to
the processional knowing that I think
that this is in service of and that kind
of mutuality that sort of that required
love you are talking about in terms of a
love affair which I thought was
beautiful and apt because that's exactly
what it is right and I think typically
our the way we interface with technology
is in a very unrequited fashion because
of the way we relate to it it is quite
one side I think like the digital age
has us all cast as unrequited lovers or
something like that right it's on ink on
eris if i can use that metaphor because
it's not not deeply reciprocal and
typically when we enter into these
discourses before this particular before
this particular arena
I think emerged you would find that you
weren't necessarily I mean you could
engage to some degree but you were
always at a distance because you were
never produced through the discourse you
were never really changed as a
consequence of it except maybe by
becoming more abbreviated than you were
before right yeah if only in your own
estimation there was a agree to which
you were you were you were less than as
a consequence of the discourse because
of the way I think interactions via
technology especially with social media
consists of branding rather than
substantial contact right your holding
of something of yourself aloft for view
and there's a certain idolatrous yeah
there's a certain idolatrous nature to
that because you're not clay it's like
there's it lacks the play john said that
to me what about this about these
conversations he said the way that he's
reckoned it is by entering into a state
of play alright which is a very symbolic
way of relating to the medium and
relating through the medium right
because then your self within the medium
is simply something that you offer up in
service of the spontaneous production
that should occur to it as it
interlocutor with other selves right
that you're offering yourself up to know
and to be known in such a way that you
identify with the knowing where and and
and that's also what I mean by that by
it being very uneven centric because
because there's a certain there's a
certain there's a certain naturalized
humility to the whole process right cuz
it had there has to be there has to
because you could be remade in virtue of
it the end if you're entering into it
perhaps authentically that in fact is
the that's the that's the formal cause
right is to be remade by it rather than
simply to present yourself and to be to
be read in a
particular way yeah absolutely uh you
know one of the things that your
thoughtfulness on this is just so I as I
was listening to guys it's noticed in
myself like mmm
taking deep breaths like certain moments
of things happening over here and
listening to you and I just want to say
that like one of the things I really
wanted to ask you about because I was
really struck I was really struck by
your conversation by you with your
conversation with Paul van der clay I am
by a number of things like first of all
the the this scent this sense of your
relationship to this discourse and
everything with this discourse points to
seemed so deeply respectful but I and I
when I think respect you know spectacle
it's connected with re-seeing to raha
and there's a quality of just like a
deep yeah just a deep respect and almost
an awareness of love as if it was
something was almost private right about
it right like that kind of personal
sense of it that was my my felt sense
and why I really just loved he liked
hearing your conversation and just in
all these ways in which you just to
express this deep humility yet at the
same time what it seemed like that that
humility gave access to were a
combination of precision and police Asst
that that really hit me hit me like
poetry on a number of number of things
and I one of the specific things I got
so interested to find out more about was
the way that you talked about this
experience of working with John in the
print in the progression of yourself in
that relationship I don't even know I
don't know if you use the word
apprenticeship I did
think so yeah when I really got this
sense of of an eye of something so rare
because people aren't apprentice anymore
other people and what that even means
but my understanding cuz my eye my
grandfather who had a huge influence on
my life apprenticed with a tailor for a
couple years while he lived outside in
order to do it to escape his family of
seventeen brothers and sisters so he
wouldn't get caught just working on the
farm right so he escaped and lived in
the park and apprenticed with this
tailor for two years um and he would
tell so many stories of what it was like
being there being in the atmosphere with
master tailor in my sense of it my sense
of it was that it did most of what he
the the deep transformation of what it
was to become a trip like a tailor in
your being Wright was a being thing and
that that very like very small amounts
of it had to do or the time was when he
was teaching him directly how to sew he
said most of it was eating lunch with
him hanging out with them in silence the
way that he talked to his wife the way
answered the door that there is so much
participation at this deep way that was
had his stories of tailors in the past
write a legacy of the way that they
moved his hands and the knuckles and
like the way put things away for how he
responded to things that there is this
sense that you could really tell that my
grandfather's reverence in these stories
was such a deep transformative
experience of apprenticeship and I I
really felt that that sense as you were
describing your journey with John in a
in a deep way
Wow yeah guys thank first of all did you
yeah he's there's so much of what you
said that I want to respond to I'm
trying to I'm trying to just order it
well thank you first of all you're very
kind
and and without simply appearing to
return a compliment for its own sake I
have to I have to say that much of what
you said of me is mutual especially in
so far as the police's is concerned
because I think that you're one of the
few people I've ever heard speak that
exemplifies in speech by them in the
manner of speech what you're conveying
in the object of the speech just the way
you I mean in that beautiful high
daguerreian way and you'd really do you
evoke that while always being
intelligible and and I find your speech
extremely resituated and mend and and
respect I've Elise Turing if I can use
that more of that from John so I really
mean that I've I've been just as
enriched by listening to you for that
very reason so thank you and yeah the
apprenticeship with John it I think that
what it has revealed to me that
particular relationship is that the the
intellectual apprenticeship and the
social and emotional apprenticeship when
figured properly are inextricable and
that's and and I think that has that has
given rise to my understanding of what
Philo Sophia actually is that it's not a
it's not dispassionate and it's not in
any way dissociated from our embodied
behavior or our fundamental attitudes
towards that behavior right it's in its
in integrative and integral right that
it's it's somehow threads us together
and gives us inward coherence so that we
might be outwardly harmonious right
that's the most idea of it and the
practice of it and that I mean you
mentioned the the relation of the I and
the vow that to me in many ways is in a
very pithy way
probably the most apt way of formulating
what its countenance and its expression
actually is in practice that i-i've oh
is somehow the is trying to get this
right I though it's like it's as though
I that was the relation that symbolizes
realization if I can put it that way
right it's how is the relation that
symbolized in Eliza's realization right
and and and and and in the same way it's
I though is also I think the native
expression of what we mean by a
symbolized self that is relational in
such a way part in that participatory
way and so I can I haven't been able to
stop thinking about it
especially when you mentioned this idea
of a love affair with the process which
I forget I find so I find so resonant
precisely because I think one way of
understanding Philo Sophia and I'm this
is all relevant to what you asked about
John because it's everything that I have
absorbed and I think gained by my
friendship with John among others
certainly among others but certainly
Joanna I like the word absorbed yeah cuz
it says like there's a permeability
right there's like a member of
membranous quality right that like you
know to the interaction yeah but this
idea that Philo Sophia is about what we
do with our arrows right
it is the arrangement of our love's for
knowing right and and that's why I mean
that's why the Platonic discourse is the
tie at radhika for Socrates features so
prominently and what's why Phi Lia
Sophia right it's embedded within the
term itself that somehow philosophy
Philo Sophia to be more specific
it's like huh this is gonna sound very
abstruse but I I trust you'll be
generous because you are very generous
it's likely it's like I thou Philo
Sophia is the impregnation of the self
with thou by means of a tutored and too
two arrows right and and so there and
then the consequent pregnancy yeah is
what is tended by the symbolic role of
this stage right that's why Socrates is
referred to as the midwife right that
somehow the discourse is a way of
birthing the self into its partition and
then that in the role of the sage
philosophically is to is to nurture and
tend to the impregnation and the birth
I think Heidegger said that something
like that to about dialectic that the
the dialect that the self is or maybe
the subject I can't remember the words
used but that the subject produces
itself in the care of the dialectic
right yeah it's almost like a passage
through a birth canal through which one
has to travel and that's why it's a
cultivation of eros by embedding it
within within a community us that
Orient's it properly that lifts its gaze
to matters of altima see right so I
think that understanding that this
arrangement of loves that is is
something that both by by in his in his
in his exemplification but also
explanation of Philo Sophia that I that
I gained from John and then that has
been just that's just been conjured
again and again and again by the the
nature of the relationship and the
friendship which is which which I feel
like I'm I'm evolving through and and I
would say that of a handful of close
intimate friendships that do that all of
those that's what that's their fight
it's like I somehow feel as though I am
composed of my most intimate friends and
friendships I'm somehow composed of the
kaabah of a handful of conversations
that they're Provident of personality in
some sense you know what I mean you ever
feel that way like I simply am the
product of of a handful of interlocutors
that I keep producing through yeah so I
I think that
sorry yeah I've run on a tangent now
guide please please save me
well I know what I like I'm enjoying
about what you're saying is is is the
sense of finding well one there's your
you're not reporting on something right
on some level obviously you've gone over
these ideas like over and over and over
and over again and probably will for a
lifetime right and as you're speaking
them they come to being in your speaking
right such that such that I say
something like oh whoa I've been
immersed I get I just want to appreciate
that the sense of formation that kind of
moves with your speech that I find
myself in I was just going like whoa
especially when you said the thing about
being a product or a conglomeration of
these key people conversations these
birds of because I very much feel the
same way in fact I could I could tell
the story of my life about just simply
walk through those describe those
relationships and you'll end up with me
right right that's exactly right
yes in that in that in and this is this
is one of the things about I I sense
it's kind of like as I'm talking right
now and you really have this quality to
and it this compels me it's like I'm on
one level I'm think I'm about to think
and I'm about to say something right but
this is quality where I'm I'm more
listening like I'm more kind of
listening I don't know to what exactly
what I cuz I I'll find out what I'm
thinking I'll fuckin doubt what I'm and
then there's this the quality of where
on some level I would imagine all of the
the faces of all of those people that
have had I've had just so deep
mentorships with right who mentored me
in many ways
structure that which structure whatever
it is that I'm thinking like there's
this kind of structural element of
thought of where and this is what I
appreciate a lot about what's happening
with YouTube and that these
conversations are available and that
people are interested in them because to
let you know to listen is to is some
thoughts you can only hear in other
words genuinely think by in order to
think them in order to hear them in
order to understand them in order to be
thought by them are so deep that they
require you letting go of something that
you didn't even know you were
presupposing that you stood on that
organized everything mm-hmm in order to
comprehend that thought and that to me
is where listening becomes can be really
deeply transformative right and it's
this kind of yoga of like stepping you
know like that's why I like I think why
I really enjoy philosophy so much
especially people like Heidegger right
because they're always they never
complete they're not they're not up to
finalized sentences right there right
there up to the right of of getting
closer and closer to the mystery that
can't ever be exemplified fully right
right right
in just the process of like it's just
beyond comprehension but there's
something there that I can't I don't
understand it in order to know to be
interested in it but somehow something
shines forth that's great in that yoga
move of like like under what is okay
what is he saying this this thing that
you go through when you really engage in
that kind of relationship or those kinds
of conversations that it's almost like
you're being um it is it's very much
feels like you're being birthed by the
logo
mm-hmm and a big in a big way that's
right that's right it's like there's a
sliver there's a sliver of light that's
sort of emanating through and that that
that that almost disclosed feeling that
you're describing of getting there
getting there getting there but never
yet never yet never yet it's like that
that disclosure is one of the things we
one of what happens when we cultivate
these deeply knowing beholding and
behold in relationships it's that thou
becomes a becomes of becomes a vessel
for for becomes sort of a proxy for that
you know it's like there's a as I'm as
yeah as you as you're speaking about
this especially as you as you're
speaking about sort of the sense of
tending to intending to and and being
dissolved by the act of listening that
somehow there sort of there's a
dissolution of yourself that happens but
then I think in the discourse when
cultivated there's a resolution to the
dissolution right and it's like that
there's a tension between dissolution
and resolution and the resin and both
happen both happen in the course of that
of that that returning to oneself from
from from the passage through that or by
thou that it's again I get keep
returning to this this idea of like of
impregnation right like we're composed
of Val and we key and and and we're
endlessly being pretend by by we I mean
that our knowing our knowing and our
being no right yeah I don't mean it in
an object sense but I mean ourselves as
our knowing and being known is endlessly
produced by these impregnation of vow
and there's a deep circularity and I I
really want to know I really want to
know in a second from you how you think
this how this
how commensurate this is with with with
circling and with some of the the
methods and and and and the the the the
axioms behind circling but that this
this endless production of knowing for
die don't mean production is an
unfortunate word because it sort of
implies it implies a certain materiality
that I don't mean to imply creation
maybe as a by this by this process of
impregnation and then it's an and and
there's this sort of there's this
process in the technique of a
conversation whereby I become though and
so I become who I am to that
and by that becoming I see myself more
by thou and am the more seen by thou and
so there's this like super cess of
uncloaking of persona but for mutual
authentication and then in behind the
persona as it is uncloaked it's almost
as though there's a hollow that sort of
yawns open into that state of revelation
yeah that and that that's and then
there's this collapsing together of the
knower and the being known into the
verbal state meaning a verb verbal state
of knowing right and shift into that
verbal state
you're being shifts into verbal state
and you identify with the process of
knowing by thou right and that's why
it's this deeply collaborative mutual
becoming process and and what you
described I think of Heidegger has been
taken on a walk right the journeying
dimension of those discourses even if
the discourses are happening in wordly
which they can of course right as we
introduct what we have between us this
idea of of journeying with the discourse
that the discourse is not sedentary the
discourse both parties travel in the
discourse but the discourse as a
relation also travels and when you
identify with the traveling of the
relation yeah
it bears you to it bears you into into
it bears you to places that are that are
otherwise unknowable on this idea of
adventuring you know yeah that sense of
really got this sense of you know the
horizon that you can never reach right
yeah it speaks to that which you can
never reach and yet the horizon is what
it tells you like it gives the ground
the horizon ground and so there's
something about when when when we when
win win because there are and perhaps
this is maybe the difference between
something like authentic something like
discourse or dialogue in the kind of the
authentic mode right versus there's
other ways of dialoguing which are more
in the inauthentic mode and I and I
think what maybe what we can start to
put like parse out here a little bit is
that like I think what you're talking
about what we're talking about is this
deep sense in which I'm coming to you
and there's a mutual um there's a mutual
I don't want to say choice but there's
an openness to find myself changed by
the dialogue right right where is
something I think like in authentic
dialogue or will you know kind of what
Heidegger calls I don't I don't talk
right the sense of the ongoing chatter
of just mumbling along you know gossip
and how you doing and and all that stuff
and that's not that's what keeps the
interpretations of the culture going
right is you would say is the movement
of the social practices and
interpretations move through that
discourse inner maintain and that
there's some there's these moments where
you it's they give you think about like
a foliage or like a you know a like a
vine struck
right and then then then something out
of that can pop up and sprout right and
right and in some way sometimes it
sprouts in such a way that it comes back
in and alters whatever one talks about
and the way everyone talks about right
in this area
I'm sure historically long long time
frames that no one could put a
cause-and-effect relationship to right
right
which is right yes yeah right but of
course that and that happens in the span
of the macro that we can't hope to that
we can't hope to digest but it also
happens in the span of the micro within
within the bounds of a single
conversation to that version of that
same process that that I'd like I
thought of fertility you know when you
said you know that that that that
there's the the ground is generative the
discourses jendi the encounter is
generative of something that that that
that emerges as a consequence of the
participants submitting themselves to it
yes yes right and and and yeah it's
that's right yeah that openness to
submission that's right
that openness to submission and I think
it I I think that that difference again
harkens back a little bit to to you know
a sort of a dichotomized relation
between an idolatress relation and a
symbolic relation right the idolatrous
relation is is conceived in thingness
right
to to have or not to have right and and
and this is where sort of boobers idea
of i I vow and and Fromm's idea of sort
of the being and the having modes kind
of interlocked is this idea that we have
to shift ourselves into being
which is a fundamentally symbolic shift
in order that we might play through
ourselves and be played right play I
think as the is the characteristic
behavior of symbolic identification
right because you neither wholly
identify nor know Li dissident nor holy
dis identify right so there's this
you're you're straddling this
interesting bivalent identification and
I think that's what a lot of like really
good games train us to do right I mean
many many people many people have
remarked on this right that's that was
all people like Piaget and Vygotsky
noted right developmentally but this
idea that I think of tabletop games is a
good example right that you're you're
playing a role in service of a story or
interlocutor in service of a discourse
and you neither fully identify with that
role but you know they're fully dis
identified from it either you're playing
it in a very important way and it can
become avowed to you just as any of the
other characters played can be vowed to
you right and so the vow the I avow
reflexively with yourself is deepened
and informed and inextricably bound with
the I though that you strike with other
cells right because in some in some
cases they are they can't be parceled
really right because when the
identification blends in a symbolic
process of knowing there's a sense of
that shared identity that we've been
talking about between the knower and the
known so it's like that's again that
collapsing together whereas in that
idolatrous relation it's something that
you're holding aloft in front of you
ossified opaque right not to be seen
through the um john and conversation
where they're talking right like not to
be free like what is yes what are the
other option is like is not to be seen
through but to be take so as to carry on
that's right to care to simply carry to
be carried on through yeah as opposed to
as opposed to an ingredient you know
that is that is offered up in service of
something altogether new which which I
mean not which isn't dis so
ciated from what entered into the cup
it's not it's not as though these new
these new iterations these new ascendant
iterations more comprehending iterations
of ourselves are dissonant from their
antecedent versions right it's there is
certainly a continuity and I guess
that's what I mean by the resolution
after the dissolution right there is a
totnes there is a continuity which
obviously has to be maintained otherwise
we would probably lose the capacity to
function in any continuous manner but
it's the sense of yeah if the sense of
playing with your identity in such a way
that you are you are that that that it
becomes identical to the process of
beholding and being beholden really oh
I'm really just I'm just I smile like
you know I'm totally excited okay
oh me too guys me too I was gonna ask
you a little bit more more specifically
about circling and and even as I talk I
find myself doing this gesturing like
there's a kinesics temptation just to
start circling with me with my hands
which I'm sure is indicative of
something important
but I've just oh yeah we just liked it
because I mean I've read a little bit on
it I've heard it described by you and
other videos and by other people by
proxy but now that you know we are
actually talking I'm kind of interested
in just based on everything we've been
talking about if how does this speak
like this vernacular that we've been
speaking and how does that translate
into the vernacular of circling both in
practice and in theory I don't know I
just just so curious about that oh god
yeah that's a great question I in fact I
was having this I have this you know
ongoing dialogue we've had a few to like
over text with John yeah yeah he was
asking me he was described it was giving
me a just he told me yeah I love this
the way you described circling I every
time you say it I more of its revealed
to me and I that to me is that as much
that for me anyway
is that that's like that it's heard like
that that it continually discloses is
very much points to the phenomena itself
and I and I reply back to him I think I
said something like you know sometimes I
can't tell if I'm trying to describe
circling or if I'm trying to describe
being sometimes I wonder like what am I
really describing but there is this
quality of that circling I kind of think
of my one of my business partners
Karenna
we've been talking a while now about you
know if we imagine circling as an entity
she said you know I think it's a she and
I'm like exactly she and it's more like
that it makes a lot more sense to me in
a in a in a poetic sense in a figurative
sense of of you could say that in
circling the thing that's honed what
circling has become as a form and
continues to form out of is there's just
the sense of like there are certain
things that reveal her to us and then
there's other things that disclose her
right looking closer in other ways and
on some level it feels like if ler if
the in this in this some way of like
them whatever showed itself to us in the
original kind of thing that happened at
Burning Man with Mike me and my friend
Jerry that just shined forth to us are
like this were like what what we didn't
know what it we didn't know what we were
pointing to what we had just a great um
but on some level I feel like I've been
trying to understand what it is that's
been shining what shine forth that
evening because it keeps yielding more
rot so there is this kind of really
almost in in and John's highlighted this
to cuz he's noticed it seems like the
people who will do circling they end up
talking abusing these very mystical
kinds of almost religious language but
explicitly it's a it's a secular
practice right there's no there's no
like belief claims or anything like that
sure yeah people as they get into it
they start to Havoc's
areas in which they find themselves the
only terms that make sense to describe
their experience and and how they end up
seeing the world through it
are these mystical terms right so
there's just very much about what you've
been talking about about the you know
the the the pregnancy or the birthing or
like eros right bird by what did you say
arrows birds by its by Leo's right yeah
yeah that's right yeah that sense so
it's there's a way in which in a lot of
ways it has a lot to do with this
experience of of on one level it has to
do with intimacy it has to do with
intimacy and I think that one of the
reasons why circling has actually become
very very big very quickly around the
world which is really something when you
think about it that must be so like that
must be such a vertiginous
experience for you to see this to see
this practice that that that yeah that's
or between you and a few other people
like be propelled into this this
international probably people had so
much to do with that right it's like
it's OPI is went beyond jerry and i big
you know big time um in ways it like it
at a certain point it becomes a little
problematic right but but the essence of
it is always in the same which is this
quality of what is it that were what is
it what is it that we're looking at what
is it that we're writing what is this
thing that's being revealed such that
that the presence of it makes me have
thoughts I wouldn't have have
perceptions I wouldn't have makes me
open my heart and ways that I wouldn't
ever have opened that then alters the
way that I perceive and relate with
everything so you could say that you can
say that if you know the the i thou
relationship is like you could say the
fundamental unit right of everything
yeah if he did a yoga around that and
all the machinery and the capacities
that that it takes to do all the asanas
that you do to exercise that machinery
that creates something like genuine
reciprocity intimacy listening deep
listening which I think ultimately
that's the real practice is like a
profound kind of deep deep listening and
how to how to share in a way that self
disclose versus versus accusatory right
undefended to the moment being with what
is which is really the hook the heart of
the practice is just being with what it
it what is as we are together and in
profoundly being with it right right
that has people kind of walk away and
relate to their lives in a way that's
just like you do in a yoga class right
like when you walk out of the yoga class
when you're not thinking about yoga your
baseline is just more open to gravity
and balanced and relational I think a
Siddis of what it takes to relate to
other people are the same capacities it
takes to relate to almost everything
because we're always in a relationship
that's that's beautifully put right
that's exactly right we're always always
in a relationship and everything is a
project it is a project and product of
how that relationship is cast and
situated at the any given point in in
consciousness this idea that you're
you're articulating this like this in in
arable quality about circling that it's
you're like the process of circling is
the process of discovering what circling
is yeah this this is so neat that that
it has a cut well it's like the the
quality it has an inexhaustible quality
to it that it begs you and beckons you
on this ongoing quest that is fulfilling
but unfulfilled right simultaneously
this idea that it winds itself
into territory that is ever disclosing
and always to some partial degree
unknowable and and that even even in the
even and the circling gesture there's a
certain beckoning yes quality to it that
it that it that it urges you forward
towards it like a like a parent walking
backwards as the child learns to walk
you know what I mean come on come on
come on
like that that's sort of the image that
you're conjuring is like circling as a
practice of learning to walk in some
sense learning to know within a certain
mode of the term well and I would say
that a lot of the things that you had
pointed out and appreciated about
qualities that you see in me that I see
in you and experience I just totally
know I was I didn't really talk to many
people until I was like you know twelve
I mean I I don't I've heard you say that
which like just stuns me I mean it's
yeah that's incredible there's this
other personal quality to it for me
where I feel like circling heads
gathered me right and I'm trying to
gather this right there's this crank it
in bright ways how I speak and how I
listen to them that and like a lot of
that is almost indistinguishable from
just being so deeply in these kinds of
dialogues and these kind for actions
with people that it's many ways is is
formed and shaped and drawn out
capacities and brought together
capacities maybe I already had that had
no connection to each other like it
consolidated into this character called
guy that you're seeing right down right
right into the logo sub guy right when
you see the word gather it's like that's
it right though the gathering the the
logos of your of your your your your
particular being oh it's so cool it's so
neat and I was gonna say something I
just completely lost the thread of it
the the
ah that's okay it's gone let go I was I
thought of oh I know I know exactly what
I was gonna say came back when I let it
go
it came back figures right you were you
actually was about something you texted
to me about how this this dialogic
process when when serviced opens us up
to you use the term guard seizures which
I thought was just I thought that was
such a great way of saying it oh yeah um
change in our text yeah yeah in our text
exchange you used to turn God Caesar
sent it and that and and I that I was
that was brought to mind when you talked
about the fact that while circling is a
an ostensibly secular practice people
can't but can't help but describe their
experience in religious terms and that's
of course is that's not surprising at
all because it strikes me even though it
doesn't de nominate as such it strikes
me as a deeply religious practice for
all the reasons that we've talked about
Carl Jung had a head on one of his his
studies one of his houses back in the
day in Switzerland had a quote inscribed
I think it was attributed to her Asmus
but I can't I can't be sure that but it
was a quote above his study that said
called or not God will be present so
this idea that mutual revelation opens
up to the presence of última see right
the sense of ultimate disclosure which
is I think in some sense what we mean
when we invoke the namesake is an
interesting way of understanding some of
the purpose of the practice yeah it is
inspired that we aspire in the process
to be inspired by it in the sense of
that again it catches that breathing
metaphor which I find is so evocative of
intimate encounters that sense of mutual
respiration right and it also helps to
depict
more viscerally what befalls us when we
can't get access to that when we aspire
and can't actually draw breath which is
again this idea of the unrequited love
or the unrequited eros not being able to
gain intersubjective traction with a
Philae a'practice not being properly
embedded communally is this aspiration
without respiration defined by lack so
the idea that that that there isn't
there is a respiring quality to the
circling that avails the presence of the
the presence of Revelation mutual
revelation and and general revelation
and what you said about it opening the
group they opening the participants to
God seizure is is a fascinating way of
putting it I'm Martin Buber who talked
about the the I thou in the ayat I think
said at some points it's something like
you know I thou brings the mind to God
right mother mind is brought to God by
thou and it sounds like it sounds like
in some sense among other things what
the way you're describing circling is
what it's doing is it's it's yeah it's a
okay let's see this where I'm gonna
borrow from Heidegger a little bit I
think it's like a conjugal clearing of
being conjugal clearing of being yeah
it's conjugal meaning together yes yes
yes yes during a being yeah yeah yeah
something like that yeah something like
that
what what about it what about it really
there's there's something about it where
I get the sense in the way that you're
struck by it and the quality of like
your your your interest and fascination
in it in your curiosity I get this sense
that it's almost like tell me if this is
true almost like there's something going
on with what you want your understanding
about circling that is somehow
gathering something in front of you that
you were already thinking about in some
way but then it's one of those things
that you you until that was gathered
that you you didn't even know you were
thinking about it but it was yet yeah
yeah oh you're absolutely you're
absolutely right you're absolutely right
and and I think it has it has accessed
what I think is a persistent and kind of
a long-standing interest that I've had
but you've given it I think you've given
it something of a more tangible shape
and then talking to you and then coming
to learn about this I have yet to do it
I should say I have yet to do it
formally but but I intend to I'm looking
forward to doing but what it what it has
accessed is this again this lingering
this lingering this lingering suspicion
that sort of what we were talking about
before this lingering suspicion that the
enchantment of the world that is often
and now unavailable to us because we've
lost the symbolic grammar to allocute it
properly that sense of being imbued with
spirit mutually imbued with spirit is
present in those most intimate and this
most disclosing conversations in a way
that it is absent in almost for me most
of the remainder of life's habits and
you know that's really part of what I
mean when I say I couldn't I could I
could I feel composed of meaningful
conversations like I I mean it
thoroughly
because when I think back you know a
handful or more perhaps at this point
it's more than a handful but but you
know those conversations take on this
yeah take they take on this enchanted
quality such that you know oh they seem
to be somehow blessed right and time
which is usually such a despot in our
lives even time starts to soar slow
to linger on them and they take on again
they took on this sense of pregnancy as
though there's a recreation of the self
through them like they take on such
importance and and I've been impressed
by how prominently they have figured for
me how prominently they have figured in
my my reflexive understanding of myself
my understanding of other people my
understanding of what what activities
are truly meaningful and worthwhile and
so that I think that natural interest
and that now that educated interest in
the in the in the in the potential of
meaningfully cultivated discourse yeah
something that now I think is turning
from a sort of a latent observation or
sort of a nascent interest into
something that I feel more and more
compelled to practice and more and more
compelled to materialize in a way that I
can be perhaps more a little bit more
directly in inquisitive about you know
with it if that if that makes any sense
for a lot of sense the ones this makes a
lot of sense of especially in it in the
way that well a couple things like a
couple things I got the same feeling
that when you when you point it to this
in this conversation that when you
talked about the dying star of
Christianity that was just that when you
when you said that I thought about that
in the way look mostly the felt sense of
what was communicated in what you said
along with what you said but the felt
sense just jiggled something in me for
still is that just jiggled again when
you talked about it this this sense of
that oh actually it's one of what I
heard you say is one of the few places
in the world right that still you could
be sued rock and birds in in mutually
birthed in a way that you couldn't
predict
ahead of time right yes exactly like
there's a there's a way in which you
keep that that none of your propositions
can deny the experience that you just
had cuz it there's so few places left in
the world that have that kind of God
sees your potential right yes yes
that presence that sense of presence
that's not simply your presence and not
simply the presence of the person
opposite you but a greater sense of
presence like a cosmic presence right
and I think that's speaks to this idea
of the the God seizure right is that you
are you are you are Sean and there is a
shining through the conversation that it
takes on a kind of important so kind of
significance that is beyond you that you
know that that like you will spend a
great deal of time trying to then grow
into like the thing that's happening now
yeah like the thing that's happening now
yeah exactly
you said that beyond you and you wanting
you that right yeah yeah yeah I thought
I was just like yeah there is a beyond
this there is something I know where
there totally is and and so impressive
is it that again when I when I think
back to my own my own memories and the
way that my time and sense of narrative
has been marked and divided into its
respective chapters that those
conversations those discourses and the
intimacy of those discourses are more
constitutive of Who I am now then the
some of the most exotic experiences you
know like you know the most of the group
that whatever accomplishments are feet
sore or adventures you know like yeah I
mean I've been lucky enough to be in
some very beautiful places and to see
some some wondrous things and
and I've you know that but but somehow
somehow those quiet intimate revelatory
conversations are more significant than
cumulatively than than anything that
could be called adventurous or exotic at
face value and I then that and and I
think coming to recognize that honestly
you know seeing that for what it is and
and and and well and acknowledging it I
think it's for me is significant because
it's sort of like it's identifying
something about this is sacred and I
mean that in the full technical proper
sense of the term they are sacred okay
why are they sacred right what about why
you know what what is what is what is
what is what is engendered by these
conversations that is otherwise
otherwise is lacking in much of the rest
of life yeah so I think that's why
you're right you intuited it precisely
but that's why this is circling and the
way you've described it and the way that
I've heard it described up to now seems
to presume seems to presume what I have
taken time to realize which is that
there is something about the
authenticating experience of being so
known to oneself in the care of being
beholden by others that that imbues a a
realization of the sacred in a way that
we seldom have access to and the
president as I I just felt it is really
not-it's natural slowing and deepening
of the pace and I felt as much and I and
I was I was I found myself listening to
that as at the same that the the cadence
and the pace
in the slow earnest and the stillness I
kind of felt consolidated in listening
to you I feel so much more closer into
my skin right and closer to you at the
same time just in that just the net
what-what just I think what I heard and
slowness was something more showed
itself in the words that you said hmm
and in one of the things that struck me
was when he said he kind of made a
distinction between yeah it's taken
something to recognize that it's these
it's been these sometimes quiet yet deep
moments of intimacy with another right
where I come to I come to knowledge of
myself in in the care of the other right
in ways that that although I've lived a
really cruel life there's been a lot of
really great experiences I've I've I've
come to be honest was I've had to be
honest with myself about that hmm I
sensed it I sensed a journey yes yes
like a personal journey like a like I
sense apart like a personal 'no sin your
own life in and just making that
distinction I felt it yeah way to go say
more so for you're so perceptive I love
the way you do that it's it's great yes
yeah you're quite right anyway right
yeah it feels like I'm getting your
world I think so yeah yeah I mean I
think you were disposed to get it at the
outset but I think that yeah you have a
you have an uncanny knack for for being
able to cotton on to to to the like your
attention to the cadence of speech and
all you know you have to I mean I
understand this is this is I can see
easily how readily you nurture you
nurture conversation and that you can
fan
it in the right way or you can dim it in
the right way there's a clearly a deaf
deafness of hand that you have with with
with guiding the process and noticing
and pronouncing certain things for for
that that that that that beg attention
but yeah I I hate
that's what circling I think as a
practice ongoingly being being available
to notice those moments that shine forth
they're sometimes really quiet but also
but in as you said I love the way that
you put this coming to heal myself in
another in the presence of care that
part the care is is that's the thing I'm
more than anything that I think
practicing circling has been a practice
of giving myself over to deep care in
come being of care at a genuine way
because I think it's only like it was
because I thought as we've been having
this conversation I just found myself
caring about you I'm like so it's like
the genuine likewise me and there's like
um what you're mattering to me and I'm
it's almost in just what I'm noticing is
indistinguishable from caring about you
mmm-hmm as it's happening so noticing
different things is all about like seems
to presuppose like just a deep care
that's cultivated in me for sure yet
arising spontaneously with you right
right right
that's really I would say is the hand
right is the high yeah and some kind of
primordial care right right that's yeah
you mentioning that the hand actually
and it reminds me of something I think
you said in your conversation with Paul
you were talking about the evolved
relationship between our hands and motor
functions and our frontal lobes which
was
was a neat connection and and I it
actually that was brought to mind a few
weeks ago I was thinking about you is
that a wedding a couple of weeks ago a
friend's wedding and I was I was I was
at the ceremony not partaking him a bit
but watching it partaking it was by
watching it and there was a an
interesting little gesture that is
sometimes officiated at weddings but not
always and and and the officiate asks
the the bride and the groom to lock
hands for one to take the other's hands
and then sort of went on at some length
about about how they're they're
interlocking hands symbolize their
mutual commitment and and there's the
potential of their life together now
we're so accustomed to seeing this right
that is so easy to glance right over it
and to attend to think it commonplace
but I was thinking about it in more
detail but I was paying more attention
to the symbolic language of the ceremony
than I think I usually do and again your
comment about this sort of top of mind
the significance of that gesture that
haptic gesture of the mutual clasping of
the hands again and that to me that
struck me in that moment in a way that
it hasn't it never had before
then the interlocking hands hmm
and again having the I vow relation in
mind when I say this that the
interlocking hands is perhaps the most
the most elegant expression of Phi Lea
and the overlay of Phi Lea over arrows
that I could conceive of John and I
often talk about the kiss as being sort
of a sort of a canonical symbolic
expression of Eros and it's a very
powerful symbol the kiss and it's this
this just drive for mergence right and
it's an enacted for merchants that is
instantiated by the act of the kiss but
there's something about the interlocking
hand
that represented and affected what was
also happening more broadly in the
ceremony which is that eros is embedded
within Philae a-- and that that phi lea
is actually its it closed it literally
not literally of course but I wish I had
a better word for it but really
symbolically encloses the couple because
they are it now embedded with infant
within family right so at the center
there's this there's this eros that is
that is that is sort of that is
transformed into a mutual conformity
right a mutual being of identification
and a mutual becoming and of course the
the hands are in many ways more
interesting symbolic conveyance of that
then the kiss because the hands come
with all kinds of dexterity and creative
power and potential that the kiss just
can't quite match right so there's
something in the in the variability of
of the hands and their multitude of
functions their multitude of creative
potential that couches the eros within
that file eeeh and then around the
couple they are then inculcated by this
familial gathering and I your into your
discussion with Paul I think Paul said
something which I thought was also just
beautifully put which is that the
sacrament of the wedding and that's
exactly what I mean a sacrament is a
symbolic transmutation Rite of sorts and
the sacrament of the wedding is the
process of making a family member from a
non family member right growing a person
by virtue of that person being known now
and so there was something about the
clasping of the hands right the the
education of the erotic instinct by the
by the Philae de and the way that was
also synchronously the way that was all
modelled by the way that the ceremony is
organized right and their ring it hands
to right at this point they have rings
on them which is also significant for
the same reason and then you know and it
comes back to this idea of the
arrangement of loves that the perception
that the sort of the processional
ceremony of a wedding is a ritual way of
symbolically arranging our loves such
that they fall mutually reinforcing into
the right order right the eros enveloped
within philia that molds it and figures
it and end and graduates it and then of
course from that just as the pregnancy
yields the birth there is this a gothic
creation of persons creation of family
as a consequence of that Wow and so it
was like I had this I was sitting on
this wedding I've been to so many
weddings and I'm sitting there and for
the first time and I'd thought about
this I mean John lectures a little bit
on this boat to some of these symbols
too and and it's not you know what cell
didn't wasn't produced from nothing but
it was the first time I actually sat in
a wedding taken all of the sin and
realized that there was this incredibly
elegant deeply penetrating symbolic
order this procession this concerto of
Love's that were ringing you know in a
certain formation and that that
formation was about the the creation of
persons in the knowing of persons and in
the mutual conformity of knowing
so that was today and anyway this was
much of this was precipitated by your
comment about that about the hands and
about our brains and the way that you
know ionic gestures carrouges acted into
you know some of the functions that
allow us to symbolize in the first place
and so there's this deep deep deep
connection right between the clasping of
hands and the function of hands and this
capacity that we have to do that
but it all just sort of fell into this
very elegant place for me before my eyes
in a way that I don't think I had
noticed it before
and anyway III I had a I really I wanted
to relate even if
we meditated way I wanted to relay that
to you because you your your what you
said in that conversation figured very
very prominently and that series of
thoughts that unfolded on that
particular day oh wow
see it right there so so right there so
there's a way in which an example of a
of a of a penetration of each other
right of like something I said in the
video right that somehow was connected
to you getting this wedding and seeing
it another way that we're then now
talking about it right that was based on
a conversation that you were listening
to with somebody else that see this is
this is that invisible movement of what
I'm really interested in and in some way
we will never quite know exactly just
like well the fact of language what who
knows who the inventor that was right
like it's not right you do it right a
letting go of it but a way that it just
brings its there's something about these
dialogues that is bringing something
forward in a way that's having I know
it's a noticing it's having me have even
more reverence for it and more like you
said humility and one was less like in
deep humility yeah by virtue of the
structure of it and in my second time
like a breadth of the possible scope
right that a place where technology
doesn't lead to further and frame it but
maybe that's right leads to the
appreciation and the cult the
cultivation of something beyond frames
right that's right that's right and I
was into there was this moment where I
was just like I looked down and I looked
at my wedding ring and I thought I I i
was also listening to my because my wife
and I got married about nine ten months
months
it's really that recently been whoa
I've been we've been with each other for
a long time they're gonna be lucky years
I think eight or nine years with the was
like a year and a half in between right
there and it's been I have been so
struck actually by how totally
transformed I feel by being wedded
that's cool idea I thought I mean mostly
I just thought it was formality right
does that yeah do and but to find myself
in this ritual rebel fighting that feels
alive in it right I think how I
described it yesterday
it's as if it felt like being married
felt like it took the right thing and
put it in there in this the right thing
in the center of the medulla and then ha
once it's is slipped in it did like an
ontological chiropractic just adjust
haha cuz my relationship to the world is
different like how I feel about right it
might you know the world wedded that's
like you yeah it's like wedded wedded
becomes of a way of knowing you know
through your wedded miss right something
like that yeah yeah and that's cool
there's kind of a way in which it
somehow present in with both of us where
we're having conversations that it she
even said the other day she's like wow
we just made it through that
conversation that wouldn't have happened
before right huh and then she said
something really telling she's like I
think our relationship our marriage is
officially more mature than us is it
there is this quality of that there's
something that actually I I do feel like
it it having right being held by
something that's so obviously deeper
more pointing to something more
greater then it has me restructure and
even I think she would say restructure
all the way down to how we perceive what
is an important right right it's it's uh
so as you're talking about that I know I
just it's like it sounds like if I'm
borrowing this very term that's that's
course steeped in in Christian sacrament
but I'm doing so deliberately it sounds
to me like what you're describing is
that the wedding the the the ritual of
marriage was like a transubstantiation
of your relationships yeah that's kind
of what it sounds like yes yes
absolutely and in some ways it
consolidated what was already coming to
form right right consummated it like in
the sense of like in the sense of like
that the perfect of perfecting the
perfecting the the yeah yeah yeah right
right
and like now I'm I never thought I never
thought I would find myself wanting to
have more children that at forty seven
right but I'm I'm like I want all of
them right I'm just doing its I might
wanting things that I didn't want things
are currently right there very
differently in what's interesting is is
is there something about being not of
that world right cuz I never had like I
never had like my you know I come from a
background was not stable at all he's
like lots of lots of addiction and all
kinds of stuff right so right not like I
had something like secure attachment so
right in anyways what I feel like and
some of this is just simply I I kind of
find myself coming into this what I
think happens in many ways culturally
well I don't know anymore culturally but
like historically the marriage in all
the symbolic all the things that you
pointed to right the the plumbing of
that the the impact of that because I
don't expect it or I didn't anticipate
it it's a
whirring to me like I'm some little I'm
just talking about having conservative
values but it's that but like on some
level like ever just is kind of given to
some you could say conservative values
or something like that yeah experiencing
it like this is profound I'm finding
love being different and so they're
saying wow everything that you just said
in the depth of what you said right and
the personal felt quality of the of
imagining you right imagining the
wedding finding itself in you're
listening right in your eyes with this
kind of depth of understanding where I
felt the almost like the wedding spoke
right through my wedding ring and like
wow which is the function of the symbol
is for it to speak yes yes to speak
endlessly through your wedding ring
yes the Warrens symbol the motioning of
the worn symbol is the endless
repetition the recreation of that
ceremony of that sacrament yeah it's
reproductions in you and thank you for
being in my wedding my pleasure thank
you for sharing your wedding with me and
that's I am that's so neat the meat is
indeed doesn't even it's it's moving
it's moving to me yeah really is it
really really is moving for me to hear
that I was thinking to myself on this
particular day that I attended this
wedding I was thinking to myself like
weddings did not when I was younger
weddings did not get to me you know I I
looked forward to the the food and the
dancing and you know maybe the open bar
but I didn't I I didn't really feel I
it's only recently that I that I've find
myself moved by by weddings in this way
and and when I started to really
contemplate it and and try and
understand it I mean it's so obvious of
course now it's so obvious because that
the symbolic depth of that that ritual
like it's and and that's why you know I
and I know that when we live in a world
now where
where it's dismissed out of hand fairly
often and you know as people have their
people have their apprehensions and
their reasons and and I'm and I'm always
because of because of my reverence for
symbolic grammar and the archetypal
proxies for that grammar right in our
familial the vessels of our familial
connections right mother and father I
got a brother-sister fight Leah right
husband wife lover error Ross the way
the wedding simply the way the wedding
integrates these into a concert is so
moving and of course it's moving because
these these connections are in most to
us how could it not be but I find that
the significance of that ritual because
it's been I think tinged with
apprehensions related to you know
religious participation writ large is
dismissed out of hand very often as
being a pro forma exercise as you say
and and I can't speak with any authority
on it because I've never been never been
married and so I can't no I can't know
in my bones that transformation but
looking out at it that suspicion has
lived it within me increasingly over the
course of time but there is something
about the symbolic transmutation that
changes the figuration of that
relationship it must it must these
symbols even though our relation to
these semiotic proxies these familial
connections has initiated a little bit
over time and even though it's
attenuated you know because our symbolic
grammar has attenuated there's enough
still there to move us
there certainly and are still there to
move me and hearing you describe it in
such a deeply and beautiful visceral way
is is it's it's moving for its own sake
but it's also moving for its for the way
it informs this suspicion that I've had
about what what a wedding does to people
and what comparable rituals do to people
right it's not just a wedding Philo
Sophia has a similarly transformative
quality insofar as right the
relationship between eros and
Leigha right in in in a different in a
very different setting in a very
different context yeah yeah fascinating
totally i best thank you for sharing
that with me i really thank you
yeah yeah absolutely it's really great
sharing with you that the sense of when
he one of the things you talked about
with with paul to that really struck
struck me and it kind of i think it
figures here is we're talking is um this
sense in which you you talk about like
you know what i although i haven't been
I grew up Catholic I didn't realize how
Catholic I actually was instantly
starting to get older and you see it you
recognize it coming out there's some
sense in ways that you realize like oh
you recognize as you get older right um
I don't know if it's if you see it and
it wasn't there before or if you just
recognize it or something like that but
there was a couple levels that I
appreciated on it was one one is two is
two that would really be something to
recognize that like I got this sense
that it's a deep recognition but it's
like comes from the ground floor in some
way that was the sense but also this it
also pointed me and I think I even can't
texted John about this I was like oh
yeah this I want to remember this
because it's it seems to point to
something where like the place or the
level or the loci of where something
like religion actually lives right the
level of depth if not being this
conscious debate about what's true or
not true but it right yeah thing that
organizes one that can one can be
without knowing it and then find out
right that's right that's right
that it is something that is isn't true
or false but rather realized or
unrealized and indict I I just had this
sense I was wondering just being moved
by
octave one being at a wedding and being
newly struck by a wedding in it coming
together and remembering that revering
that and then sharing about the impact
of me sharing about your wedding
and be so moved by it that your personal
responsiveness right and being breathed
in a way or obstructed by that is that
speaking to what something what you mean
when you say oh I didn't realize how
Catholic I am yes yes yes absolutely
absolutely because I think part of what
I meant by that is I started to notice
my response to being symbolically
provoked by certain demonstrative
rituals or certain narratives you know I
could feel myself becoming provoked by
revisiting the site of symbols that I
had perhaps known as a kid or at a
younger age but finding them vivid in a
way that I had for seeing them at a
different level of resolution so there
was that there's I feel symbolically
provoked more and more frequently by the
by Vivi by the way in which by the by
the especially by the motions of of the
of the sagacious figures right like I
mean being like like Christ and Socrates
I those those move me and I think much
of what much of what estranged me from
it when I was younger and still
estranges me from
certain kinds of participation is that
idolatrous quality that I was describing
of our sociability which i think is also
true of the way that religious knowing
has been miss clasped and placed unduly
into object taxonomies you know it has
been it has been subject to a number of
of category mistakes I think and this
has it has been misplaced and I think
that gets to what you were saying about
the fact that it's not here it's it's
here and well it's you know and you know
what I mean when I swen I when I make
those gestures and and it's like we've
been uh I'm trying to get we it's like
I've realized that sort of like an
adolescent mists can mistake his father
for his friend that kind of category
mistake like I've been looking across at
this rather than up at it
Oh interesting yeah that it is
constitutive of me I am composed of
religious compounds you know that that
that act through me in care of me and in
care of my relations that that I have
but to realize in order for them to
espouse their proper significance I this
brings to mind I heard there's a there's
a little excerpt of a poem from WH Auden
that I heard once that like just blew me
back because it articulated this so
succinctly and it's it could go
something like this where we are lived
by the powers we pretend to understand
they arrange our loves it is they who
direct at the end the enemy bullet the
sickness or even our hand this idea of
being lived just as you say being
bereaved and the end this ideas where I
get to say of arranging our loves right
that that that the the
sacramental ordering of symbols is the
sacramental ordering of love's right
interest to a configuration that avails
us and avails our knowing and being
known that I feel myself increasing
increasingly lived by an orientation
that I have come to listen to and abide
more and more and more and with less
self-consciousness and with more
vulnerability and with with fewer with
fewer with fewer sort of being able to
sidestep some of the apprehensions that
come with adolescence and and and the
ego centrism that comes with a lot of
that though the fear of maintaining
oneself and one's brand you know once I
was able to get you know that mean
that's an ongoing project in some sense
but I think once I was able to get over
myself to get over this idea of being
fixed in a fixed in a certain of having
my nature fixed in a certain way hmm
understood myself as a project of
unveiling as a project of realization
then I gave myself license to allow
things that were of a more unconscious
valence to to come forth and to shine
through and part of that is just as we
were talking about cultivating
relationships that have a way of being
incisive just like you were doing with
me earlier by noticing things that
perhaps I might not have noticed of
myself and of course I've done tried to
do that provide the same kind of the
same kind of service obviously for other
people but I think that's one thing we
do to eat with for with to with for each
other is we provide that service of
helping to to pronounce things about one
another that we see through and that go
unseen by us
and so I think cultivating relationships
like the one I had with John I mean it
was John it was John's I think you had a
similar experience I think I remember
you saying this it was John's discussion
his exegesis of Agape yeah way back when
I first met him you know whenever that
would 10:10 almost 10 years ago now that
like I think took a lot of this this
this this dormant attachment these
constitutive compounds right that
composed my my the gut of my religious
Creed elections mm-hmm they all just
came bubbling up like they just came
bursting out like that you know cuz it
was all of a sudden because the grammar
was there right the symbolic grammar was
communicated properly and of course it
was a perfect match
for those those those those sort of
archetypal convictions that for a long
time lay unspoken because they couldn't
be spoke they had to be spoken and heard
and spoken by the proper the proper
grammar yeah and that's one thing that
these loves give us and the symbols for
these loves give us as they give us the
grammar to be able to inflict those
inward convictions that otherwise will
inevitably appear you know will appear
under under other under you know yes in
other net with other names right though
they'll surface with other names and and
but if they're spoken to properly if
they're called out properly they will
take their authentic form I think and so
that's what I think a great teacher does
of course Jonas is my canonical example
of that that's what good pedagogy does I
think good religious and philosophic
pedagogy people is it is it provides the
grammar to figure our how well to
arrange our loves I
I'd like to take what we what we already
know to be true and to allocute it and
to to give it its proper geometry to
finesse it and yeah and so and and I
think that's that's really what I think
that that's what kind of there are there
have been a few instances like that
where there has been an awakening of an
awakening of realization about what I I
I named lessly knew to be true or to be
real it's probably a better way of
saying it huh but certainly meeting John
was was probably chief among them yeah
sorry I don't know if that answered your
question at all I just sort of meandered
but I guess that's okay I guess that's
what we're doing quiet like I'm enjoying
well one of the things that really
struck me about what you're saying was
that it was that something as you
started to come to know yourself less as
a thing right as a ago that was fixed
and he started to awaken to that you're
a process of transformation really that
there was something at a certain point
you started to look at in some ways
little Indus symbols that had you grew
up with let me they shine forth to you
you were able to see them and and in
them there was something it sounds like
it undone it puts skin on the ghost of
these inner yes right like beautiful
beautiful way of putting it yes right
and yes but what's interesting to me
about this is what I feel traveling
along with you in as you're speaking
this and as this has been coming to you
the atmosphere of it is that there's
this
being important it seems about about it
that what was all when he put the skin
on the ghost
there was the recognition of that oh wow
there's a I'm kind of made for this on
some level yeah but there was also the
recognition seems implied in the
atmosphere of the of the insight is what
I'm hearing is that I hadn't seen it
like that like that got disclosed as
well I would imagine in this I'm looking
through the most familiar thing I'm
looking at the cross or whatever right
and then yeah yeah precisely
oh whoa like there it is
right yeah yeah able to see it was able
to reach you in some way that's right
and it's also this I think part of I
didn't here's the Alethea part I would
imagine which is the scien
I I thought about this you know the
event of unconcealed it right yes yes I
always when I would for years I just
assumed that when Alethea the the lake
of forgetfulness right so lethea
forgetfulness oh it was about what's
revealed but but actually know what's
revealed is concealment
yes won't miss yes yes holiday of that
echoing of that in what you're talking
about of just seeing cuz what the mood
of it feels something like it revealed
and feel exactly exactly exactly it in
and in and the to the to the to the
hiding to Heidegger son concealment
I would also pair Plato's recollection
because for me it was also it was a it
was that it was the the realization of
affinity the realization the reverence
for the symbol was the realization of
affinity with it that there's that they
were mute I was mutually informed by it
and was and was and was known by it just
as I I could then
it I it was like I realized how much of
it was already was already in behind
much of my experience was already
creative of so much of you know who who
and what I was that it was a it was a
it's a revelation of parentage in a
sense that's right it's a revelation of
parentage it's revelation of origin and
fundamental Constitution it's like I'm I
made of this I'm moved by this because
I'm made of this in some sense right so
there's a there's something like a
familiar and again I mean this
symbolically but that means I mean it as
real there is something like a familial
reunion about returning to those symbols
there's that there's a returning home
there's a sense of returning to origin
not in some kind of romantic
you know sense but but a realization of
fundament of the the realization of like
the ground of my being in some sense
bottoms out at these symbols and I and
that's just like and they they tell me
that you know they just said they I just
it's it's just an intuition of the
encounter that that is true and I
suspect that that's true of us in our
respective you know in our in our
respective in our respective clothing
that is true of us all generally you
know we are we're mermaid were composed
by these symbols right we have been for
a very very very very long time and for
me having a Catholic background which I
think I think I said DePaul was kind of
it was I'm glad to have had it because
it it it sewed a lot of religious
vocabulary and a certain amount of
biblical literacy not near enough but
enough that when then I rien countered
it in
hands of more adroit pedagogy later in
life I could start to make match you
know I could I could start to yeah I
could start to make match with it and it
you know so it would so yeah but it was
the it was the revelation of the it was
the it was the realization of of being
of being constituted by these symbolic
compounds and then encountering them was
encountering myself right right right
right cuz that's what they do they
encounter yeah
yourself right you encounter yourself in
them and through them because in playing
them through you are you're you are so
you are so you are so birthed as it were
so they had this idea of this idea of
recollection this idea of being being
pronounced by I think I'm attending it
in some sense that's what's that's
what's intimated by this idea of the
divine double right or maybe if I was to
return to that metaphor though you know
that that dying star it's that the nor
the dying star has correspondent embers
within each of us right and and it's
without but it's also within its again
it's it's drawn by relation it's cast
within us in relation always there's
always a tension like sentence expensive
it's some point record with the
perception say this what I may see the
here you see it's not like you thought
of something it's more like you saw
something like you're looking at and
it's it has this quality of being
impressed like literally a quest
impregnated with it but then there's
this quality of
two of the earth being the birth being
this recognition of this is what what
has impregnated me is what I've been of
the whole time that yes yes yes exactly
exactly exactly so it's a I mean it is a
in some sense it is a self impregnation
I think hair could go ahead a metaphor
like that where he talked to like this
which sounds you know it sounds egoistic
but of course it's not because it's only
egoistic of what we mean by the self is
that is that stunted object right yeah
but but of course it's not what we mean
by the self is this this processional
this procession will be coming and and
that and and taken taken in that
definition that's exactly what it is it
is self it is self impregnation and and
and self and sand yeah the self
impregnation and rebirthing and and and
then the idea that it happens the idea
that it happens in the care of vow as
we've been saying is also crucial to all
of this crucial to the matter because
the symbol is thou right right this is
right so yeah when we start to sort of
parcel this the the symbols more
specifically it gets difficult to unpack
without without it gets difficult to
parcel in in in in its grains but I
think that that the I think that's right
I think it's like it's almost like it's
difficult the most parcel is itself
revealing yeah fuck it bucks a certain
in books a certain a certain a certain
kind of examination yeah it has to be
known in such a way and not known in
others right it's difficult but
hopefully well it's just in some ways
you know I as we're talking about this
I'm thinking about just
you know what if we really look at the
structure of a conversation taken
seriously
an authentic conversation yeah and we
think of this it just I feel like a
something deep rumble in me like like in
some way I just I can feel this sense of
like oh yeah all those moments with all
those people like all the moments of
getting somebody's world and feeling
everything Jake and mutually and all
those moments we've had this is getting
right at the the structure of those
moments in a very big way that's having
me start to think about what we started
talking about right at the beginning
what are we doing when we were like yeah
yeah well screens you know there's
something deeply firm you netiq ha yes
about this yes that's a guess that's
exactly right
that sense of where what what's doing
the talking what we're talking about is
what what's doing the talking that sense
of where substance is yeah yeah yeah
what we're talking about what we're
talking about is do is what's doing the
talking
I like that what we're talking about is
what's doing the talking and then there
being where we are being we are being
talked just as we're angry ourselves
being talked by the conversation and
then not yes yes yes because exactly
because the conversation the relation of
the conversation is like an entity unto
itself right and and it's the it's it's
the relation that becomes the symbol and
I think that's actually what we mean
when we say someone is a symbol I don't
think that's quite right I think what we
really mean is it's the I though that is
the symbol it's the pairing it's the
it's the fight it's the erotic and Phi
Lea pairing of the relation that is the
symbol itself that entity of that
relation that synthesis I call this a
synthesis of spirit is really what we
mean by the symbol the evolving project
yes all right that's the that's the
projected that's what that's what is
projected is the relation yeah and that
relation becomes us as we become that
relation dad seems like that seems worth
going to go I think so that's dope
I actually have to I completely lost
track exam I asked it's okay so did I oh
no it's all right I got a jet too so
good I just really this conversation
really really impacted me deeply lady to
guy you're just that whole thing they
were talking about just wreck the
recognition of your own constituent what
you're constituted by and I feel that
deep Constitution in you in a very very
articulate genuine personal way that's
really stunning so I just I feel I have
many ways I feel shaped by this
conversation I know it's gonna be it's
gonna be I'm gonna be walking with it
thank you guy thank you guy and I have
to say like I'm not you know I have not
been inclined I mean it's it occurs to
me now that I've only just met you it
doesn't feel like that at all I've been
I've been disinclined to entrust many
people and many conversations with this
kind of intimacy but but but but you you
you begged that confidence and that
trust implicitly in in everything you
say and do and so I'm so I'm so grateful
to have had the chance to chat with you
I hope we can chat again love to oh yeah
it guaranteed you're not getting away
alright alright okay thank you thanks
guys okay