[Music]
you
[Music]
welcome back to awakening from the
meaning crisis this is episode 26 last
time we took a look at what's happening
in Germany in the period post Hegel
postmarks post Nietzsche and we took a
look at the rise of the pseudo religious
ideologies and of the various other
cultural undercurrents and threads and
processes of transformation that were
gathered together in Germany and then
exacerbated and ignited if I'll if
you'll allow me a volatile metaphor by
Germany's terrific defeat in the terror
the that was World War one and the
impact this had on Germany and how all
of this all of these features that we
saw at work in Germany and in the
meeting crisis get spun in Hitler's
autodidactic myopia into a gnostic
nightmare a titanic pseudo religious
ideology and how the two great pseudo
religious ideologies of Nazism and
Marxism at least the Stalin and the
Stalinist version in the Soviet Union
come to Titanic blows and the Eastern
Front at the Battle of Kursk and then I
pointed out that this and then the
ideological battle political ideological
battles of the Cold War and thereafter
have left us deeply traumatized we place
no faith in pseudo religious ideologies
utopian visions to solve the meeting
crisis at least many of us don't we do
not see ourselves as capable of the
nostalgic return to religion somehow
pretending that all of this history
all the science can be ignored in a kind
of fundamentalism and please note that
I'm not equated all religion with
fundamentalism instead we find ourselves
in the middle in between these and we're
trapped we can't go back and we can't do
a secular alternative to religion and
yet we need something that will
systematically create psycho
technologies that transform
consciousness cognition character and
culture in a way that religions have if
we're going to address the meaning
crisis and in fact the Metta crisis that
we're confronting right now in the world
today and so we're caught in this
situation and we pursue either various
radicalism 's and i critiqued the idea
that the meaning crisis should be
understood or we should attempt to solve
it by the clash or through the clash by
means of the clash of political
ideologies that that is to fundamentally
miss frame it because if you remember
kirkegaard and Marx and Schopenhauer all
in their different ways and in ways that
we can criticize are nevertheless
pointing to the fact that the
participatory in perspective of knowing
that is so crucial to responding to and
loss as a meaning and regenerating
meaning has been ignored by Hegel so we
can't do this politically it doesn't
mean the politics is irrelevant but it
means that framing and formulating the
problem at the political level is too
radically miss frame it and miss
formulate it and then I propose to you
that instead we turn to an alternative
way of trying to reformulate the problem
that we try and get a scientific
understanding as best we can the meaning
machinery
this machinery that we prospectively
participate within we don't just simply
I'll often say meaning-making but as
I'll argue we don't just we don't make
meaning the way the romantics said
neither we do we just receive meaning
from the world the way the empiricists
and the Enlightenment argued right we're
gonna see that it's neither one of those
that's another dichotomy that we have to
transcend but nevertheless let's look at
this machinery the machinery of meaning
realization what are the cognitive
processes at work within it and I
propose that we do that from a
scientific worldview precisely because
at least from a scientific point of view
precisely because we need that to
complement the historical analysis and
because the scientific worldview is part
of the problem of the meaning crisis
itself so I propose we take a look at
the science of cognition and that means
that we take a look at cognitive science
I am a cognitive scientist
professionally but as I said from the
very beginning of this series I'm
offering you a particular interpretation
of how to do cognitive science not
everybody in cognitive science would
agree with me but I think it is viable
and respectable version of cognitive
science that can be argued for what is
that idea is the idea that cognitive
science is born out of a particular way
in which the scientific study of mine is
unfolded and it ends as I indicated last
time it's a way that has actually
contributed significantly to a version
of the meaning crisis that is deeply
personal deeply into the very guts of
our minds and bodies all right and this
has to do with the idea that this term
has now become equivocal and we'll come
back to that in a minute because we
actually are talking about different
things or at least different levels of
the reality of mind
with different disciplines different
disciplines that use different
vocabularies different theoretical
styles of argumentation different means
of measuring phenomena different ways of
gathering evidence so we have the brain
that's being talked about by the
neuroscientist you know talk about
patterns of neural activity using fMRI
etc we talked about that and then we
have a totally different level at which
we're understanding intelligence the
mind in terms of information processing
especially when we're in the project not
of measuring brains but of trying to
make machines that are instances of mind
not just simulations but bonafide
instances of right and this is the
project of artificial general
intelligence projects like machine
learning etc and of course they talk
about different things they don't talk
about neurons they might talk about
neural networks but those aren't the
same thing
importantly all right they'll talk about
algorithms heuristics you know all that
sort of stuff very and they don't you
know use that from our eyes they
actually make the machines and processes
different ontology different methodology
etc then we of course we have
understanding - behavior and that's
psychology and here we talk about things
like working memory and problem solving
decision making and we and we do
experimentation on human beings and
statistical analysis again different
ontology different theoretical
vocabulary different methods of studying
the phenomenon of different ways of
presenting evidence right and we noted
throughout that there are attempts to
create hybrids between the various
disciplines so these are the levels of
reality here and these are the
disciplines here right because above
this as we said we have language because
of the tremendously important and
special role that language plays with
respect
to being a medium for mind and being a
way of communicating mind and of course
here we have linguistics and we might
get psycho linguistics to try and bridge
between them right but nevertheless in
linguistics we're talking about things
like you know sentence structures and
rules of transformation and we're
gathering different kinds of evidence
etc and then the networking of minds and
brains together through language and
behavior as culture and that studied by
anthropology and that has a very
different method this really emphasizes
the perspectival and the participatory
so you do participant observation you
write ethnographies right and of course
that helps to give one of the advantages
of science it helps to formulate you
know and specialize people so they can
get much more precise analysis and so
this is a good thing I'm not trying to
in any way despise this but it is
problematic in that it carries with it
first of all it fragments us well this
term mine has now become equivocal what
are we talking about when we're talking
about our mind and and related
constructs like our self so let's
remember what equivocation is
equivocation is when you fall into
confusion precisely because you do not
keep track of the meaning of your terms
so here's one of my favorites right so
nothing is better then long life and
happiness kind of something that you get
in Star Trek right great and then I can
say to you a peanut butter and jelly
sandwich is better than nothing
okay so nothing is better than long life
and happiness and a peanut butter and
jelly sandwich is better than nothing
there go a peanut butter and jelly
sandwich is better than long life and
happiness so you know what you should do
you should eat nope a peanut butter
jelly sandwich and then commit suicide
now that's ridiculous
and that's the whole point not this
should not convince you to eat a peanut
butter and jelly sandwich to end commit
suicide it's designed to convince you of
the the ridiculousness of this argument
now why is the argument ridiculous
because I'm used the argument hinges on
the this right and that because I'm
using the same term it sounds like I can
make the inference but of course
although I'm using the same word I'm not
meaning the same thing this means no
thing from the set of things that makes
life worth living is better than long
life and happiness this means no thing
from this set of things you should eat
and those are not equivalent sets
there's not equivalent reference that
you don't keep track of what your words
mean that's why we I'm always so careful
to try and give you like the meaning of
things in the history of the meaning of
a term if you don't get sensitive to the
meaning of terms you'll fall into
equivocation which is a disastrous way
to try and reason about anything okay so
what's the point of that well the term
mind isn't univocal they can be what am
I talking about am I talking about this
am I talking about this am I talking
about this am I talking about this am I
talking mother my time about how this
and this I'm I talk about this don't
know and the degree to which I'm
equivocal without realizing it is the
degree to which my thinking about my
mind and therefore mice
self is ridiculous if you aren't clear
about what this word means how you're
using this concept you will be
bullshitting yourself through
equivocation I also pointed out that one
of the consequences of this is
fragmentation what do I mean by that
well there's a couple is an ignorant in
this and again I'm not I am not
disparaging these Sciences
I love these Sciences I've got education
in them and I value them that is not
what is happening here but one of the
things that is missing that we are
ignorant of in this model is this these
various levels of reality causally
impact and constrain each other in very
important ways these individual
disciplines don't capture that that's
why there's this constant temptation and
need to create the hybrids like psycho
linguistics so how are we going to study
therefore the relationship between the
levels we have to get the disciplines to
hybridize or beyond that to talk to each
other to integrate together in some
fashion if we're going to deal with that
ignorance and that has to be an astute
practice we can't just we can't just
integrate by equivocating no integration
through equivocation because that's just
bullshitting so what we have to do is we
have to have a philosophically astute
integration we need philosophy precisely
because philosophy is the discipline
that has us take conceptual care to try
and articulate the meaning of our terms
to try and bridge that because that what
philosophy does it tries to bridge
between these different vocabularies
these different ontology --zz the
different methodologies that's what
philosophy does philosophy isn't about
sitting around in cafes smoking
cigarettes and saying vaguely obscure
things now the discipline that tries to
come up with a philosophically astute
integration between these disciplines so
that we can avoid equivocation and deal
with fragmentation and overcome the
ignorance of the causal relationship
between the levels
that's cognitive science that's what
cognitive science is that's what people
mean when they say cognitive science is
an interdisciplinary science now I hope
you see that cognitive science is
already directly confronting and
addressing one of the ways in which the
meaning crisis is inhabiting us in terms
of the way the scientific world view
again I'm not denigrating it but the way
in which the scientific worldview is
fragmenting us and causing us to fall
into ignorance about who and what we are
and to equivocate and bullshit ourselves
about who and what we are cognitive
science is placed to address that by its
very nature and of course it is the
science that is going to talk about this
meaning generation process because all
of these are about that in some
important way they're all about how mind
makes sense
now I want to argue that there are
different ways in which you can
understand how you practice cognitive
science how you try and create these
bridges between the disciplines I'm
gonna and I'm not presenting them in a
neutral fashion and telling you that
right from the beginning I think one of
these ways is the best way a way
nevertheless in which people use this
term and they'll often not capitalize it
and they'll PluralEyes that they'll talk
about the cognitive sciences and then
all that is is just generic nominalism
cognitive science or the cognitive
sciences is just a name for the genius
that each one of these disciplines
belong to anthropology is one of the
cognitive sciences machine learning is
one of the cognitive sciences
neuroscience is one of the cognitive
sciences generic nominalism it's useless
given the concerns I've articulated for
you it's not going to address the
equivocation it is not going to address
the fragmentation it is not going to
give us any purchase on addressing the
ignorance between the different levels
of reality so I believe we should
although this is often used this way
well we should reject this at least as
the sole meaning of what cognitive
science is doing right the next thing
people do is they will have this term
sort of cognitive science and they
understand it as is it as a kind of
interdisciplinary eclecticism
when I do like I'm you know to do
cognitive sciences but let's say I'll be
one of I'll being a member of one of the
core disciplines let's say I'm a
neuroscientist and what I do is I'm a
neuroscientist but I I read a bit about
psychology or perhaps linguistics and
then I pick some ideas that are
interesting from the other disciplines
and you know when I use them and
sometimes I I'll tell some of my
linguists or psychological friends some
of the things I'm doing in neuroscience
and some of those ideas might interest
them and of course that's good and
people are free to do this and the model
for this right is you know kind of look
I mean this as an analogy you know what
we have an interfaith dialogue see the
whole point about interfaith dialogue is
you know the Christians and the
Buddhists talk and you know I find
something interesting the sama Buddhists
and Christianity and the Christians to
find something interesting me and we
talk but we're not trying to Brad eclis
transform each other there's no sense in
which there's going to be a really
significant transfer a transformative
transfer of insight between us and we're
certainly not trying to make something
above and beyond
Buddhism than Christianity it's not like
after we do the interfaith dialogue
we're gonna have come up with a new
religion now I use that metaphor
precisely because I think it's helpful
right for understanding now the goal of
interfaith dialogue is to you know
enhance mutual understanding and build
tolerance and respect reduce violence
and these are all noble endeavors so I'm
not I'm not disparaging this but notice
the problem here notice it's not really
capturing why people feel so strongly
you know drawn towards creating things
like psycho linguistics that bridge
between them the different disciplines
see the problem with this is it's both
it's neither too weak or too strong this
can very quickly just become there's no
significant bridging between the
disciplines there's some interest
there's some creation of mutual respect
but it's not the case that we're really
capturing significant theoretically
important relationship between the
different levels by having strong in
transformative insights passing between
the disciplines right so this will tend
to degenerate or people will realize
they need something stronger they will
realize that there is something to these
attempt to create the linking
disciplines and that's the third and I
think therefore best vision of cognitive
science that's the vision of cognitive
sciences synoptic integration synoptic
integration is not saying that all the
disciplines are saying the same thing
it's not saying that but it's not simple
eclecticism of well they're all sayings
different things but let's get them all
to be friendly and like each other and
they can have some sort of peripheral
influence on each other
synoptic integration is saying no we
need to build something right between
the disciplines that addresses the
equivocation deals with the
fragmentation and fills in the ignorance
tells us about how the levels are all
are actually causally interacting and
constraining each other that's synoptic
integration so what you want to do right
is you need to say they're not saying
the same thing but they're not just
saying different things either you have
to create this bridging vocabulary that
integrates across the disciplines
now that's a tricky thing to do but
we've talked a long time ago about the
fact that our brains actually since the
upper paleolithic transition we've been
training them and developing them and
enculturated them to get very good at
bridging between domains even the word
bridge exemplifies what I'm referring to
namely metaphor we use metaphor as a way
of bridging between domains I am not
about to make the argument that science
is metaphor that is not what's happening
here
okay but I'm trying to use metaphor as a
way of saying that there is already a
cognitive ability in us that we can
exact and make use of in cognitive
science look look at how a metaphor
works okay if I say to you but and Sam
as a human being if I say to you Sam is
a pig right notice what you have to do
in order to make this work so it looks
like I'm creating an identity claim Sam
is a pig but of course what makes it a
metaphor is it's not an identity claim I
can't use this as a way of telling you
that Sam has pink skin and he lives on a
farm and he's gonna be eaten by other
human beings someday okay that's not
what I need I mean something like he's
gluttonous or he's you know sexually
selfish or something like that right so
notice what I have to do I have to keep
the two different while also saying how
they're importantly the same now why am
i doing that because that difference
right that difference gets me outside of
myself here's my framing of Sam and the
difference gets me outside of my framing
of Sam and I look through this I look
through if you'll allow me
you know the framing of something as a
pig and I used this to look and see
something in Sam away in which they're
identical so I stepped back through the
difference but I step I look through
into the identity and I see thing
in Sam through my Pig lenses if you'll
allow the metaphor and I allow it allows
me to see and understand Sam in a
different way it alters what I consider
salient in Sam it restructures and so
metaphor has this duality about it and
what you want to do is you want to you
want to create a metaphor that balances
these in an appropriate way when a
metaphor when a metaphor balances these
these what these two well we talk about
a metaphor being apt so notice if I make
the identity relation too strong if I
emphasize this side too much and I say
bees are Hornets you don't think oh wow
what a great metaphor that is that's
such a wonderful metaphor in fact that's
a really crappy metaphor right this
doesn't give me enough distance I can't
step back enough and have an insight
into this this provokes no insight
there's no insightful transformation of
my understanding of bees this is too
close but if I if I emphasize the
difference too much something like you
know arguments or chairs well you know
arguments of chairs because they're both
human-made structures and we use them on
a day-to-day basis and this is a very
crappy metaphor precisely because you
know the difference is too great I've
stepped back so much if you'll allow me
I'm losing sight of this and it's not
clear it's vague how what am I supposed
to see about arguments through this
distant lens of chairs apt is when I get
an appropriate balance of that so what
I'm looking for I'm writing cognitive
science is I'm looking for theoretical
constructs proposed theoretical entities
that get this apt balance that allow me
to keep the differences between the
disciplines but you know but also
see from and through those distances
relevant identities that allow me right
to look from neuroscience into
artificial intelligence in an insightful
way or look from I step back from right
behavior in psychology I go I step into
linguistics and then I look at
psychology I keep that distance I don't
identify them but I also try and see ah
but what is that what can I see in
psychology through the lens and
linguistics
now of course the thing about cognitive
science is it's not trying to create
single aptness right it's not trying to
create a one this is one way I've just
bridged between two domains cognitive
science is trying to create constructs
that are multi apt that bridge between
multiple domains multiple disciplines
and that multi aptness is really
important so I'm trying to create
constructs with multi aptness they get
this balance between identity and
difference that affords and provokes
insightful transformation of the
theorizing from one discipline to
another and I start to create an
overarching integration now this brings
up an important idea but well what's
constraining me how do I know like
what's how do I judge if I'm doing this
well or badly
well this has to do I think with this
notion that is very much the notion that
we use when we're considering how to
create new constructs new ideas
theoretical entities that will bridge
the between domains create lines of
inquiry this is plausibility
now there's two meanings to this word
one is just a synonym for high
probability and that's not the one I
mean there's a dis there's a different
meaning originally really brought to the
fore by Russia's work but a lot of other
people there's work being done now some
good work in psychology being done on
plausibility I'm doing some work with
Leonardo Ferrara Jensen Kim on
plausibility and this other sense of
possibility isn't a synonym for high
probability it's a it's it's a synonym
not for rational but for reasonable the
sense making good sense and of course
man that's so relevant to us right
making good sense deserving to be taken
seriously right this is what plausible
means it it's reasonable it makes good
sense it should be taken seriously and
when we look at sort of ideas that we're
using to make sense of the world and
again this is building on a lot of
people's work
I can't refer to them all all the people
I'm trying to draw together
of course people make judgments of
plausibility all over the place and they
bullshit themselves in this in all kinds
of ways I'll talk about that so I'm
talking about here not a descriptive
theory of what people do when they're
saying something's plausible I'm talking
about a normative theory about what do
they do when they're doing it well what
are they doing when they're doing it
well so part of the argument is this
people of course really like ideas that
are multi apt right here's my idea my
thesis my proposal some model whatever
kind of construct I'm using and it's
multi act in that you know I can I can
use it and it can bridge to this domain
and this time I can go into these many
different domains I can do this
insightful connecting and transfer I
think this is a much better wave this
notion of multi aptness right and being
able to go into many different domains
and help us find formulate and solve
problems I think this is a much better
understanding of what scientists are
trying to invoke when they say a theory
is elegant right then just talking about
simplicity precisely because of the way
we have no canonical way of trying to
work out what scientists are meaning
when they talk about simplicity whereas
it's clear that they do seek constructs
to do this now here's a problem is that
good enough is that is that good enough
to make a construct plausible no see the
problem with that is if it's just on its
own right we're we're we're lacking
something we're lacking another thing
that we want and this is a point
actually made by rusher and it comes out
in some of the psychology of
plausibility you see we also want that
these constructs are produced in a
certain way not just that this is how
they're used but this is how they're
produced right this is their forward
orientation this is their backward
orientation we want a construct that has
been produced by many convergent right
independent lines of Investigation now
let me show you just a concrete example
of this right and you can see it even in
young kids you prefer information that
right integrates think about integration
across multiple senses right so you
prefer information that is not not just
something you can see but also you can
simultaneously here
that's why seeing and hearing me right
now is better than just seeing me or
just hearing me now why is that the case
well you see if if I'm getting all of my
information just through one channel
there's a very good chance that this
thing is being produced by bias
by distortion in that channel but if I'm
getting the same thing produced by from
multiple independent channels right
there's a very good chance that is not
being produced by the bias or distortion
in any one of these there's a chance
that there's a very good chance that
they're relative that the the relative
biases and distortions cancel each other
out so by doing convergence I get bias
reduction and man does that matter it
for overcoming the way in which we
bullshit ourselves with salience so
convergence gives me biased reduction
what rest shark alls trustworthiness now
trustworthiness isn't truth it's not
certainty this by the way is why science
likes numbers scientists like numbers
not because we're fascists or because we
don't appreciate the artistic beauty of
bla bla bla bla
we like numbers because they give us
this look you can see three you can hear
three you can touch three numbers afford
convergence and they boost
trustworthiness they would help to
reduce bias and remember I tried to
argue that the scientific method of
experimentation is a method right in
which we are trying a methods of sorry
the scientific method of experimentation
and observation our methods psycho
technologies in which we're trying to
reduce bias reduce the way in which
we're deceiving how we're coming up with
our constructs now think about this if
you had just elegance
that's multi aptness you can bridge to
many different areas and link lots of
stuff together but it wasn't produced in
a trustworthy manner what would you have
you would have conspiracy theories
that's exactly what conspiracy theories
do their form of bullshitting because
they are they're they're very a look if
you will just accept that the british
royal family are lizard reptilian alien
from another dimension you can explain
so much of their political and social
and interpersonal behavior just give me
this idea just give me this and look at
what I can do look at all the different
disparate facts I can link and integrate
together I can give you the synoptic
integration and you should be saying
yeah but it's all bullshit it's bullshit
because we find this we want this so
it's very salient but it's bullshit
precisely because we've we've lost this
we don't trust the construct what about
the opposite so the conspiracy theory is
far-fetched because it gives us lots of
this but very very little convergence
what about this where I've got
tremendous convergence certainly we'd
like this and there's just there's very
little insight integration what's not
well if you read scientific journals
you'll see people and even beyond
philosophical people rejecting this this
is this up here this is the conspiracy
theory and it's far-fetched but you know
what this is this is triviality and we
reject things now excuse something of
being trivial as to not say it's false
it's to say that it has no
transformative power it makes no
difference it causes no insight it
affords no integration so this tells me
this tells us something and notice
notice notice notice ways in which we
can equivocate on these right between we
can equivocate between this right
between these two so Daniel Dennett
talks about this and there's a way in
which one way in which we bullshit
ourselves he calls it the deep Adeeb
Adeeb Adeeb ok so people do this they'll
say they'll say things like love is only
a four-letter word
and you everybody says this and all it's
very profound and you take another drink
of your alcohol or whatever all right
now notice what's going on here on one
level this is a triviality of course
love is a four-letter word I've got many
different independent memory it's
different uses everybody is using the
word love this way right love is a
four-letter word right now let that
level it's trivial but then it's
supposed to I'm supposed to equivocate
between this as a word
I'm equivocating between this as a word
and this as a concept for a thing that I
care about
because love as a thing has tremendous
elegance it goes into so much of my life
but notice what's happened here I'm not
actually giving you any information or
analysis about love as a thing or a
concept I'm pretending to give you multi
aptness when in fact all I'm doing is
giving you triviality sort of triviality
i equivocate so i say love is just a
four letter word that's bullshit it's
bullshit that makes use of abuses and
this is powerful ways in which we
bullshit ourselves with these deputies
these things that sound deep and are not
deep at all because what we're doing is
equivocating right we start with
something that's undeniably trivial and
we and then we're equivocating with
something that looks like it's elegant
and multi apt and we bullshit ourselves
we do the reverse right we say something
that looks like it's really multi optin
really controversial is gonna change
everything and then we're challenged
oh no but we're great crits oh no no I
never meant that I only meant this
trivial thing that nobody would
the objective right
right
this is the Martin Bailey strategy right
where you present and it looks radical
and controversial and then when you
criticize you withdraw no I was just
saying this it looks like I'm doing but
no justice but then I pretend that I
didn't actually change my position
they're the same thing and that is again
how we bullshit ourselves so notice how
we can abuse this machinery and bullshit
ourselves now the fact that we can abuse
it tells us how we can improve it how
it's supposed to be used because if we
acknowledge that these are a beaut that
this is abuse that right the DPD is an
abuse if we acknowledge right that the
Martin Bailey strategy of avoiding
criticism is an abuse if we admit that
we don't want far fetch it miss and for
reality we can put this all together
into a normative account of what good
plausibility is we have high convergence
matched by high elegance now I'll talk a
little bit later when we do some more
cardio science we want something more
about this in terms of relevance
realization and other things but we'll
come back to that but when I get a
balance between balance between
convergence and elegance then I get
something that's highly plausible I'm
making a construct that is trustworthy
and powerful and it's affording me
getting a new pattern of intelligibility
this is how I make integrative new
patterns of intelligibility in the world
and so this is what you're trying to do
in cognitive science you're always
trying to create these constructs that
are high in plausibility when I get
something that is extremely trustworthy
that is balanced with powerful multi
aptness then I think that's what we mean
when we say something is profound it's
the exact opposite of the DPD the
triviality the conspiracy the martin
bailey bullshit
it's profound now being profound doesn't
mean it's true being profound means it's
very reasonable and it should be taken
very seriously I'm going to now try and
exemplify this with you
I should mention before I go that this
idea of the balance between this and
this I got this from Elijah milligrams
really really brilliant work on
practical induction practical induction
is not induction about how you change a
belief practical induction is how you
change your desires how you change what
you care for it's deeply relevant to
that Socratic project of having a
rationality of what you care about ok so
what I want to do is first I'll draw
this together in this definition ok so
cognitive science right it's the
discipline that it's trying to bring
about synaptic integration and I'm going
to say it's trying to bring about
profound synoptic integration it's
trying to create these constructs that
bridge don't reduce bridge between the
disciplines profound synoptic
integration profound synoptic
integration that addresses equivocation
publication fragmentation and ignorance
the ignorance of the causal relationship
between the levels of reality that we
designate by the term line that's what
cognitive science is trying to do and of
course as I've tried to show you
throughout it is deeply relevant to the
meaning crisis because it deals with
this issue of fragmentation the
confusion we have about ourselves how
we're sort of pulled apart it deals with
as you've just seen the the the
meaning-making machinery and it deals
with again as you've just seen our
propensity for bullshitting ourselves
and deceiving ourselves now what I want
to do is I want to do the cognitive
science of meaning making again I'm not
totally happy with this room because it
it sounds too romantic in my ears right
I'd also want to say meaning seeking but
that that that's that sounds - that
sounds - empiricist in my ears like
meanings just out there to be seen and
experienced right so I'm gonna try a new
metaphor because it also goes with
something else I've been saying from the
beginning and this is inspired by the
way we talked about the cultivation of
wisdom it has expired it's inspired by
Heidegger's use of this metaphor meaning
cultivation because what I'm gonna try
and argue and I've been also you've seen
this in the history is meaning isn't
something we are imposing willfully on
the world that's a mistake from our
history meaning isn't something we just
find in the world that's to ignore the
Scientific Revolution meaning is
something between us and the world like
the way you cultivate a plant you're
doing stuff with the plant but you're
also allowing the plant to
unfold your cult your cultivating with
the world meaning between you and the
world so as much as possible I'm going
to try and switch this I will fall into
habit because this is the language that
we inherited from the the cognitive
revolution and psychology about talking
about meaning making and making sense
and where the emphasis is on us making
even though am I gonna I'm gonna show
you the third-generation cog science is
much more talking this way than the
romantic notion that we impose or make
meaning or we simply sense it or find it
in the world okay I want to start doing
the cognitive science of this I want to
take a look at right the science of
cognition and I want to try and
exemplify what I showed you what I
argued for I want to try and exemplify
synoptic integration and the creation of
a plausible construct so the faculty in
us that is supposed to be our core
cognitive capacity or core capacity for
meaning cultivation and being able to
adaptively respond to the world and this
goes all the way back right to the Greek
heritage this is the notion of
intelligence intelligence is the
capacity that makes you a cognitive
agent at least an agent whose cognition
is working with meaning as opposed to a
living thing right that is in some sense
like a plant responding maybe in a very
sophisticated fashion but it's just
responding in this complex fashion to
its environment intelligence means you
are in some sense a cognitive agent
okay so
what is it that we should how should we
frame this we're gonna try and get a
purchase on this right so a good way of
trying to understand this is the way we
try to test for intelligence is being a
general problem solver and this goes
back both within the psychometric to
people like banan's simon who are trying
to measure intelligence and people like
newell and simon to different people
whether way that are trying to create
artificial intelligence make the
intelligence artifice artificial
intelligence artefactual intelligence
right not fake intelligence right both
of them point to this idea that when
we're trying to measure or make
intelligence we're trying to measure you
as a general problem solver or we're
trying to make a machine that is a
general problem solver now what does
that mean okay so here's a machine
that's not a general problem solver this
is good for solving this problem holding
water and we've talked about this in
such a way that I can use it it solves a
bunch of other problems maybe but not
very many
not very many it's very limited in its
problem-solving capacity right now
unlike that cup you are capable of
solving a wide variety of problems in a
wide variety of domains you are a
general problem solver you can worry
about God and how to get a drink how to
go swimming right how to build a
houseboat the number of domains in which
you can operate is vast and within each
one of those domains there are many
different kinds of problems you can
solve you are a general problem solver
and that's why when we measure
intelligence we give you a wide variety
of different kinds of tests to see if
you can solve a wide variety of problems
across multiple domains that's how I
test to see if you're a general problem
solver and what
Newell and Simon were exactly trying to
make they in fact called it we can't use
this term now because it now means
global positioning but they called it
the GPS the general problem solver the
first project to make artificial
intelligence not just computational
machines but artificial intelligence was
the right this project of trying to make
the general problem solver okay so
you're a general problem solver okay
great
that makes sense right now what I need
to do is a couple things to be I got to
be very careful here all right and
because people get very of course this
is well we'll come back to that this is
such a a politically Laden term
precisely because we we aren't clear
about what we're talking about we're
equivocating all over the place and
we're ignorant of how this term is
applied to different levels of reality
and yet nevertheless we will shut
ourselves by finding it salient and
rushing into speech and action without
the clarity that is needed we'll see for
example that this is not a synonym for
being rational being intelligent and
what you ultimately should care about is
not how intelligent you are but how
rational you can become so let's take
care here we're meaning some capacity
you have for solving your problems in
learning and so we want to keep
intelligence separate from knowledge of
course having knowledge enables you to
do things right and in that sense in a
broad sense of adaptivity it makes you
more adaptive to your environment you
can do lots of things even if those
things are make claims that other people
value for their truth but if you if you
think of the if you make these
synonymous then you can't use this to
explain this you can't say the reason
why susan was able to acquire such
knowledge is we
she's intelligence because if
intelligent means possessing knowledge
then you all you're saying is Susan
possesses knowledge because Susan
possesses knowledge which is non
explanatory right so what we want to ask
is what is it to solve a problem don't
focus on the product having the answer
getting the knowledge I focus on the
process that process and this is going
to be a hallmark we've talked about this
before the hallmark of rationality is
valuing the process not just being
fixated on the product especially the
belief the conclusion right so what we
got to analyze the process what is it to
solve a problem and this is where the
work of Newell and Simon was just so
deeply influential it's been influential
in psychology computer science economics
it's just seminal and important work
now as I first try to describe it to you
it's going to strike you as you know
somewhat trivial but let's go let's go
very carefully on what we're going to do
right we're going to try and analyze a
problem down into four basic features
and we'll end today's episode with that
and at that point it won't seem like
we've got that profound construct that
we're looking for and then I'll need you
to wait to next time
but Newell and Simon basically said what
what is it to have a problem a problem
is when there's a difference between the
state you're in which they called your
initial state and the state you want to
be and this is your goal state so I have
a problem when there's a significant
difference between those for example I'm
thirsty right and I don't want to be
thirsty since those aren't the same
thing I things have to change in the
world and in me but the difference
between the initial state and the goal
state to go away so part of what I have
to do when I solve a problem is the
system has to be able to represent will
have to come back to how we're going to
use that term the initial state and the
goal state and then the
our actions operations I can perform
that will change the state I'm initially
into some other state so for example
part of the problem I had was I'm over
here and the glasses over here so one of
the things I can do one of the things I
can do is I can walk towards the glass
right the cop right of course another
thing I can do is I can raise my hand
now you say well don't raise your hand
that's stupid
well wait there's going to become a
point though when I do need to raise my
hand so I'm gonna need that operation
okay so I think you're starting to see
things and then what I do is from here
perhaps I can do two other operations
right from a trim here maybe three from
here maybe only one and so on and so
forth right I'm not gonna draw it all
out right so so far I've got right three
things that I'm analyzing a
problem-solving I'm analyzing problem
solving in two initial State a goal
state and operators that can transform
one state into another state there's one
other thing I have I have what are
called path constraints you see I'm a
general problem solver I don't want to
find just any solution one of the ways I
can make lunch for myself is to burn
down my house it will cook my food that
is not a good solution not because it
doesn't achieve the goal I want in this
situation of cooking my food but it
really reduces me as a general problem
solver I don't want to solve this
problem to the detriment of my ability
to solve multiple other problems or I
will lose my intelligence I will lose my
capacity as a general problem solver so
what I have to do is the following
solving a problem is this it's to have a
sequence of operations a sequence of
operations that will transform the
initial state into the goal state while
obeying the power
constraints preserving me as a general
problem solver that's what it is to
solve a problem and this this is called
the problem space or sometimes called
the search space now what this analysis
does for you is it explicate s-- the
problem space and this is where all of
the powerful insight of new orleans
simon's work comes out because once we
start to pay attention to properties of
this search space we can see how
profound this idea actually turns out to
be and that's what we'll do in our next
session together thank you very much for
your time and attention
[Music]
you
you