good morning it's my morning I don't
know when you're watching this I am
reading the completion process by teal
Swan and I just want to read an excerpt
from Chapter five see where to start I
highlighted part of it but I want to
sort a little bit before that there's no
such thing as a correct or an incorrect
experience while doing the completion
process from this point forward you
should process progress with the
following statement in mind ever
experience I have while doing the
completion process is valid and every
experience I have while doing the
completion process is a bright one for
me it's the exact experience that I need
at this time yeah that's what I've been
trying to articulate for my version of
the completion process that I stumbled
upon it's amazing that the universe
gives the exact lesson that I need at
the exact right time
except it's not because it happens for
everybody when you commit to the
completion process you adopt the
perspective that any current emotional
upset is in fact just the echo of a
traumatic memory you might be haunted by
it and not even remember it but the
circumstance in your current life that
you think is the cause of your upset is
just a trigger from a prior wound of one
that needs your attention because
triggers today help you see the wounds
you have tried to suppress the triggers
are beneficial instead of detrimental
you might find it difficult to accept
that triggers today are good are a good
thing even when they hurt so badly you
don't have to feel grateful for them you
just have to commit to viewing them as a
messenger carrying the echo of something
important
looking at triggers this way you can use
them to your advantage you can see each
trigger as a wide open opportunity for
integration the beauty of the completion
process is that when you use triggers to
integrate yourself you'll eventually
lose any negative association that you
might have had with the triggers you'll
be much less reactive when a trigger
does occur and you'll begin to associate
triggers of integration and feeling
better instead of feeling worse once the
meaning of something changes
dramatically your whole life can be
lived
you no longer live in a state of defense
or feeling victimized you'll feel like
the universe is assisting you instead of
deliberately causing you to suffer and
that is in essence what I've been
experiencing the last couple years since
being introduced to kylo ceases work for
sure and although he doesn't talk about
the completion process per se he talks
about a GPS map and I like that version
we rode like we all have our own roadmap
to become who we are meant to be it
doesn't necessarily look sane and right
to other people because it's not their
road map it's yours and every experience
you have is the proper experience that
being said I don't think it's okay to go
around purposely triggering other people
but in my own personal life I now can
see that triggers are a blessing but
although I've had to de-stress my life
on a large part and I'll go into that
and my parallels of teal swans life even
though hers was highly traumatic in
order to be able to come to this process
and instead of mine being highly
traumatic my threshold was much lower so
it was highly traumatic to have my
experience in the medical community and
highly traumatic to have my experience
as an autistic child not knowing so and
living in this world in a neurodiverse
way and having a much lower threshold on
things like sensory processing and so
for life-and-death reasons you come to
needing to regain sanity I don't know
what word to use instead of that that
I've had to distress situations in a
different way and I'll have a whole
video on stress I'm sure probably many
and I am just enjoying reading this book
and having all of these aha moments
that's different than reading something
else it oh I didn't think about it that
way this is what this is what I've been
trying to say not as eloquently not as
well processed because I wasn't I wasn't
trying to deal with my past I was trying
to deal with my present I was dealing
with the triggers as they come up and
what they're here to teach me
not going back and healing that and so
it'll be interesting just to see that
part of it and experienced progressing
in that way
this is today's video on chairs and how
they can heal us thanks