you are about to learn one of the
biggest secrets in the history of the
world it's a secret it has huge effects
for everyone who lives on this planet
most people can feel deep down that
something isn't quite right the world
economy but few know what his gone are
the gate where a family can survive on
just one page every day it seems things
are more and more out of control yet
only one in a million understand why you
are about to discover the system that is
ultimately responsible for most of the
inequality in our world today the powers
that be do not want you to know about
this as this system is where's kept them
at the top of the financial food chain
for the last 100 years learning this
will change your life because it'll
change the choices if enough people
learn it it'll change the world because
it'll change the system
for this is the biggest hidden secret of
mine
never in human history have so many been
plundered by so few and it's all
accomplished through this the biggest
scam in the history of mankind they say
that money doesn't grow on trees but the
truth is that the modern banking system
creates currency far faster than trees
can grow most people don't have a clue
how currency is created economists and
bankers make it sound so complex that
people think they can't understand it
but I'm going to strip our monetary
system down to its essence so that you
can see the scam behind the curtain and
just how it affects you every modern
society creates currency in pretty much
the same way but since the u.s. dollar
is the majority of the world's currency
I'm going to use the United States as
our example it all starts when some
politician says vote for me and I'll
make sure the government provides you
more free stuff than my opponent but
there's no such thing as a free lunch so
to provide that supposedly free stuff
the politicians vote for the country to
spend more than its income this is
called deficit spending to pay for that
deficit spending the Treasury borrows
currency by issuing a bond so what's the
bond if you think about it a bond is
really nothing but a glorified IOU it's
a pretty piece of paper with numbers
printed eyes that says loan me a
trillion dollars today and I promise
over a 10-year period I'm going to pay
you back that trillion dollars plus
interest but what you need to understand
is that Treasury bonds are our national
debt these glorified IOUs are to be paid
back by you and I and our descendants
through future taxation therefore when
the government issues a bond it steals
prosperity out of the future so that it
can spend it today
the Treasury then holds a bond auction
and the world's largest banks show up
and compete to buy part of our national
debt and make a profit on it by earning
interest you'll notice that as we move
through this process the big banks are
they're taking a cut every step of the
way this isn't by chance as you'll see
shortly then through a shell game called
open market operations the banks get to
sell some of those
to the Federal Reserve at a profit to
pay for the bonds the Federal Reserve
opens up its big old checkbook and
writes bad bogus counterfeit checks that
should bounce because they draw on an
account that always has a zero balance
there isn't one penny in there to quote
from the Boston Federal Reserve when you
or I write a check there must be
sufficient funds in our account to cover
that check but when the Federal Reserve
writes a check there is no bank deposit
on which that check is drawn when the
Federal Reserve writes a check it is
creating money the Fed then hands those
checks to the banks and at this point
currency springs into existence the
banks then take that currency and buy
more bonds at the next treasury auction
but what is a check a check is also an
IOU when you write a check you're making
a note that says here's my IOU for cash
all you have to do is go to the bank and
pick it up now it's very very important
that you understand this process because
we're going to come back later and show
you the devastating effect this has on
you the Treasury issues IOUs
bonds the banks then by those IOUs with
currency the Federal Reserve then writes
IOUs checks and hands them to the banks
in exchange for the Treasury's i/o use
the bonds and currency is created so
what's really happening is the Federal
Reserve and the Treasury are just
swapping io u--'s using the banks as
middlemen and abracadabra presto
currency magically springs into
existence this process repeats and
repeats over and over again enriching
the banks and indebting the public by
raising the national debt the end result
is that there's a buildup of bonds at
the Federal Reserve and currency at the
Treasury this process is also where all
paper currency come
from the federal reserve in the
government is stationed Lee call it
baseline because they didn't watch
episode 1 of this series and they don't
know the difference between money and
currency but I will correctly refer to
it as base currency because it is not
money it is currency and as we've
learned there is a big difference money
has to be a store of value and maintain
its purchasing power over long periods
of time we learned an episode one that
earlier in our history our paper
currency was just a claim check it was a
representation for real money of
intrinsic value the gold and silver that
was held on deposit of the Treasury you
could walk into any bank and slap your
currency like say a $20 bill on the
counter and redeem it for real money a
twenty dollar gold piece but now this
base currency that's piling up back here
is really nothing but a receipt or a
claim check on an IOU that bond so it's
really nothing but a supply of numbers
the Treasury then deposits the newly
created currency into the various
branches of the government and the
politicians say hey thanks for that and
the government does some deficit
spending on public works social programs
and war the government employees
contractors and soldiers then deposit
their pay in the banks now this may come
as a shock to you but we need to posit
your currency with the bank you're not
actually depositing it into an account
to be safely held in trust free instead
you're actually loaning the bank your
currency and within certain legal limits
they can do with it pretty much anything
they please this includes gambling in
the stock market and loaning it out at a
profit of course now this is where the
Machine of currency creation really gets
cranking because this is where something
called fractional reserve lending comes
into play fractional reserve lending is
exactly what it says the banks are
allowed to reserve only a fraction of
your deposit and loan the rest out
although reserve ratios may vary I'm
going to use a 10% reserve ratio as our
example if you deposit $100 in your
account
the bank can legally take $90 of it and
loan it out without telling you the bank
must hold $10 of your deposit in reserve
just in case you want some of it these
reserves are called bulk cash but why
does your bank account still say you
have $100 if the bank has stolen $90 of
it because the bank left IOU is it
created called bank credit in its place
now I know this sounds crazy but here it
is in black and white from the Fed
commercial banks create checkbook money
when they grant a loan simply by adding
redeposit dollars in accounts on their
books in exchange for a borrower's IOU
these are nothing but numbers that the
bank's type into their computers and
even though these bank credit IOU
numbers are very different from base
currency numbers because they only exist
in computers they are still currency so
now there is one hundred and ninety
dollars in existence now the reason
people take out loans from the banks is
to buy something they're going to buy a
house or a car or something like that so
the borrower takes the $90 of the bank
loan to him from your account and he
pays the seller of the item but then the
seller deposits that currency into his
account and his bank loans out 90% of
that and leaves bank credit numbers in
its place so now there's 271 dollars in
existence this process repeats and
repeats until under a 10 percent reserve
ratio an initial deposit of just 100
dollars can create up to $1,000 of bank
credit all backed by $100 of vault cash
just 10% but as I said reserve ratios
vary wildly on some deposits it's 10% on
others it's 3% and on some funds of
deposits reserve requirements are zero
the result is that the expansion of the
currency supply by the bank is far
greater than even this example would
lead you to believe so once again when
currency is deposited in the bank
the banks get to lend it out and then it
gets redeposited and relent redeposited
and relent redeposited and relent
and over and over again creating bank
credits all the way this is where the
vast majority of our currency supply
comes from in fact 92 to 96 percent of
all currency in existence is created not
by the government but here in the
banking system
now massive amounts of currency spewing
into society may at first sound like a
fun idea that is until you remember one
of the most important hidden secrets of
money from episode one that the prices
of everyday goods and services act as a
sponge on an expanding currency supply
the more currency we have the more
prices rise this is where inflation
comes from the true definition of
inflation is an expansion of the
currency supply rising prices are merely
the symptom so our entire currency
supply is nothing but a couple of bucks
whipped up in this hocus-pocus scam
where the Treasury and the Federal
Reserve swaps glorified IOUs and a bunch
of numbers at the banks just type in to
their computers that's it that's our
entire currency supply it's nothing but
a supply of numbers some of them printed
most of them typed and there is nothing
else but if you thought that was crazy
get ready to enter the twilight zone of
modern economics we work for some of
that currency supply tour wealth is your
time but we trade away moments of our
lives hour by hour day by day and year
by year for numbers that somebody
printed on pieces of paper or just typed
into a computer now those numbers
represent our blood sweat tears labor
ideas and talent we are what gives the
currency
but here comes the really cool joke we
work hard so that we can save some of
that courage so that we can pay the tax
collectors in the United States known as
the IRS they then turn it over to the
Treasury so that the Treasury can pay
the principal plus interest on that bond
that the Federal Reserve bought with a
check drawn on an account that has
nothing in it now let's do a recap on
this section because this is where the
system begins to rob you and I on a
massive scale much of our taxes are not
used for schools roads and public
services but to pay interest on bonds
that the Federal Reserve bought with a
check drawn on an account that has
nothing in it the Federal Reserve is
committing fraud but here's one of the
biggest secrets of them all before the
establishment of the Federal Reserve
there was no need for personal income
tax the Federal Reserve was created in
1913 and that very same year the
Constitution was amended to allow income
tax do you really think this was just a
coincidence ask yourself how much income
tax you've paid over your lifetime much
of it has been silently siphoned away
into the hands of those who own the
system yes this system has owners who
they are is an even bigger secret that
we'll get to shortly but first we need
to understand the mumbo jumbo of the so
called debt ceiling it's all based on a
huge paradox there was interest due on
that bond and there was interest due on
every one of those loans at the banks
that means that there is interest due on
every dollar in existence let me ask you
something if you borrow the very first
dollar into existence and that's the
only dollar that exists on the planet
but you promised to pay it back plus
another dollars worth of interest where
do you get the second dollar to pay the
interest the answer is that you have to
borrow that one into existence and
promised to pay it back
as well so now there are two dollars in
existence for you oh four and so on and
so much the result is there is never
enough currency to pay the debt there is
always more debt in the system than
there is currency in existence to pay
the debt therefore the whole system is
impossible it is finite it will come to
an end one day what would happen if the
government stopped borrowing to do
deficit spending are the payments on
those Treasury bonds going to stop what
would happen if the public stopped
borrowing and going deeper into debt are
your house and car payments going to
stop no there is a payment due every
month on the principal plus the interest
on every dollar in existence and those
payments do not stop if we stop
borrowing then no new currency is
created to replace the currency that we
used to make those payments whether
you're making a payment on a loan or
paying tax to make a payment on a bond
the portion of the payment that goes to
pay off the principal extinguishes that
portion of the debt but the debt also
extinguishes the currency currency and
debt are like matter and antimatter when
they meet they annihilate each other if
we just pay off the principal only on
all the loans and bonds that exist the
entire currency supply just finished so
if we don't go deeper into debt every
year look what happens the whole thing
goes into a deflationary collapse under
the weight of those papers politicians
and pundits alike talk about balancing
the budget paying down the debt and
living within our means they don't
understand that that is deflationary it
is impossible to do under our current
monetary system without collapsing the
whole economy this is why any talk of a
debt ceiling is not only ridiculous it's
delusional the system is designed to
require ever-increasing levels of debt
just to continue and that's why
politicians will always kick the can
down the road and raise this so-called
debt ceiling over and over again
until the whole system finally collapses
under its own way in other words they
don't want it to collapse on their watch
the founding fathers of the United
States knew the dangers of central
banking and fought to free themselves
from this very thing the Revolutionary
War started out of the tax revolt but
now we must pay tax
just to have a monetary system having
just suffered through the hyperinflation
of the Continental dollar which was
printed into oblivion to finance the
Revolutionary War they understood the
dangers of fiat currency and debt based
monetary systems so to protect future
generations from institutional theft and
out-of-control government they wrote
into the Constitution that only gold and
silver can be money for the simple fact
that you can't print them our current
system is not only unconstitutional but
it robs us of the liberty and prosperity
our forefathers fought and died for we
are all feeling the effects of ignoring
the Constitution right now by forcing
more currency into circulation our
purchasing power is diluted inflation is
a slow and insidious stealth tax that is
simply the result of this debt based
monetary system this system empowers and
benefits those who create the currency
and receive it first as they get to
spend it into circulation before it has
an effect on the economy
they're stealing purchasing power from
you and transferring it to the banks and
the government every hour of every day
because of this false monetary system
and it's not like the people at the top
don't know this to quote the Federal
Reserve the decrease in purchasing power
incurred by the holders of money due to
inflation in parts gains to the issuers
of money this is a fraud it is a pyramid
scheme it is a Ponzi scheme it's a scam
and it's a lie our entire monetary
system is nothing but a form of
legalized theft but here's the biggest
con job of them all the Federal Reserve
is not federal it has stockholders there
is no federal agency that has
stockholders
what's a stock holding a share of stock
represents a percentage of ownership
in a corporation so the stockholders are
the owners of that corporation therefore
the Federal Reserve is a private
corporation with owners and you can see
it for yourself if you go to the Federal
Reserve's website and it will say the
stockholders receive an annual dividend
of six percent now we know that the
stock and the Federal Reserve was
originally issued to the largest bank in
the United States but because of mergers
and acquisitions through the years you
can't actually trace who owns the stock
in the Federal Reserve that's a very
closely guarded secret my guess would be
that the owners are those primary
dealers the banks would get to make a
profit by selling part of our national
debt those bonds to the Fed Reserve who
buys them with a check from nothing then
we pay tax to pay the principal and the
interest on those bonds so that the
Federal Reserve can pay the banks of 6%
dividend
don't be alarmed if you don't quite
comprehend the deception of this system
at first glance very few people do it is
purposely complex the economist John
Maynard Keynes once wrote by this means
government may secretly and unobserved
confiscate the wealth of the people and
not one man in a million will detect the
theft
I believe that presented correctly
anyone can understand this system
regardless of how complex it is so let's
do a recap and break it down even more
the way the system works is that step
one the government creates glorified
IOUs these bonds increase our national
debt and put the public on the hook to
pay it back step 2 IOUs are swapped to
create currency the Treasury sells the
bonds to the banks the banks then turn
around and sell our national debt at a
profit to the Federal Reserve which they
probably own the Federal Reserve then
opens its checkbook that doesn't have a
penny in it and buys those IOUs with
IOUs that it writes checks on a checking
account that has a zero balance then
they give those checks to the banks and
currency just springs into existence and
then the whole process repeats this
results in a buildup of
bonds at the Fed Reserve and currency at
the Treasury which is really just a
supply of numbers the Treasury then
deposits the numbers in the various
branches of the government and we get to
step three the government spends the
numbers on promises public works social
programs and war then the government
employees contractors and soldiers
deposit their pay into the banks and we
get to step four where the banks
multiply the numbers by magically
inventing more I'll use through
fractional reserve lending where they
steal a portion of everyone's deposit
and lend it out that currency gets
redeposited and then a portion is stolen
again and the process repeats over and
over magnifying the currency supply
exponentially then we leave work for
some of those numbers which brings us to
step five where our numbers are taxed we
pay tax to the IRS who then turns our
numbers over to the Treasury so the
Treasury can pay the principal plus the
interest on bonds that were purchased by
the Federal Reserve with a check from
nothing then we get to step six the debt
ceiling delusion the system is designed
to require ever-increasing levels of
debt and will eventually collapse under
its own weight because politicians
always kick the can down the road they
don't want it to collapse on their watch
and finally step 7 the secret owners
take their cut the world's largest banks
own the Federal Reserve those banks make
a profit selling our national debt to
the Fed they make a profit when the Fed
pays them interest on the reserves held
at the Fed and the Fed pays them a 6%
dividend on their ownership of the Fed
this system is fundamentally evil it
funnels wealth from the working
population to the government and the
banking sector it is the cause of the
artificial booms and busts of modern
economy
and it causes great disparity of wealth
between the rich and the working-class
and it is only possible because we no
longer use real money we use currency
but worst of all it is a form of
enslavement bond is the root word of
bondage whenever a government issues a
bond it is a promise to make us pay tax
in the future nobody asks you if you
wanted to pay tax today for the
prosperity we all enjoyed in the last
century nobody is asking our children if
they want to work hard in the future to
pay for the prosperity we are enjoying
now George Washington once wrote to
James Madison no generation has the
right to contract debts greater than can
be paid off during the course of its own
existence by stealing prosperity from
tomorrow so we can spend it today we
enslave ourselves and future generations
now this all sounds pretty bad but there
is great hope for you are the greatest
threat to this false monetary system
this system relies on the public being
ignorant of its workings please share
this knowledge with everyone you know
because an informed public that fully
understands the system can build a
better future for generations and now I
leave you with this quote widely
attributed to a former director of the
Bank of England the modern banking
system manufactures money out of nothing
the process is perhaps the most
astounding piece of sleight of hands
that was ever invented banking was
conceived in inequity and born in sin
bankers on the earth take it away from
them but leave them the power to create
money and control credit and with the
flick of a pen they will create enough
money to buy it back again but if you
want to continue as the slaves of
bankers and pay the cost of your own
slavery let them continue to create
money and to control credit
[Music]
this is a Federal Reserve in Washington
DC it's located on Constitution Street
and that is just as much of a joke as
the New York Fed being located on
Liberty Street both of them are
unconstitutional both of them limit our
Liberty and they transfer wealth away
from us every second of every day to the
Federal Reserve to the government and to
the banking sector you are now among the
one in a million to Detective theft of
real prosperity so the big question is
what can you do about it
one watch this video until you can
describe and teach it to others those
who understand the system can make
preparations for its unavoidable
collapse and protect themselves
history shows that those who don't will
probably be wiped out to share this
video with everyone especially those you
care about
all it takes is a mouse click or two to
get this message in front of millions
post this video on Facebook tweet it
email it to loved ones please share it
wherever you can 3 join the conversation
the current world monetary system is
based on a 300 year old design meant to
enrich a few at the expense of the many
there must be a better way
at hidden secrets of money com we've
created an open-source platform for the
design and development of a new world
monetary system we're calling on every
economist every student every college
every bright mind and anyone who cares
to join the discussion in educating
ourselves and each other we can prevent
the further loss of our freedoms and
maybe just maybe we
then back
[Music]
[Music]
I think your episode four is very
beneficial very helpful it was going to
introduce these ideas to a lot of people
and like I've just been talking about we
have to change people's mind and the
more they understand it the better and I
think we're at this point now where more
people and last several years for five
years have thought about the Fed than
they ever have in Latin previous 95
years so I think an explanation and
diagrams to show it it's very helpful
because quite frankly they're not going
to get it in their grade school they're
not going to get it in the high schools
they're not going to get it in college
unless they're in a very rare
circumstance to understand how how this
works you know for years before I got
involved in really selling gold and some
of the things I read and talked about
today I was a monetary economist for
decades you know in your video you
talked about the primary dealers
I was chief counsel and chief credit
officer one of the largest primary
dealers for ten years so I had an inside
seat on the Treasury market and had the
privilege of working with several former
vice chairman of the board of governors
Manley Johnson and David Mullins going
back to the 80s and 90s so I'm very
immersed in what you're talking about I
thought it was extremely accurate
extremely clear I didn't think you were
stretching on any points it was it was
really exciting something out of the PhD
course except that it was very easy to
understand I think it's accessible I
think I think we're seeing a little bit
of a revolution in communications in the
following sense you know as you point
out the Fed was created in 1913 well in
1913 there was no web there was no
YouTube no Twitter there's really no one
to kind of stand up and oppose the Fed
or call them out if you will or really
get into a discussion that everyday
Americans could follow that's not true
now with with social media and
everything else you can reach out to
millions and tens of millions of people
and tell them what's going on I think
you've done that you've done
successfully I applaud it I think this
is a great video I look forward to
seeing it again I know millions of
people enjoy it well as we know the
Federal Reserve believes it can create
money out of thin air not realize money
supposed to represent real products and
services and what people don't realize
when the Fed does that in effect as
Keynes pointed out it's a form of
taxation it's a form of confiscation and
because people don't see it the
politicos get away with it but it also
undermines social trust it just is a
corrosive throughout society we're going
to have a lot of turmoil in coming years
but it's going to be the kind of turmoil
that leads to positive things so don't
despair get out there and fight because
the tide is going to turn this is going
to be the status last stand thank you
this episode of Mike Melones hidden
secrets of money was brought to you by
goldsilver.com
and the new silver pegasus round to
learn how to protect your family and
turn the coming economic storms and
opportunity visit gold silver calm
[Music]
you
[Music]