welcome welcome to meditating with John
gravity we live every weekday morning at
9:30 a.m. Eastern Time with Monday's
alternating between a new lesson on the
day and this Monday is such a Dharma day
and a review of the whole ecology
practices of Pi a day which will be next
Monday every day we sit together and at
the end there's Q&A please limit your q
and a's to discourse the psychology of
practices if you're joining us for the
first time you're most welcome
but for previous lessons and sits I see
the description I recommend doing lesson
one immediately and then you can
continue to practice with us and meet
with us and every Saturday or Sunday do
the following lesson lesson two three
four etc and you'll catch up with us
quite quickly reminder if you have more
general questions beyond those for the
Q&A that every third Friday of the month
we have a more general Q&A live stream
on YouTube 3:00 p.m. Eastern we just did
one this past Friday we ended up going
longer than normally go because I'm
really I guess this sounds a little bit
too 1968 but I really got into it I was
it was really enriching and enrapturing
and I really appreciated that a lot so I
hope people also found an equally
resonant for them a couple more general
things before we get into the Dharma day
this is again a reminder for the long
term for those of you who want to commit
to the wisdom Sangha you need to order
this book the wisdom of Hypatia by Brian
McClennan okay and I'm pretty sure it's
available
relatively inexpensively on Amazon so
please consider doing that as soon as
you can because we're going to be moving
towards that in the summer
okay so today is a dharma day and what I
want to do is show you a Siddha practice
but it's this particular type of
practice so I'm also going to start
teaching you some of the principles by
which you construct an ecology of
practices because I want it to be clear
that I are not offering any kind of
exclusive ecology I'm offering a
philosophically grounded pluralism which
is there's shared principles that are
that are grounded both in the best
cognitive science and convergence from
the wisdom traditions but each one of
those principles can be enacted by
various families of practices and you
want to put them together in a fashion
one of the things we'll talk about is
you want various practices to have a
complementary relationship they have
corresponding corresponding strengths
and weaknesses well it's an example of
that design feature within this ecology
that I'm showing you so far because we
have we have a complementarity
relationship between meditation and
contemplation they have a compensate for
each other they self correct for each
other so you want to be looking for
relate and we have set in still
practices and then moving practices
right complementary relationships right
so that enhances the capacity of the
whole ecology to be as self-correcting
as possible we also have layering
practices where we take a practice and
like we build a one-layer practices and
then we exact it up into a higher order
of practice what's an example of that
Praja right we have we take meta and the
past night and we integrate them and
then they get exact it up into Praja and
then you're linking practices practices
that are designed to bridge and help you
to transition between practices and more
smoothly let's take an example of that
the clear example of that is Lexi o
Divina which helps to transition and get
via logos and the mindfulness practice
is to talk to each other so now I'm
giving you another one of these
practices that's both a linking and a
bit of a layering practice so it's
designed to be it's a sitting practice
but it's
it's an moving practice so it's designed
to bridge between you know the standing
and we'll eventually do some meditative
walking right moving practices and the
sitted practice okay so one more time
let's review some of the devant and
design principles and I say almost said
divine principles I wonder if that's a
union slip of some kind so you're
looking for relationships of
complementarity so you get dynamical
self-correction you're looking for
relationships layering so you get
dynamical development and excitation and
you're looking for relations of
transition so that you get dynamical
progression between the practices okay
so what is that practice well it's a
form of Chi con but its influence it's
influenced significantly also by
Kundalini and so you'll some of you who
do chakra work as I've mentioned before
I don't get too much out of the chakra
system and I've practiced Kundalini bit
I haven't had once in my life and I
don't know what it means I mean it was
helpful to me that that's I don't want
to like set it up as and if you have
experienced a sort of a very powerful
Kundalini experience so I have some
sense of what what's going on there but
I'm not going to put so much emphasis on
that I'm going to put an emphasis more
on how that gets integrated with the the
Taoist practices because that will more
smoothly integrate with ecology
practices so let me describe it to you
and there's sort of two things to it too
there's a sort of a more of movement of
body and then movement of mind and then
the movement of mind won't be that form
to you so I'm going to describe each one
to you and I'll demonstrate a little bit
please keep your eyes open and watch
because then we'll do it together and
I'll also talk you through it okay so
the first like this right so let's say
we we've we've done you know we brought
down the heavens and now we sit okay so
we're gonna put our hands in front of
our face like this and we lift her and
you'll recognize you see how this links
to what you've already do
so I do ah alright inhale and then I
exhale and I close my eyes and I come
into the prayer position like this now
when I inhale I press my hands not like
not not like like a stream but I press
my hands and I try to like move towards
the center of my mind like in the depths
of the pasta so pressing my hands and
moving to the very center so the most
imminent aspect of my experience
okay so inhale exhale inhale press and
the next sale put your hands out keeping
your eyes closed and then open your eyes
again and the inhale and then exhale
close in the opressed exhale hands okay
and you'll do like four of those and
then on your last exhale instead of your
hands coming in front to go to your side
like this and then you take four in
breaths with each in-breath you open
your hands more and this is the part of
your mind that's expanding out and
you're giving your mind an anchor for
that in the gesture but you're also
moving towards the center so you're
doing something like project you're
trying to integrate the two together so
with each inhale and then we hold your
breath for a count of four
and then as you exhale you bring your
hands to your throat like this you do
those four inhales and hold your breath
against and then you rotate one way for
four times and then four times this way
and then whenever you exhale you move
your hands to the next plot so it's
mixbus now you move to your heart for
inhales rotate you're trying to feel
that warmth like you do and the moving
exercises between your hands
but now into your body and then this way
holding your breath throughout I can't
hold my breath because I've got to talk
and then as I exhale move to your solar
plexus for an in-breath rotate one way
or the other way okay and then the Don
Tian I'm going to talk you through all
of this again
okay now for the last one like the
microcosmic orbit right above right sort
of your pelvis area pelvic area right
here you can you you you you tighten the
sphincter muscle for in breasts then
rotate one two three four one two three
four then exhale and then draining and
like like in rooting draining melting
sinking into the earth opening melting
draining sinking into the earth
put your hands in whatever position you
would for the meditation and then we do
the next part which is more the movement
of mine so you Center your mind above
your head and then as you inhale you
expand to the horizon and then as you
exhale you contract to the core and then
in the pause between breaths you drop to
the centre of your skull your head
inhale to the horizon exhale to the core
and there's space between your breaths
drop to your throat you don't move your
arms I'm showing you what you're doing
with your mind your arm stay still I'm
just showing you with my arms what your
mind is doing you draw your heart again
and try to make this 360 you're not just
expanding this way you're expanding this
way it's like a sphere expand it and
that solar plexus same thing all right
don t on the same thing again contract
the sphincter muscle the root and then
drain into the earth okay so this is a
practice that's designed and you notice
that that's already get you into some
proto flow some proto rooting and now
will you Center and root you'll find and
flow you'll find that they're even more
powerfully engaged so this is a
transition ok so again we're looking for
complementarity relationships layering
relationships
and linking relationships so now let's
do it and what we'll do is the following
ok we'll set the timer Jason if you
could adjust for this we'll set the
timer for 15 minutes
because what we're going to do is I'm
going to take you through I'll talk you
through right both the well they're both
movements of my good body but one is
emphasizing moving the body the other is
emphasizing moving the mind I'll take
I'll talk you through the whole sequence
and then we'll without interruption I'll
just say and now go into like your
practice like go past neuro or meta or
proj nut and then we'll come out of it
and then they'll be time for questions
and answers okay so that's what we're
gonna do okay so let's begin okay so you
start with your you're gonna tilt your
head up slightly so this is Jane Johnson
see Jane Austen have James Austen's work
on then in the brain and bunch of things
I have to talk to him in person
and the idea is by orienting your vision
and your affective state you can write
and you move between first-person and
third-person processing you're actually
activating fundamentally different areas
sort of stratum of the brain and so the
this these kinds of practices are sort
of trying to point towards some really
good cognitive sciences to support their
functionality so we start with their
hands in front like this we lift our
head up and we're doing it on again like
ah like experiencing ah and we're Pantha
money it and then we exhale and we're
coming in and this is a primordial thing
to write into the prayer posture because
this is like they're getting into a hot
bath and we inhale and press and press
in toward the core of the mind exhale
keeping your eyes closed put your hands
out back into their original position
now inhale and repeat the sequence we'll
do it three more times
[Applause]
[Applause]
[Applause]
now on this last exhale bring your hands
beside you and it for inhales moving the
hands out so your mind is going both
howling in like in crash nut and hold it
for a count of four and then he'll
exhale bring your hands to your throat
for in breaths and hold your breath or
rotations one way feel that heat and
then the other way and as you exhale
drop your hands to your heart for
inhales and hold your breath
one way or directions four times in one
direction I should say four times in the
other direction and exhale your hands
solar plexus repeat four inhales and
then with your breath on the other way
as your exhale drop your hands to down
to n4 inhales and hold your breath
on the other way your exhale house here
take your sphincter for inhales with
your breath rotate
as you exhale everything melting
draining into the earth like the root of
your tree in the rooting exercise bring
your mind above your head open those
circle outward as you inhale to the
horizon
exhale to the core and then in a space
between breaths talk to the core of your
head open to the rise in with you now
collapse to the core with the exhale up
to the throat core the throat inhale to
the horizon let's go to the core
not to the heart repeat
solar plexus
countdown
training into the earth reconnecting
with your roof now begin your city
practice the pasta not approach them
[Music]
slowly come out of your practice trying
as best you can to integrate what you
cultivated in your practice with your
everyday consciousness cognition
character and communitas perhaps by
reciting the five promises to yourself
okay we have time for a couple questions
hi Victoria it's good to see you we see
your name and know that you're there is
the for breath where it's out related to
the levels in the view from above I
haven't thought of that boom I haven't
thought of that that's that strikes me
as an insightful ridging or maybe
layering to explore I don't know that's
that's a that's a really good question I
would I would I think that's worthy of
exploration that strikes me is
insightful II worthy that has never been
explicitly part of my practice but it
strikes me as plausibly insightful Diane
Nicholson for the beginning of the
practice is the rotation about the
vertical axis do you mean like here yes
like you're rotating this way and this
way and like so this is the vertical
axis you're rotating clockwise and
counterclockwise David's so the plane of
rotation is this plane I hope that
answered your question this is one of
the difficulties about doing this whole
virtual EA but we'll make it work
well we're together we'll make it work
we'll make it work Kiera Kroger hi Kara
is practicing a musical instrument
something to be included in ecology
practices definitely definitely it's not
something for which I have any expertise
or any in-depth experience so I am
speaking from the other side I cannot be
a guy in this for you but so many of
their traditions emphasize the
participation of music I wish I did
because the the notice them the musical
metaphor their resonance between a
musical practice and what you're doing
in Tai Chi Chuan is deep and profound I
would definitely include that I
definitely include that as long as the
and this is sort of a concern Plato had
about music as long as the music is like
it like like what we do at the for prop
five promises you practicing it
mindfully carefully lovingly that you're
trying to remember the being mode you're
trying to experience reverence and
respect for religio and and you're
trying to cultivate wisdom and if music
is that for you
most definitely excellent excellent
proposal again I don't have such a
talent or skill but I there's clear
converging evidence from so many Western
traditions that that should be part of
any good at called you practices when I
was on sabbatical I was going to take up
the shakuhachi but time and financial
resources and other things you know have
a life of their own and went another way
and I couldn't do it but most definitely
so so last question from Kelly Meyers
is your recommendation we do this move
it's moving see to practice before the
court for yes yes exactly exactly so
thank you Kelly that's exactly so this
is you know this is a linking practice
it's designed to help you transition
from the standing and moving Qigong into
sit into sit and then you can go into
the court but you'll find especially the
routing and the flowing right have been
prepared there already through activated
and partially actualized there in
potentia actually right there actualized
potential on the beginning to flow and
so you'll find that there's a bit
there's layering as well so doing that
practice will layer into the core for in
a powerful way remember when you're
doing that breathing pront all of that
breathing aspect although you're holding
your breath and you're doing and you
don't hyperventilate
you don't hyperventilate so if you're
getting lightheaded you're you're
hyperventilating and you need to reduce
sort of the intensity of the effort and
the extremes of the breathing okay I
will review this like I'll talk you
through again about both the movement of
body and the movement of mind practice
on both Wednesday and Friday so thank
you all for joining I want to thank my
dear friend and techni me
our behind-the-scenes making things
happen and my beloved son Jason always
making things happen
opening with you coping with the
unexpected and the novel which is great
please subscribe this channel to be
noticed on the unnoted of the next video
you'll find links to the lecture series
awakening for the meaning crisis and to
the deal logo series voices with rob a
key that will set this into a broader
spectrum a more encompassing framework
and way of seeing and being way of life
please like this video
raise its profile on the youtube search
algorithm please share this with as many
people as you possibly can
this whole ecology practices please
remember to order the wisdom of Hypatia
if you want to do go into the long term
practice with the wisdom saying up you
can continue this practice and deepen
and enrich it by going to the discord
server where there are people who have
been doing this practice there's larger
communities I will be on the discord
server tonight at 6 p.m. Eastern for the
bi-weekly Q&A we've had just a wonderful
set of people people on there my dear
friend and collaborator at Christopher
master Pietro was on it was just
listening to that last line just
wonderful Jordan Hall was on and Jordan
is like oh my gosh that man is brilliant
oh my gosh alright you'll find links to
the discord server yeah in the
description of this video
reminder we're doing this practice every
this ecology of practice every morning
at 9:30 Eastern Time remember continuity
of practice more important than quantity
of practice there is no enemy worse than
your own mind and body there is a friend
no Ally no true companion on the path
better than your own mind body we lamps
unto yourself and to each other I'll see
you all tomorrow
take good care