hello hi Morgan can you hear me okay I
can how about me can you hear me yeah
you're very clear I'm outside so if the
noise of the end of the ocean gets too
noisy just let me go I can head inside
ha ha ha sounds like a rough environment
right yeah how are you doing I'm doing
wonderfully to be perfectly honest I was
rereading your billion articles much as
it is a book but um yeah it's great it's
fantastic to encounter it now just
thinking about all the different folks I
had offended too and you're ready we're
really yeah I would very much appreciate
that I have been you know speaking about
the the ambiguity that you just kind of
alluded to with respect to the article
versus book context I've been wondering
in terms of you know how how best to
publish it right like would it be better
split up into multiple articles or as a
long-form one I would I would I would I
would in a virtual form I would break it
up into probably four different articles
my sense is maybe five maybe three but
it's a board seems like feels right and
medium of course has that structurally
is really they design it so it's easy to
do it that way yep
and I've noticed they even like it at a
stylistic level you've almost already
coated that in where each section
recapitulates things in a way that
allows somebody to break off come back a
couple of days later and just kind of
refresh and then separately I'm glad you
got that feeling because I was hoping to
do that given the the relative
complexity of the article I'm trying to
kind of create a continuity amongst
those ideas I think it's one of those
things where you kind of have to do
something like that so I'm glad it came
through yeah absolutely I noticed that
actually myself from something I've been
writing recently that you do you know
for as the writer the concepts are very
clear so it may feel a bit from my
perspective it feels maybe a bit
repetitive move on I think for the for
the reader it's extremely useful to kind
of have like almost like an ABC a EF a
be some kind of structure like that
where you're laying something out and
then you're coming back
returning to it in the new context that
the reader is now built in their
consciousness Dibble more it it's I
guess it would be structurally identical
to the evolutionary laying down of
complex ecosystems yeah I think it has a
lot to do with the idea of you know
building those coherent structures to
some extent not to get too mad and loop
back on the concepts in the essay itself
but at least that's something that I
noticed developing as just a human being
in this world trying to communicate with
other human beings and realizing over
time just how complex that can be when
you're trying to communicate ideas that
you think make complete sense in your
own mind given all of the late knowledge
and structure that you've carried with
you implicitly and yet does not
necessarily exist in the vast majority
of other minds or may exist but in some
other form of translated or rotated or
projected shapes that you need to
discover and kind of pull out somehow by
the way I just were interrupts that's a
great metaphor like the the topological
language um if somebody catches that
metaphor you're gonna be grabbing a lot
of territory precisely in doing map
mapping yeah yeah yeah I I have the
language of projection and
transformation and so we've given the
fact that I had that that language we
can now you begin using that which is a
very powerful language for doing this
kind of exercise extremely powerful and
then that's why when I heard you speak I
think so we met for the first time at
the what is the upgrading democracy
conference about a year ago okay and I
mean when you were speaking that was
also when I first met Brett Weinstein
for the first time because he was there
that day as well yeah that was before
the whole evergreen concentricity and
you got thrust onto the onto the
national or international stage yeah
which I think in the long term will be
obviously in that positive given that
his message is now finding a much larger
forum yeah I heard I heard you speaking
that day and you know I did hear you at
least alluding to if not explicitly
using bet on that
topological language and that's been
something that's been deeply ingrained
into my own my own thinking
ever since I started toying with ya my
background was in evolutionary
psychology and behavioral economics in
college but I got really into
agent-based modeling mmm thinking around
those types of systems and understanding
adaptive landscapes and and playing with
the variables to understand the
different you know modalities or phases
of complex system dynamics and building
up an intuition for that and I think
that that sort of laid this neural
framework for how I thought about
absolutely everything and and from that
it seemed very obvious when I would try
to communicate particular ideas and then
I came to realize that that framework of
communication just it's it's not part of
the general consciousness right it's not
so I thought generally it's not the way
we tend to think about systems and this
is actually one of the topics that you
know I don't know we don't need to jump
into it right now cuz there's some other
things that might be more important to
speak about but I feel as if it's deeply
related to the limits of statistical
understanding as we as we tend to use
statistics in popular communication
there are particular abstractions and
ways of communicating ideas that are
hangovers from more statistical as
opposed to dynamical perspective hi
I have no idea what you're talking about
therefore I'm very intrigued so I agree
with you I'm not sure if it's the it's
the most interesting yet important place
to go but thanks either let me apply a
heuristic though I don't know how much
effort it would take to explore that
area but given the fact that it is
always best in the beginning of a
relationship to build coherence mmm-hmm
think about the fact that it just is
intrinsically interesting and is an
example of a place where there's a
current lack of obvious coherence it may
actually heuristic would be useful to
basically put it out as a play space
mm-hmm to that to collaborate together
on learning how to just share how we can
come to understand more effectively yeah
that is general purpose always useful
and probably is in fact justifies going
into it
maybe rationalizing just the fact that
I'm curious no no certainly certainly I
mean maybe I can just kind of try to
reiterate and paraphrase it in a way
that could give you a mental or
cognitive placeholder that might be a
little bit more graspable than that
first pass which was not very clear um I
think the best way that I've heard it
described succinctly was actually in
which book was it one of young Carl
Jung's books in which he talks a little
bit about he was a very simple example
in terms of you know you have something
like a hundred marble and the average
weight of a marble might be something
like 8.3 grams but you might very easily
come to find out that no single marble
is 8.3 grams right so there's this
there's an abstraction of truth right
and that abstraction of truth has
certain utility it can be used for
certain you could use as a tool for
certain purposes in the world more or
less effectively but there's still a
space there's still like an abstraction
gap between the actual empirical or
physical actuality of the system and the
abstraction of the statistical
understanding above that system ok and
and what I was talking about before is
that you know that the agent based
intuition is far more of a bottom-up
intuition that that kind of bubbles up
from the dynamics of the system as
opposed to trying to use skull
abstractions from the top down yeah
understating completely perfect well
done ok cool cool so with that out of
the way um let me know what you think of
I know you recently wrote something
about Facebook
I'm currently I have something that I
wrote that will be published fairly soon
and in Poulet I think they are two
slightly different perspectives but I
think there
they could be you they feedback on one
another in a way that could be quite
useful to discuss okay perhaps maybe you
could you know yours was from the
perspective of fiduciary responsibility
at Facebook so maybe you could just kind
of elaborate your thought process on
that and then I could come in and kind
of bounce off some of the ideas that
I've been writing about sure so the the
original motivation was actually taking
a look at the evolving landscape at a
pretty high level so including for
example things like Internet of Things
yep and well sensors in general and the
natural the natural path that these
particular technological capacities
portend
is a generalization of the three
principles I put in my article the idea
is that Facebook just happens to be an
early example of what will show up as
being a nearly ubiquitous I'm actually
just gonna call it a domain right it's a
channel said instead of a phenomena and
and so the the effort was to find
something so given the fact that that's
the case and given the fact that we just
find ourselves in a sort of a
strategically interesting location where
a lot of attention is pointed at the
problematic of Facebook right the canary
in the coalmine is coughing vigorously
um an effort to find a way to there's
about three things let me see if I can
hold all three simultaneously to
meaningfully and simply and clearly
convey
a way of structuring a space for that
entire domain that because it's actually
already been it's a kind of a principle
of biomimicry a way of structure in this
space that has already been the subject
of a very long evolutionary history with
a variety of different early examples
that actually show up in the same domain
so we get the advantage of not having to
to do sort of classic top-down design
but to be able to do something that the
my deep code group calls transcendental
design which is something that utilizes
both bottoms up and top-down methodology
in a coherent space who to develop those
kinds of structures and so that then led
to the proposition that the concept of
the douchy a responsibility which is as
far as I can tell at least 1200 years
old and spans all of common law
turns out to be a way of creating a well
instantiating a structure that already
lives at a deep level of intuition
across the entire collective
intelligence of the legal set of legal
institutions that span all of Western
civilization and by the way also most of
India that is
[Music]
Varia to take a very precise way of
selecting the right kinds of values that
are responsive to the set of
characteristics of the domain hmm
and just to recapitulate the
characteristics of intimacy ubiquity and
I called it AI but it's actually just a
symmetry so that was the idea
I'm sorry and then of course by
virtually being simple and Present and
intuitive that hopefully would also have
strategic ability to catch on the wave
that exists right now and perhaps bring
some level of increasing consciousness
of both the nature of the problematic
and of the well and of what the right
kinds of solutions should feel like not
even look like but feel like
did I talk to you about Joe Edelman
stuff um I don't think we've discussed
it explicitly although I'm like familiar
in passing with okay so Joe the Joe is
not involved in this conversation but if
you if you tap into the primary and move
that he's making it's completely aligned
with the primary move that you're making
as far as I can tell and it's also
associated with this which is just say
beginning to build skill sets at the
lair in the meaning-making stack not the
sense leading stacked with the
meaning-making stack yeah that is at the
lowest level um so that's that's that's
that was the other chart sort of driving
back there which is to start to get
people to become aware of their own
values complexes and how those value
complexes relate to each other and then
show up and how they make sense move
from making sense of to making choices
in which is how I define meaning making
in the world that's the that's the
context yeah within a complex system I
kind of see those you know within that
meeting making framework kind of see
them as like the nucleation events in
the feed-forward process of of
instantiating structures that would
would then display your meaning or
display values in society right so so
you get you get environmental stimuli
based on you know you know the way that
the way that you perceive all of that
stimuli is is this extremely layered
response that occurs across you know the
biological the so Sebald biological the
cultural technological layers at all of
these different I guess you might call
frame rates of kind of iterative frame
rates and they're all happening
simultaneously
and so when information comes in
based on me I guess what you might
characterize as self sovereign
structures within the individual line
you might grasp on two different facets
of that information or those stimuli and
therefore respond in a host of different
ways based on what you perceive to be
the most relevant way to act in your
environment yep and when those types of
patterns start clearing into something
that gives you a response that is
perhaps desirable or may you might even
not be desirable it might be just
addictive but but that kind of starts
threading into the idea of meaning as a
pattern it's something that you can
actually grasp in a way that is that is
subjectively relevant to your desire to
either consciously achieve a goal or act
on behalf of one of the goals that
larger structures may have for you and
and have embedded inside of you right
without your conscious knowledge whoo
okay so you actually grab three distinct
domains simultaneously and there's
certain places where you you actually
like drop to into a concept I saw it
like open like
what was it the distinction between what
is what is good and what is addictive
mm-hmm is what happens when you move
from the perception to the through sense
making into meaning making mm-hmm
because it's actually precisely in the
gap between the feed-forward and the
feedback loop so you have a perceptual
modality in a sense making set of
heuristics that endeavor to close the
binding between what is good and what is
perceived as good mm-hmm
and of course addiction lives in that
gap right it is that which is perceived
but is not good at a maximal level um so
it's maximally perceived and minimally
good is max is is you know the essence
of addiction so that's like catching
that catching what happens as the
feedback loops and starts to come back
from adaptive reality so you have this
in this sort of double OODA loop layer
where you've got your internal
subjective processes that are moving
from these boats a layered voci
multimodal differentially frame rated
perception sense making meaning making
choice making action taking processes
and then you've got it which then in in
the sense making the media making you're
going to be making sure istic
propositions around the degree to which
the consequences that you're perceiving
are themselves good and then
simultaneously you have underneath the
other half so I think of it as a circle
on the other half of the circle you have
actual complex reality which is doing
kind of the same thing which is to say
that your actions are now propagating
out into reality changing the context or
the niche the environment in which
you're in and feeding back on you in
ways that are propagating back up
through that process which will show up
as in fact actually adapted um and then
that's that sphere is is the total loop
and it's really interesting that if you
actually recognize that you've got a
subjective objective slice and you run a
sphere throughout all of that recognize
that your sovereignty must contain that
entire sphere mine your agency only
lives in the top half of the sphere
um and the inter mediate between the
subjective and the object is the area of
um perceptual antigenic relationship
then that like that's the model that I
work with okay okay
I like the spherical idea so at some
point if we meet up I would like to
actually show you some of the drawings
that I mean quite a while ago when I was
in San Francisco yeah okay so I'm I'm
gonna be coming up there apparently uh
metallic and some of the other people
cerium requested that I come up and give
them some some advice and mentorship
okay so I'll be coming up mainly to use
that yes I think they're definitely in
need right now for sure
you may night and I'll probably be up
for a little while like maybe four or
five days I'm gonna meet up with other
another group of people called the
Terran collective okay you know that I
have not heard of them time Aaron
through your door garbage and Tibet
Sprague okay who because they all met at
Burning Man also go by
superhero names I know one of them is
prometheus I don't know the rest okay
they're very interesting just to folks
they got some good stuff going on with
with Gao stack actually mmm they're
doing a lot of like a real kind of a
really coherent product application
development team but also it's a big
conceptual space that they're working in
so I'm also gonna be hanging out with
them but it'd be awesome to actually be
able to connect with you when you say
you live in San Francisco in the city
yeah yeah I'm a straight guy it's okay
it's super easy ah yeah okay cool so
we'll all uh I'll make sure to reach out
to you digitally to to find out how we
can do that well yeah I'd love that
um to tie the kind of try
take what you're saying and map it on to
some of the ideas that I was we began
the conversation with respect to some of
my intuitions with respect and based
emergence when I was studying a lot of
this stuff I was very deep into
topological structures and trying to
understand topological structures as not
just landscapes but also potentially
ways of thinking about the structure of
information flow throughout complex
systems ok and so you're kind of talking
about this sphere through which there
are these dynamic feedback loops moving
encounter currents that are interacting
with one another
yep in a way and I think that our
thinking there aligns and parallels one
another quite almost in an eerie fashion
but I think that's that's partly just
because we're trying to we're trying our
best to perceive reality and perhaps
perceiving certain patterns that you
know the words don't exist the patterns
doesn't exists or we're grasping at the
linguistic structure that we have and
you know it's it's within similar
domains so yep are you familiar with the
idea of you know like a mobius strip
right yep you know a Klein bottle the
yep okay so I was looking at this side
you know these ideas through the lens of
the metaphor my mind was something along
the lines of a nested Klein bottle in
which the point at which it intersects
with itself you would insert yet another
type of Klein bottle information you can
kind of look at the the top of it as the
top of the agenting surface that makes
contact with the environment yeah and
then when the information you can kind
of picture the information flowing down
one side of it into the nested recursion
but then
but then converging two points at some
layer of depth at which it decides to
travel back up the recursive surface
yeah on the inside of that same topology
yep so now you have information flowing
down the recursive topological structure
on one side and up it on the other side
and it's a loo but there's information
flowing up and down
there's a membrane right which is the
quote-unquote surface yep well then it's
not too far from there to think that
there might be some sort of information
exchange or receptors between you know
information moving up the loop from
various depths right and I kind of look
at when I talk about these different
time frames I would kind of map the
different time frames of codified
structures to the different levels of
recursion of this nested klein bottle
structure and so in the deepest version
so certain some information would
trigger something that happens in your
environment some information might flow
all the way down to your deepest
evolutionary structures and interact
with something there and only at that
point would it codify and perhaps
activate a neural structure that then
flowed back up that system but but
that's quite rare because most the time
it's like a sieve or like a sierpinski
gasket or something along those lines
where most of the time it would it would
activate something far more recent and
and those loops I'm thinking a lot about
the the concept to tie this to some
extent back into Facebook in social
media I'm thinking about the the
structures of communication and the way
that we interact with information how
does it impact our ability to exist at
different levels of that recursion and
what is the application of that like
how are we creating structures that trap
us at the surface of that structure
and prevent us from existing within some
of the deeper cultural and historical
patterns of thought in a way I was kind
of like I don't know I'm trying to stack
too many I'm trying to talk too many
concepts right now it's instead that's a
serious stack but let's that's well why
don't we grab grab the last thing you
said and pivot on that yes sir
contextual eyes it in the in the
situation of Facebook we have a nice
simple articulation of Facebook I can
hold the entire stack that you just
articulated it at at least antic label
that you articulated it's not in depth
for sure yeah
but if we start back at the prosaic and
I think those two touch points might be
good so retell that story just for the
point of view of Facebook
so just from the point of Facebook and
perhaps like it uses to lead into
actually what I'm writing about which is
not directly related to this but it's
somewhat related to it
you have to forgive me to some extent
because for many of these ideas I just I
haven't articulated them within my own
mind and tonight can I introduce
something to you mm-hmm
so by the way welcome to deep code so
the it's called rule Omega okay rule
Omega is the the only ethical and
epistemological principle of beat code
and what it articulates is what you just
said and but also the ethical corollary
which is if I am operating under Rule
Omega then you recognize that I am the
kind of being that is endeavoring to
grasp really deep difficult distant
nuanced things and by definition when
I'm expressing them to you they're going
to be very hard to understand in fact I
haven't yet even come close to figuring
what the hell I'm doing yes
however in I am absolutely acting in
good faith to try to do this thing in
collaboration with you and you by
agreeing to rule Omega are also
operating in absolute good faith to try
to listen and to collaborate with me so
that we are forming a shared
consciousness to do this work that we
are in fact both doing simultaneously
it's a love it it's associate with the
thing you said earlier which is they
were trying to for trying to perceive
reality mm-hmm and that ain't easy and
we're very poorly equipped to do it so
understatement of the year so this is
like it's like rule Omega is the
ultimate maiya culpa you are fully
forgiven from the beginning so you were
free and safe to try and do do your most
acrobatic work and sort of I'll do my
best to serve it as a net but of course
will also be simultaneously doing it in
that same thing so it's a mm-hmm it's
real like real time jazz acrobatics over
a over a pit hahaha okay okay so I will
step back and try to tell the Facebook
story and tie it into what I was
discussing
I think it makes sense to
to discuss it through the lens of
perhaps the intensification of
information flows and what the
intensification of flows through a
system you know a network right in an
information in in a network of actual
agents such as ourselves information has
flowed through us across the surface of
humanity's mental landscape so to speak
at different rates across time right so
you know at one point we didn't even
have linguistic symbols that could carry
information between agents and therefore
all of the actual information that we
exchanged with one another had to be
actually embodied in our relationship
structures and I kind of allude to that
to some extent in the message that
you're reading yeah but then you know
there's this and I think you talked
about this is some extent when you have
these you have innovation you have
moments in which the complexity of the
environment and the system in question
synchronize around a new modality of
exchanging information that gives you a
sort of positive feedback loop and you
gain some territory with respect to the
expressive capacity within you know your
network and also again you gain a bit
more control over the domain that may
have once had a greater degree of
control over you mm-hmm
you know we we actually start gripping
the fabric of humanity or grab grabbing
the fabric of reality a little bit more
[Music]
in the capacity to impose our intent
upon more and more complex
complex environments mm-hmm once had
that once almost exclusively exerted
their intent or lack you know just
exerted their just exerted themselves
upon us whether intentionally or not so
you can kind of look at this as a macro
pattern of these this continuous series
of innovations from you know from from
language to actually printed word to
different modalities of actually
increasing the rate of speed and the
distance at which that written word
could be transmitted right
and so we creep we keep creating these
increasingly capable higher speed
networks of infusing human minds in the
network with larger larger degrees of
symbols that carry meaning and therefore
any given moment of a particular
individuals existence is going to be
infused with an increasingly large
amount of these symbols and that's
deeply related to this notion of sense
making in terms of we're at this moment
where I often think a lot about like
what are the limitations of the
structural biology of the human mind in
terms of you know the upper bound of
making sense of a stream of symbols and
then it becomes a question of you know
what is your what is your and this is
this ties into yourself sovereignty idea
like what is your sampling rate what are
the types of things that you target how
do you make sense
look it would sat on sorry my phone my
phone was ringing um how do you how do
you actually you know what are your
interpretive frameworks that you apply
to the selection interpretation of this
decreasing radius symbols and you know
is there some point at which no
interpretative framework may be
sufficient for any one agent to have the
ability to to navigate this system
in a meaningful way not and and and
therefore you know I think perhaps to
some extent that's that's the point at
which collective intelligence becomes
not merely useful but perhaps the only
mechanism of you know the only possible
the only possible technology or the only
possible capacity that we could develop
to allow us to thread the existential
needle right yeah oh and so that's kind
of I kind of look at that as a there's
an accelerating nature to that right and
so then the question becomes with
respect to something like Facebook or
social media how
how much of that is
if you if you use if you use the
try to develop systems that
intentionally leverage the human brain
to lock people within systems that they
are not well equipped to navigate or
make sense within what is that doing to
their what is that doing to their their
ability to engage with the other parts
of contextual reality or deep time or
deep deep code perhaps that they may
need to be able to even become a useful
part of the collective intelligence yeah
that's absolutely correct the short
answer is it degrades yeah and there's I
should return another essay about this
about two months ago mm-hmm
I think called what's the problem with
social media or something like that
mm-hmm
or I actually explicate those ideas more
deeply and it's actually I think five
distinct characteristics of that
phenomena so what one for example I'm at
I think I'm doing it at one or two
levels of abstraction or less
abstraction than you are right now but
for example the the problematic of the
relationship between weak and strong
social links that there's an
optimization so yeah so you've got a
finite amount of attention and you've
got a finite amount of adaptive capacity
now this seems just true it may not be
but it seems to be yeah
you're always we are wired to always be
using our maximum adaptive capacity in
the and in the context of where it makes
sense for us to point our attention and
in the context of something like a
social network like Facebook what ends
up happening is that we're living in a
simulation that grabs a substantial
amount of our attention precisely
because it plays on very very
effectively plays on that gap between
what seems to be good and what is
actually good for us
um and it does so in a way that turns
our adaptive capacity to to optimize for
complicated rather than complex
environments this is something that Joe
Athens been writing about a lot and
four-week social signals and affinity
relationships rather than strong social
signals and coherence relationships this
has to do the thing you're talking about
of surface to death yes that there is
actually apparently as far as we can I
can tell a way for human beings to
become very very adapted to surfing
fast quick shallow affinity mm-hmm
but almost by definition at the expense
of the allocation of those finite
resources to slower deeper
coherence yep um and
I believe I well I believe and I believe
I have a good reason to believe but I
cannot quite recall why um there is
actually that's not that's not good
there's there's there's a way to
demonstrate that
and that the topology of that kind of
collective intelligence mm-hmm
always fails mm-hmm and in fact always
fails in an accelerating finite time
meaning the more you progress towards
that nodal point the more rapid it
actually collapses
I think it's isomorphic with the reason
that complicated systems collapsed so it
ends up being sort of a similar
fundamental dynamic mm-hm which is why
it's difficult like it's it's kind of
unpacking the same fundamental
conceptual scheme across three different
material or physical instantiation
yeah it's gotta be go ahead I didn't
meet her up you know no it's fine um so
let me let me try something on for size
here it's a metaphor that I used to more
maybe more of an intuition pump but I
used to try to navigate this idea myself
and let me just maybe just frame it in
the idea that I would posit that the
issue may be that the
the way that the connective structure
Valls disconnects us from all of our
prior evolutionary knowledge in a way
that makes the system fragile yeah so
the way I kind of used this idea to
conceptualize it to some extent is and I
imagine I imagine the sum total of human
knowledge not just a conscious explicit
knowledge but you know even the the
knowledge that we have latent within us
or just our historical systems or
systems of record or artefactual history
that we may not have fully extracted all
useful information from but but it all
exists layer upon layer but I kind of
look at it as a sphere and all of that
is this layered liquid and the closer
into the center of that liquid sphere
you go the viscosity increases and the
buoyancy you know your your push your it
takes the further you go into the center
the more energy it takes to move further
into the center right yep and so it's
it's hard enough it's like I kind of
think of it like without any conscious
cognitive effort will float on the
surface and Bob there and that's
probably the point of you know least
you
sorry my phone is just going crazy I
need to remember to disconnect it from
all of the otherwise integrated systems
next time I take a conference call so
surface floating least yeah okay so all
right cool
so and in the state of in the state of
non exact aynd of at this point you're
at this point where you're bobbing on
the surface and that point is you know
there's it's a kind of a minimal perhaps
minimal suffering in terms of just the
amount of effort that you might have to
put yourself through to extract
otherwise useful value from this
structure that from this structure that
that otherwise resists our ability to to
extract knowledge from it and this kind
of maps to Peterson's idea of the
archetype of chaos right but it's like
the deeper it's kind of like the sphere
of chaos you can even look at it you
could look at it at that although he
maps that idea to more of like the
external domain of the unknown but I
think that it can also be applied to
this this domain of our own our own
unknown in common polluted involuted to
the Union and unconsciousness and I
figured it you'll get a closure on it
okay okay and then then the interesting
part and then that part is necessary
necessarily the most part about this the
most interesting part about this is that
you know we have to we have to dive we
have to develop structures in the same
way that you would develop a structure
to actually dive underneath the ocean
you know you need to have a scuba tank
or you need to have a submarine you need
to have these these mechanisms that
allow you to withstand pressure and and
not be pushed back up to the surface or
drown in the depths of this this
otherwise this otherwise volatile and
hostile hostile environment to to our
particular consciousness and so it's
like you then we created these
structures of social media or or our
connectivity not only are we buoyant at
the top we've also created a massive
network that creates a surface tension
in a way and maybe that's what I'm kind
of maybe that's the the one takeaway
from this whole metaphorical structure
is that you know we have these different
layers of communication that
incentivize particular modes of
interaction and to the extent that you
are
enmeshed in that surface tension you're
going to spend even less time diving
under the depths of this this knowledge
this kind of like the sphere of
knowledge and actually spending the
energy to take those deep dives and stay
in those deeper layers because you know
this is the idea we have these this
concept of FOMO that's now very much in
the zeitgeist and I think this we're
kind of trying to articulate this notion
of an extreme surface tension to one
another because we have extreme
visibility into one another's lives
extreme visibility into all of the other
processes that are going on at that
behavioral surface and that is going to
pull us away from the types of
exploration of the the invisible the
exploration of the historical the
excellent you know the exploration of
the textual it creates this
gravitational pull away from it or
surface tension I don't know like I said
this is this is all just in my head now
so I need to articulate it before can
actually spell it out in a way that's
compelling I think but
that raw material I'll toss it off to
you
nice that was that was that was terrible
but would you would you would you like
to be the the bass player yeah that felt
like bass to me I was just listening to
the Jazz so you do we just handed it off
to uh to Mingus to play a little bass
solo alright so what are the cut one of
the terms that you used is actually a
term that I wanted to bring into the
conversation which was viscosity so I'm
gonna play with viscosity for a little
bit in this metaphor so we have a
a feedback or a relationship between the
surface and the debt in this sphere um
and it is a relationship that has the
the the deeper you go the higher the
viscosity this means two things one is
the more energy that is necessary to be
able to cause it to move yep and the the
more leverage it has on causing movement
in the other opposite direction yes so
it's like the the the atmosphere of
Jupiter yeah you know as the as Jupiter
rotates the core yeah I guess the deep
the deeper you go the more subject you
would be to its inertial forces that's
right
and the more
the floor and more intense the
execution the the execution of energy is
to generate
I'm gonna just say change I can't go any
further than that yeah all right so
that's one piece and it also speaks the
idea of the deep code the notion of deep
code because
keep code maybe you know the energy
required to actually change that
structural you know code of our culture
requires this this massive exertion to
to yield even smallest of results but
because it underlies every other
structure those small changes may be
enough that's right that's exactly right
and
well okay so let's just slide to that
pretty quickly let me tell you what
we're doing um I could probably give it
to you in its raw form but let me give
it to you in a slightly simpler form and
then come back there's a guy named Tom
sheet tom is working was the was one of
the first guys I think the founder of
Google X then he left and he is working
on trying to do very kind of practical
things in large-scale system dynamics
specifically he grasped the problem of
carbon remediation right so he looked at
the whole system and said oh where
the places were sort of in the most
trouble in the students time frame and
the most distant from any viable
solution and he found in two places one
was coral reefs and the other one was
carbon remediation so the proposition is
that we're already so far out over our
skis on carbon that even if we cut
emissions to zero wouldn't solve
anything we have to actually get
extremely good at pulling it out of the
atmosphere and yeah and sequestering it
so then and this is this is the key
point he then ran a sort of a design
spec on what is a what does a viable
solution even look like um and what are
the parameters and so what he was able
to discover or identify was that we had
to get to the point where we were
pulling something like 10 Giga tons of
carbon from the atmosphere on an annual
basis by 2025 to have any to be a viable
solution we should just say that if we
didn't get that amount in that timeframe
or sooner then the feedback loops of the
dijkstra the destabilization in the
larger system start to get out of
control pretty quickly like there might
be plus or minus two or three years but
it's sort of a a nice envelope yeah
which is the type of conversation that
we really can't meaningfully have in the
public consciousness and miss climate in
terms of you know the the sensitive
dependence on those thresholds and what
that actually means or might look like
if it does and you know to kind of start
Sur kind of falling into that phase
shift you know yep yeah for sure that's
a sort of a meaningful problem and well
actually oddly enough so we'll get there
in a second so so the idea is that the
once you can characterize correctly
characterize what a viable solution must
look like it that's one characteristic
where I guess it's three others have
have to do with the fact that it can't
it must also not generate unanticipated
consequences in other domains right it
doesn't do us any good to do carbon
remediation in the fashion that for
example lipstick say accelerates
collapse the coral reefs you know so it
has to be from a biomimicry perspective
a do no harm solution that also hits
this design criteria mmm-hmm once the
design criteria are put in place then
you can begin the process of actually
trying to figure out how to construct a
solution and see if there's anything
within the viable design space that
actually works as it turns out he
actually found one on its that's nice
and so he's in the process right now of
building it and making it and trying to
instantiate it the point is that deep
code tried to do is endeavoring to do
that kind of thing
at the most fundamental level all right
so if you take a look at the scope of
the total problem can we articulate the
total problem um with enough clarity
that we can then use it to define the
design space of any necessary and
sufficient solution and so for example
the criteria the feedback between any
possible set of rival risk games in the
context of any exponentially
accelerating technological capacity it
turns out to be
one of the primary parameters in fact it
may be the only one that matters because
everything else if you solve for that
everything else actually you kind of get
for free as far as we can tell
and the binding strength or the the
resilience to change that is necessary
to resolve that requires a level of
structural depth that is extraordinary
meaning you actually have to go down to
things that may in fact just flat-out be
invariant under all transforms mm-hmm I
think if this is oh oh fun okay so
here's a different concept this notion
of viscosity is perfect because it
allows you to do is also use the notion
of temperature and you can use that to
then think of intensity so if I have a
you talked about this earlier so when I
innovate a new capacity to deploy
intensity what I ain't what I'm able to
do is relate to things that I used to
have to conceive of as solid has
actually now being liquid I can melt
stuff and so the problematic is that if
you're building a self sovereign
structure on
structures that are meltable then
you actually end up being in deep
trouble yeah so you have to find a way
to find something that is actually will
show up as solid under infinite agency
yeah so I think to some extent then the
metaphor becomes you know the creation
of game theoretic meta material
all right keep going with that so in
terms of the idea that you know there
are we have these we have these low
resolution abstractions when it comes to
the idea of temperature and matter or
the types of matter and the behavior of
the the simple types of matter that we
then you know the layman would know
about in terms of now you have your
solids or liquids or gases your plasmas
if you you know perhaps remember a
little bit more about the high school
textbook but most people don't know that
we're actually in the process of
discovering what is you know what are
known to be hundreds or thousands of
different types of matter right new
states of matter and not only are we
discovering new states of matter that
are these exotic states that matter but
we're also starting to leverage what
we're learning about those states - you
know intentionally engineer materials
that have properties that would not
otherwise be found in the types of
configurations of matter that might
naturally settle within the physical
environment and so in terms of our
biological environment and the game
theoretic model one might look at those
as also potentially categorized by a
smaller subset of low-resolution
game theoretical categories or
rule-based categories I think that that
might map towards something like you
know Stephen Wolfram's mapping of a new
kind of science and like when he kind of
draws like what is it three or four
families of these types of identic
systems just from basic rule sets but
that being said we obviously know that
within complex systems there are all
sorts of other attractor states there
are all sorts of other ways that you can
stabilize local complexity and so we
don't necessarily know as much about is
how to again so so that would map to the
idea of discovering new forms many other
exotic forms of matter would be actually
mapping many other stable attractors of
behavioral space right but then what
we're trying to learn is the same idea
of creating the metamaterials of
attractors in terms of intentionally
taking the reigns of creating stable
complexity with new properties that
might yeah actually settled otherwise
right leg size right perfect yes I'll
hold that now do this thing will you do
it
drill-down so imagine that you're you
your ability to melt is increasing in
intensity so you pout you power through
chemistry and you're now operating at
the level of physics and then you power
through physics now you're operating at
the level of
that thing which gives rise to physics
yeah of which mathematics is a piece or
actually it's the generator function
from which mathematics comes as it turns
out with mathematics and physics are
actually peers and there's a generator
function that lies below both of them
this apology is the kiss that is is
closer you can actually do topology in
both mathematics and physics so now
we're at the level of topology you can
actually go lower than that two levels
and that's as far as it appears that you
actually can go what would you what
would you characterize is two levels
deeper than topology just so that we're
I it we could go there but that requires
that we actually do that work okay the
only thing I can do is to say that
there's a
a a self reifying self-generating
structure that language right there when
I pause before structure the word
structure is a pointer not an actual
object
you know the metaphysical or Boros yes
that's right it's a if so we could just
the topology below topology you're now
going to be dealing with the partition
between ontology and epistemology as it
turns out there's six distinct things
that lay a deficit in that partition
ethics aesthetics ontology epistemology
I can remember the two right now okay
then there's one layer below that which
is the metaphysical Ouroboros the form
the place from which ontology and
epistemology collapse into a singularity
but nonetheless actually has a
Dynamis associated with it yeah so it's
actually the location from which
structure being and dynamics is
omnipresent in a unity sure okay I just
wrote a short poem about this last night
actually it's funny no godly enough I'll
send it over to you after the
conversation nice one but I'm gonna
introduce you to the guy who actually
did that primary work kind of the the
lowest point in deep code that that's
gonna be a that's gonna be awesome yeah
and he'll be very happy you don't he
only has like five people he can talk to
so having people he can talk to is one
of the biggest gifts that we give him
yeah so I mean it truly is to be able to
communicate about these types of ideas
and actually show oh God the beautiful
thing it's a beautiful thing he may
actually start crying by the way and
that's great it's beautiful so so the
point is that
if you're going to be building anything
in an environment that has that level of
potential intensity if you don't take
care to identify in very talk with
metamaterials like if you're trying to
actually build metamaterials you're
going to be half of it you're going to
be having to operate at the level of
topology at a minimum and it turns out
that in the in the you know and under
exponential we get past topology
actually pretty quickly
and maybe you like 2845 so we really
have to actually go all the way down now
the beautiful part is that it appears to
be the case that when you get all the
way down to the metaphysical Ouroboros
the question of intensity breaks down
that you're actually now at a level
below concepts like force and and and
change and so by definition force and
change low longer have any ability to do
anything and if you're actually below
the level of do so you're in an
invariant that is a place from which you
can then construct higher order
[Music]
structures that you can have confidence
will be
able to parameterize all of the
higher-order
I guess behaviors or dynamics without
falling out of
the ability to continue to be
so in a simulation its conception is
that something like me the information
theoretic bedrock then from which all
emerges yeah from your 'cimmanon
perspective did that would be it yeah
and so the interesting question then
becomes you know how do we you know
other than other than conceptually if
it's beyond the domain of empirical
observation
it becomes rather different it becomes
rather difficult to develop those types
of maps and develop an understanding of
if it's beyond dynamics if it's just an
encoding and it's not empirically
identifiable encoding you know we're
working with reverberations only at
these higher levels right the the Pat
the the invariant the emergent invariant
patterns of the reverberations and
trying to work backwards if it let me up
let me do this we can actually get a
look this is actually a helpful tool
empirical is actually a higher level
concept leaking there's actually
something that is more basic than
empirical that we can actually use so
we're we actually where we actually end
up doing as we so we recognize that
empirical ends up being first-person
mm-hmm all right so it's the the binding
at first person which is differentiated
from the binding at third person mm-hmm
and by the way which is differentiated
from the binding at that thing which is
both and neither first and third person
and it turns out you now have closure
those are it that's that's the lowest
level basis at which you can have so you
can do and muscle use is divided between
first and third person or the the but a
state of ambiguity between first and
third person that is that closure or
that is that that ability to feed back
upon itself is that the coherence
binding is that what you're going there
or is that what you're is that it is
actually okay that is exactly it is and
so I mean fortunately we can do that so
so the thing that you're looking for
under the heading of empiricism you can
still look for under the heading of
first-person if there's actually a more
fundamental way of articulating that
first-person is just a useful metaphor
you can get lost if you actually stick
in that metaphor you find yourself
becoming a Buddhist which isn't which is
a bad it's useful no it's not it's not
where it's nothing it doesn't have
everything we need right now and you can
get lost there but the idea is that if
you if you recognize the necessity of
having a simultaneity or a trial to
Naji of what we can call first person
and third person and the binding between
first and third person it's important to
recognize that it's an aunt that third
isn't enough by itself we have to be
able to have all three simultaneously
then you have the checksum that science
has been able to get via what we call
become an H between math and empiricism
so it's just a more basic and
foundational expression of the deep
insight that gave rise to the scientific
method
okay
whoo that was heavy um
and you ever done like I've seen you've
done some variation I'm going to go
juggling
metaphorical juggling no no actual
physical drug line I have I have it you
know I've gotten to a very very basic
level being able to do it but not having
practice it regularly it's something
that I can't just pick up tightrope
walking and love on time abroad you
metaphor
so the you may have some example of this
I've slackline a bit Lachlan okay so the
experience is just a circumstance like
that where you are very much walking on
something where you are at the limits of
your ability to be there yep but you're
indifferent could be there any any
number of embodied experiences are of
that sort that's how I just felt like I
was actually like the petering on the
edge but trying to hold it in place and
get into the other side and like
touching the tree yeah I mean it's a
beautiful thing right I mean it is that
I think it's expressed quite clearly
people like Peterson talked about this
explicitly as well in terms of and this
is why we watch sports this is why we
watch yeah this is this is why we watch
you know those who have practiced or
those who have gone to the limits of our
known capacities act out the limits of
their own capacities for all others to
you know appreciate or potentially try
to emulate and it is a beautiful thing
it's it's it's quite powerful
oh speaking of tithing so what I'm gonna
do is I'm gonna do to interrupt I'm
gonna hand the ball back to you to
finish what you're just saying but I'd
like to introduce before we what is your
heart stop by the way I do have a
probably 30 minutes um I got to get to
something at noon and I don't want to be
pressing it too hard sure I'd like to
loop into pragmatics like what exactly
tactically or materially are you up to
and or what would be the most meaningful
way for us to develop this relationship
but yeah so I'm gonna put that on the
stack high-ropes okay yeah the tires
concept is something that's it's a
little bit I've been thinking about it
through the lens of the evolutionary
metaphor of what we are
the schism between the perception of
stability and the reality of extreme
contingency if that makes sense so you
know in our in our everyday life we are
I kind of like to look at it as
evolution and the processes that have
given rise to us have given us this
powerful gyroscope that we carry with us
as we walk upon this tightrope
and we don't realize that we're on the
tight way above a 10,000 foot chasm
because the gyroscope is so finely tuned
mm-hmm but you know it doesn't take much
in terms of you know if you're willing
to go there and this is one reason why I
think people have such profound
experiences with psychedelics because
that is one way of observing just how
easily the system can be perturbed and
the extreme potential disorientation
that entails from even slight
distortions of that gyroscopic
stabilization and so it's almost kind of
like you know you'll have these moments
and the reason I kind of like to think
about that through the individual lens
because I also think society is starting
to have these moments where we're on the
tightrope we don't realize we're on the
tightrope
but the gyroscope is starting to glitch
out right and it glitches out it stops
working momentarily we get this sense of
you know extreme dizziness or or fear or
fear of heights in terms of like
starting to realize just how deep the
chasm needs to this is if the gyroscope
were to begin malfunctioning in a way
that is more chaotic than it already is
is trending towards and yeah I think I
kind of look at like Trump like that
Trump is this glitch in the gyroscopic
stabilization mechanism yeah it's giving
some people extreme panic reactions to
the realization of just how fragile a
system just how fret just how fragile
reality can become if certain if certain
assumptions are violated repeatedly and
we push over one of those those
thresholds like in the same kind of way
when we're talking about the complex
system of the climate environment it's
like you know you start bumping up
against these thresholds and even though
all behavior before that was was
relatively linear and maps pretty well
to human intuition and we could tell
this linear story of history when you
start bumping up against a phase
transition or a potential bifurcation
point things stop making sense in any
type of linear narrative and you know
when that happens you know then the
bifurcation point is kind of like the
left or right looking down over the over
the over the wire and thousand feet down
you know and Mike you don't want to
necessarily put all off on either side
and the question becomes how do you
maintain the illusion of of that
narrative or even then they're to you
how do you maintain linearity or at
least some sort of coherence the word
some sort of coherence and in this case
I'm going to put sovereignty back into
the end of the vocabulary it's how do
you maintain sovereignty so there's a
couple there's like I think three
distinct things here they're all
separate and interesting the one is the
gyroscope and what I'm going to talk
about so I'm gonna talk about that using
the language you used or we used earlier
in terms of this unconscious
intelligence or stack okay so and
walking on a tightrope is perfect I mean
think about it
a one-year-old can't walk on a floor
mm-hm
that's the beginning of the stack is the
actual building of the capacity to walk
balance awareness perception can the
kinesthetics by the time you get to the
point where you're capable of walking on
a tightrope all of that is being
run in the unconscious meaning it's
being run in a domain of intelligence
that you don't have to have any
conscious control over at all so you end
up having this
your significant gigantic intelligence
that is acting as an unconscious
gyroscope that your conscious volition
and perception
which is itself miniscule relies on
mm-hmm right now there's another aspect
to the degree which that is entirely
unconscious and your consciousness
becomes aware of the vastness of that
for which it is in fact responsible if
it forgets that it's not responsible
then it gets terrified once this is this
is the you look when you're rock
climbing and you look down or you're
walking the tightrope and you suddenly
become aware of the fact you're walking
on the tightrope consciousness takes
itself as taking responsibility for the
vastness of the thing it's trying to do
ie losing track of the fact that it is
just the tiniest trim tab on top of a by
definition equivalently vast capacity
otherwise you wouldn't be even in this
position of tightrope walking then it
falls into immediate overwhelmed now
this is a serious problem
because if it to overwhelm then the
third characteristic arises which is the
well functioning of this stack of this
gyroscope is itself very
delicate and so yet and as consciousness
falls into some form of overwhelm we can
do this very neurologically if you get
scared then actually the neurological is
very very easy right if your if your
prefrontal cortex begins the process of
telling a story that indicates that the
situation you're dealing with is myth
though poetically overwhelming then
paradoxically your adrenal system will
actually respond to that story as if
it's a real phenomenon and kick your
brain into a drew into adrenal and
amygdala hijack which are actually
restricted blood flow and neurological
override out of the prefrontal cortex
radically collapsing your actual
capacity to well your actual capacity
full stop and so you end up with this
really interesting problem that and this
I think is the reason why I've actually
been so interested in the stuff that say
Jordan Peterson is doing or at least the
the space that he is indicating is a
place to look at yep which is I think a
place that I spend a lot and you know I
wrote the my essay on sovereignty is
about this primarily and this is how our
medicine are our metaphorical tightrope
walker operates
yeah you are suspended over an enormous
abyss
and you can only do what you can do
and there's a very large amount of what
you might do that will reduce your
ability to do what you can do so maybe
we should maybe we should connect the
dot because I think there's a lot of
structural parallels between the process
you just outlined
without the realization that the
capacity to bring yourself to the point
at which you even had the ability to
look down in the first place
[Music]
plies
maura relevance than relevance with
respect to that perception of that acute
perception of anxiety or fear in that
moment right and I think that maybe also
precisely we're talking about or what I
was trying to communicate with respect
to the emerging disconnect from the mode
of being on social media yeah I think
that's dead right
but just that the at the collective
scale of the collective organism acting
in that way that's really neat so the
implication would be that ha that's
really interesting I think that's
actually awesomely right so so here's
the way it's feeling to me
using tightrope-walking as the metaphor
there's a way of having an integrated
I'm going to say consciousness that
allows you to be
aware of in the right way the modalities
of intelligence that are in fact
adequate to and responsible for things
like walking
okay but without doing this state shift
where you're pulling responsibility and
agency for that capacity out of those
domains and into some other domains for
which that isn't possible
and so the walking along the tightrope
you suddenly try to take responsibility
for controlling your balance running it
in consciousness which is a
terrible idea yeah but if you're if
you're really really self-aware like you
could do it right now I got yeah I can
can stand on one foot and you can notice
that yeah what's going on like I'm
standing on one foot holding the laptop
in one hand and balancing if I'm just
like listening very closely I can be
aware of the fact there's actually an
intelligence that's taking care of that
I can notice it the more I try to pay
attention to where my balance is the
less balance I have is harder because
I'm somehow I'm changing the sovereignty
flow and putting the sort of the shape
of that intelligence out of sphere yeah
I can still notice it and that's that's
where it is right but here's the key
thing all right so given that metaphor
that sphere of meta solvent we've been
talking about these layers of viscosity
all the way down to the deep code there
is a mode of intelligence that is
operating at that level already our job
is to actually be able to be present to
a kind of being aware that allows us to
give that intelligence the space and
integration that it needs to surface and
do the work that it needs to do mm-hmm
meaning we cannot operate at the level
of
consciousness and intelligence that we
use at the surface mm-hmm and try to do
the work at the base mm-hmm like it's
good just to extend your your metaphor
in terms of the balancing metaphor and
the trying to tune into that so I think
the way that I kind of look at this as
well going all the way back to the the
kind of recursive T'Pol topological
stack there's this all these processes
dynamic processes going on deep within
the stack and they're sending signals up
the stack that are often in no way
listened to by the conscious mind and
especially not they're there they're
there not only are they not necessarily
listen to or tapped into consciously but
what you're getting at is that if you do
try to listen to them and then take
control without having developed an ear
for them perhaps the interaction can be
quite dizzying literally yep
and it's kind of
those who have those who have attempted
yoga for the first time might be
familiar with these types of these
moments where you put yourself in a
position where you are now
forced to realize that the natural modes
of balance that that control habituated
processes are operating beyond their
limitations mm-hmm and therefore your
conscious mind engages to try to correct
yet if you have not developed the
grammatical capacity to interact with
those structures those emergent
structures and and and parameterize them
with the appropriately subtle touch to
exert appropriately subtle top-down
parameterization your going to fall and
becoming you know rehabilitate that
behavior becomes a process of actually
developing mathematical capacity um if
that makes sense
absolutely yeah that made a lot of sense
that was a very different set of words
that I refused but I get it that was
very well done
yeah that's neat that's actually quite
inspiring that I feel like I have a much
better handle on
what's happening it's really interesting
so this will I think this will actually
end up generally showing up as spiritual
to most people mm-hmm you know it is the
the embodied reality of collective
intelligence mm-hmm that's that's a
really interesting concept I think that
is a we were I think we're actually like
ironically on Twitter and this is I mean
meta ironic I even mentioned Twitter
right now um but you know sort of ik the
kind of conservative voice who you know
take him for what you will but he's
recently I think struck a chord of panic
with his followers because he's begun
speaking and otherwise spiritual
language or talking about things like
energies we're talking about these types
of shifts in the energy of consciousness
mmm he's speaking to a demographic who
has very little likely has very little
cultural immersion in those types of
grammars and he's getting a lot of
friction for that but I think that was
just it there's a recent perception that
I had that maps very well to what you're
saying because I think some people are
starting to perceive these patterns of
coherence for these shifts in the
collective intelligence and the only
language
available to them is the spiritual
language yeah yeah yeah that's
gonna be it's gonna be really
interesting I actually it's kind of neat
I like it and and I'm intrigued I'm
actually gonna take an i I watch him and
see if there's see what what you're
talking about because that also sounds
fascinating it doesn't your tick you
lating it is novel to me I didn't wasn't
aware of it but it doesn't surprise me
yeah because
in just the same way that you know you
and I are noticing that we have come to
very
similar perceptions independently as far
as we can tell as it depended as against
the defendant suggest and of course is
it's obvious what it would be the case
because reality happens to be reality
which is awesome and so it sort of itch
or any agent any human or any sentient
endeavors to perceive reality and
becomes capable of doing so which to say
just constructs within themselves a
integrated intelligence with this
ability to perceive these subtle signals
from the unconscious which also could be
perceived to save their body whom look
at a piece perceive reality and it's
give you the same reality that's
actually like the most optimistic fat
mmm-hmm
to the unavoidable optimism it is an
unavoidable operation get any better
than that yeah it's funny the good you
could articulate the both the the
problematic and the solution can
actually be done pretty simply I can't
quite say it yet in a way that can be
shared simply but it's you know not that
hard it's very similar to this notion
this medical report or the tightrope
walker or the metaphor of the addict to
use use your near passage it's like
maybe three failure conditions identify
that two other conditions
remove the failure conditions and then
you're fine like it's okay
the process of creating the map to
discover the simplicity happens to be
quite complex yeah quite complex yeah
yeah we have just to be respectful your
time we have about 13 minutes left so I
know you may have wanted to go in a
particular direction to wrap things up
we're saying yes there is a with the
stuff that is well here's here's
something that I've been I've been
working on myself
what are the things that you think might
be able to help you flow more smoothly
either by getting them out of the way or
by bringing them into being
mm-hmm whoo a lot of that depends on the
level of resolution I think in my own
personal life I'm working on
articulating the body of thoughts that
have only existed within my own mind in
a way that is that in a way that that
can begin to create the archetypal or
imagistic language that act as beacons
to attract like-minded individuals in a
manner that facilitates more
conversation that gives rise itself to
higher resolution images and you know I
kind of look at it as like this this
process of pointillism in which I'm
trying to create the you know minimally
viable or a pointillist image of minimal
viable interest to those with whom I
would resonate yep on these topics and
then together we can start adding more
points I've been called the generative
bat signaling yeah precisely exactly
exactly so that's part of what I'm doing
and that's one of the reasons why I'm
writing in the way that I'm writing and
starting to try to make some videos
about these topics so that's just the
personal development level and trying to
build the kind of trying to build the
collective intelligence in my own
personal life and identify and integrate
into those networks within the world too
because we are even if we are capable
individuals we are but individuals and
so plugging into those networks is a
highly positive sum game that I would
like to play yeah to the extent I'm
capable and so that's part of what I'm
working on another part of what I'm
working on is trying to take a lot of
these ideas and map them onto a learning
system actually create a mathematical
framework
with respect to the way that I
envisioned
modeling these dynamics topologically
from an agent-based perspective I think
if a tool like that could be created
I mean that it's kind of like this this
experimental map right like what is this
experimental map of the game theoretic
reality in which we exist how can we
potentially start developing tools that
allow us to begin weaving these meta
materials with with tools other than
just words because some extent our words
are only so capable of expressing the
nuance dynamics of what happens at the
edges of these systems so I'm interested
in developing those types of models and
working with anybody who's interested in
that
great above that with respect to the
paper that you've been reading on the
development of human value systems I am
fascinated by the types of increased
grammatical capacities opened to
humanity by distributed systems of value
representation and transaction that
allow us to coordinate our trust and our
interactions gained theoretically in
ways that are more sustainable and
positive some so I think I kind of I
look at this emerging submerging space
of cryptocurrency or what presents
itself
first as cryptocurrency as the entree to
a world of you know stable social
metamaterials of value so yeah
and so I've been thinking a lot about
how to weave those
pieces together with
the notion of a collective so to speak
of those who are interested in creating
technologies or services that would
coherently grow within the world and I
kind of like a value generation engine
is is one way of thinking about it bound
with a coherent substructure of trying
to understand and map out and distribute
the value that flows into it so perhaps
I'm speaking in overly general terms now
but I'm trying to just kind of get this
in in the last few minutes but you know
I look at a lot of the the negative
dynamics in terms of our current
economic structures as emerging from the
capital flows into the systems and the
way that the capital flows into systems
shift incentive structures so the
particular like you know kind of flowing
down a hill from high concentrations of
capital to low concentrations of capital
and then creating incentive structures
largely predicated upon that is highly
efficient in many ways but it also has
its limitations and so we're starting to
experiment with now emergent
collectively intelligent ways of
allocating capital and and organizing
creation in ways that
that perhaps explore more effectively
the value landscape of humanity that
being said they have their own attendant
shortcomings and you know the ico the
first ICO wave was a demonstration of
that and and so I'm very interested in
exploring this space in terms of how to
negotiate that boundary of allowing for
effective structures of emergent
cooperation capital allocation
cooperation and and minimizing
unnecessary competition but maintaining
healthy competition right so that's kind
of where I'm at right now I'm working
with some you know a few people to try
to figure out what that would look like
and how that would take how that would
take form in terms of an actual platform
I have some ideas that I've been mapping
out but yeah I haven't built it yet
so there's so good so the shift to
pragmatics I actually don't want to
overwhelm so I'm just gonna I'm gonna
surface these and reserve them for later
later date but there's a group that I'm
working with that is called the good
money project that is how do I put this
right
they have a nice high capacity for
operational excellence and good intent
and at least the ability to perceive the
value of more sophisticated approaches
mm-hmm right so they have asked for deep
code help in designing a it's actually
kind of very simple their intent is to
try to figure out how to actually create
a intrinsically stable cryptocurrency
right nice desirable simple thing
they're aware of the fact that
that is most interesting in the concept
context of it being a potential
strategic entree into a more
sophisticated multivariate not
necessarily metro sized field of
currencies and I'm using the word
currency there to mean symbolic
structures for modulating and flows in
the way that you use currency in your
Santa Fe talk exactly yeah so they don't
get to the point where they can actually
listen to the Santa Fe talk and know
what I'm talking about but they can get
to the point where they can know the
fact that that is something that's worth
paying attention to mm-hmm and so as a
consequence to come I interact with them
at that at that interface layer where I
endeavor to provide them something that
they actually feel is the consensus
valuable which is to say here's how you
actually design a metastable
cryptocurrency that will work and here's
strategic approaches that will cause it
to disseminate out into the global
environment with maximum integrity and
velocity and by the way if by virtue of
doing this you'll give me permission to
load a couple more things on it that are
my own private stuff that you probably
won't understand or value but you're
just gonna kind of give to me here's
from build to the API and then when we
get there we'll add that so that's an
example there's another team that is
building it's still in the crypto space
they have partnered up with a group that
build the largest scale a house are
called high speed trading trading system
in legacy finance well to build
something like that in crypto I said
this group has made it there's you know
three three billionaires who built this
system they left it there now entirely
ego driven to try to build something
that is super fun and cool in crypto the
team that I'm talking about was had
already has already built kind of an AI
infrastructure for doing that and it's
really a very interesting and
sophisticated adaptive AI infrastructure
with the intent of
bridging exactly what you were just
talking about so it's a collective
intelligence resource allocation that's
that's where they're trying to get to
this is part of the strategic vector so
I'm also working with them and helping
them both strategically make sure that
they're not making mistakes in terms of
how they're setting themselves up and
partnering but also recognizing that the
language that I use here is that we've
got a game a game B transition we have
to be able to rebuild stuff that
operates in and with the game a flows
but nonetheless doesn't becoming capable
of delivering on the game B values so
that's another group
there's a series of potential folks in
the Bay Area who have I've interacted
with a kind of like the level we're
interacting that they've also been
engaging in some kind of bat signaling
generative bass signaling effort that I
think what I'll probably want to do is
maybe get you into a conversation with
the deep code folks here if I can use
your send them the link to your medium
post as an entree that would be perfect
yeah everybody say oh here they can map
it and also when I'm up in San Francisco
maybe just invite you to be part of the
conversation with the Terran collective
just I think there might be some fun
synergy there and it would just be love
yeah I would love that and then we can
we can go down there's a lot a lot of
stuff that can come down the road mm-hmm
oh it turns out that the guy the guy
you
the metaphysics work also happens to be
probably the most skilled stop for
engineer alive or in the top five and so
he told me yesterday that he he is now
reached the point where he must teach me
how to code to continue to be able to
communicate with me so I know I'm going
to be entering into a pot of wine ship
of extending my coding capabilities from
like maybe level two to level five it's
wonderful getting getting into the weeds
of the complexity is something that
gives you just such a visceral
appreciation for you know for the
delicate nuances of this delicate
nuances of the downstream effects of
programming I saw just two I guess we
have one minute I saw there's an artist
who took the the memory buffers in like
a Super Nintendo system referred for
games for the game card basically mapped
them over a particular window of playing
this game and basically took each memory
buffer and graphed it you can actually
see effectively programmer fingerprints
Oh imprint programmers have these
different character s your
characteristics in terms of how they're
intentional code is manifest itself
in a generative relationship with a
player and there are still these
attractor so it's kind of like cognitive
attractors that they've been bedded in
their code Wow
play out as patterns over the memory
buffers and he sells these things as art
you can get him to do any any Super
Nintendo game I've added that is
fantastic that isn't really interesting
yeah oh man
anyhow so I think we have plenty of
fodder for another conversation I'm
sorry you just blew my mind could you
you could do the same thing for
Nietzsche yes yes Wow oh I mean
obviously anybody but that's the example
that pops in my head holy cow that's
killer
okay cool cool cool Wow my brain is
jelly I'll have to let it anneal but
safe safe travels and I really look
forward to speaking more and kind of
pursuing all of these various paths yeah
all right man thank you have a wonderful
day
but yeah