[Music]
so it's probably about 8 months since we
spoke before we did a talk just before
Jordan Peterson South Paris at their
very high profile discussions and we
talked about how to argue to the 90s it
certainly seems to me that there's a bit
of a shift whereas before the Atheist
worldview was sort of quite cynical
religious people are idiots at believing
what they believe was dominant
whereas now I've seen a bit of shit it
sort of seems that now the atheists of
the ones that look a little bit naive
because they're rejecting a huge amount
of the world's knowledge they're
rejecting mythology and that seems
partly related at least to the growth of
interest in Jordan Pederson what do you
make of that well I first was aware of a
shift actually rather earlier in 2013
when my TED talk was so-called banned
you may remember there was a big
controversy I gave a TEDx talk on the
Suns solution and then Ted took it down
following protests from militant
atheists peas ed Myers and Jerry Coyne
who attacked Ed they didn't argue with
what I'd said they just said what I said
was pseudoscience and Ted had destroyed
their credibility by allowing me to be
there I'm familiar that's with that kind
of attack usually people don't argue
with what I say they attack the people
who provide the platform so that then
led to a persistent controversy which
was very embarrassing for Ted and to
start with the sort of atheist troll
types dominated but there was a kind of
backlash and gradually the whole tone of
the debate shifted until they became a
kind of minority and that talk which
they of course couldn't ban you can't
ban anything on the internet anymore has
now had well over 5 million views and
the majority of comments you know
supportive most people can't understand
why this talk should be banned or why
even should be controversial I'm just
scientific questions so that's the first
time I saw the shift myself before that
anything by me was instantly attacked by
the kind of atheist you know the troll
types his that is a huge paradox because
in that all the science was he called
the science division as well you were
saying there are certain things that
you're not allowed to say because of the
dogma of science and the dog with his
science materialists then came down and
said basically prove your point we
exactly
I mean it was ironic I mean they didn't
get it themselves the the irony of it
but that's what happened and so for me
the first sign of a turning point was
then and I think it's accelerated this
process and I think Jordan Peters has
done a great deal to accelerate it
actually and there is something about
the nature of this have bottom-up sense
making of the Internet is bypassing a
lot of the gatekeepers now the people
who have already made up their minds
about you for example yes the Internet
provides a an open forum
for good or ill I mean all sorts of
crazy people can get their views out on
the Internet
but it's for me it's been very helpful
because because I'm a kind of proclaimed
heretic in the world of science I mean
it's not me that proclaims that but I'm
sort of branded as a heretic then the
normal gatekeepers and the mainstream
media rather back off when it's anything
to do with me because it's too
controversial it's not that they're
afraid of the views I'm putting forward
they're afraid of people criticizing
them for allowing these views to be
expressed and you've indicated yet or
are you is that some way off yet well
the point I was making in the science
delusion
ten dogmas of science that I was talking
about the changes that have happened in
science since it came out have all gone
in the direction I was suggesting and
the one weather the greatest change has
happened is in the chapter 11 of that
book is called illusions of objectivity
and it's about the way that scientists
believe that science is true everything
else is sort of false but science is
true because it's replicable and because
of peer review and I pointed out in that
chapter that the way science is actually
practiced the chance of it being
replicable pretty low people pray to
publish their best results they ignore
results that don't fit their theory very
often and indeed many journals won't
publish negative results or for that
matter replications and then due to
three years later there was this
enormous thing blew up in science the
replicability crisis or the
reproducibility crisis where it turned
out that in biomedical sciences up to
90% of publish papers couldn't be
replicated in psychology about 60% the
majority of papers in top journals
turned out not to be replicable and this
has caused an enormous amount of
soul-searching within science I mean the
mood within science that normally I grew
up with it being like that is arrogant
you know we know the truth we're the
kind of new priesthood everyone else is
ignorant and basically deluded and what
we say is true because it's replicable
and it's subject to peer review it now
turns out that a lot of it most of it is
not replicable and it turns out to peer
review processes very badly flawed again
points I made in the science to Lucian
and funnily enough three the English
cover of the science delusion has sort
of crumbling letters of the science
delusion is in crumbling graphics and
three years after the book was published
in the midst of this crisis nature the
top international scientific journal in
discussing the replicability crisis had
a cartoon of the temple of science with
the pillars Krum
the whole robust science across the top
the whole thing crumbling which fitted
this imagery very well I'm working on a
new edition of the science edition them
so dilution Sochi will include the
nature cartoon which is ironic as well
his nature was where that the famous
editorial was published that asked
whether your book in 1981 exactly yes
Sara nature's been at the leading edge
actually of this discussion about the
replica the reproducibility crisis
within science and you you also in the
same book in the science delusion which
is called science set free I think in
America in America you said that we're
seeing a credibility crunch of a
scientific worldview is that more than
just the rep ability replicability
crisis oh yes I mean I think it's the
area where it's most clear is in
consciousness studies I think because
until fairly recently most of science
are still the official materialist
doctrine is that consciousness is
nothing but the activity of the brain it
doesn't do anything there's no such
thing as free will you may imagine
you're conscious but it's a kind of
illusion or a kind of meaningless
byproduct of the physical and chemical
activity of your brain then that's the
official view and it obviously
contradicts just common sense free well
is something we have to take for granted
as part of raising children the legal
system courts of law you know it's it's
just the fabric of all normal human life
otherwise there's no responsibility and
consciousness studies has also now
started well for 120 years been looking
at near-death experiences psychedelic
experiences spontaneous mystical
experiences the effects of spiritual
practices like meditation and his
enormous Lee enlarge the sphere of what
we can talk about and
of human consciousness and that means
that the the narrow mechanistic view of
consciousness it looks very threadbare
and in fact question number of leading
materialists a jumping ship and going
over to Pan psychism the world view that
there's a kind of kind of mind or
consciousness at all levels of nature
including electrons so that's been a
massive intellectual shift I mean it's
still materialism is the dominant theory
and the universities in the educational
system you wouldn't get a hint that any
of this has changed if you study science
at school for example it's still locked
into absolutely old old-style
materialistic thinking but at the
leading edges of science and in the
philosophy of mind there's been a real
shift in mood well I think that the
shift is more in within scientific
communities more under the surface to
know over to surf ISM the number of
scientists who are true believers in the
kind of Dawkins type materialist near
Darwinian worldview is fairly small I
mean as we did some surveys recently
through the scientific and medical
network in Britain among scientific
engineering and medical professionals in
Britain France and Germany some atheist
materialists are about 25 percent of the
scientific community there not a
majority agnostics and non-religious
people about another 20% said 45 percent
classified themselves as non-religious
and about 45 percent classify themselves
as spiritual religious or spiritual but
not religious and so the spiritual /
religious is about the same proportion
almost equal to the non-religious within
science
so the idea they're all committed
atheists and materialists is just not
true but the day the the militant
atheists of materialist tend to talk
louder and
and claim that they speak for the
majority and most other people keep
quiet because they don't want to be
attacked and do you have a sense that
that's what's keeping because it's the
gatekeepers more than anything the
people who are commissioning science
programs for the media or who I guess
feel exposed if they if they did
something or they commissioned something
that was not acceptable to the jury
coins of this world that they would then
be attacked do you think that's what's
keeping these other views out of the
conversation yes I think it's part of
that it I mean they would be attacked
they don't just fear it they would be
attacked because that's how the Gerry
coins of this world work they attack the
gatekeepers and for example I was
invited to give a talk about three years
ago to a leading independent school in
Britain be Dale's school they have an
annual science lecture open to students
and parents is a big event and I was
asked to dirt and I accepted and I
thought everything was plain sailing and
then the New Republic magazine in
America published an article by Jerry
Coyne attacking the school for allowing
me to corrupt the minds of the young
saying this whole generation of young
people would be lost to science because
they'd be influenced by me to adopt
pseudo scientific views and he said I
hoped his readers and he put this online
too he said I hope you'll join me in
emailing the headmaster of B Dale school
to get Rupert Sheldrake disinvited and
he put the email address and started a
whole campaign to get me disinvited well
luckily the headmaster you know just saw
this as being a weird kind of American
thing he'd and and the result was that
the it sold out was in about two days
and they had a wait a long waiting list
but it that's the standard technique and
that's why gatekeepers and media
frightened because they get personally
attacked for for doing this so I think
it's also the case that many people in
media are converted who converse to this
sort of materialist
view I mean they do personally believe
it and they think that a lot of people
in science education or these science
media feel it's their job to persuade
the public that the world is as Richard
Dawkins sees it or as Jerry Coyne sees
it well the the dogmas of science do you
think needs challenged well I mean the
ten I mentioned in my book are the ones
that I think should be channeled I mean
that you want me to go through all of
them I can I can summarize them if you
like yeah well first is the mechanistic
theory of nature nature is a machine the
universities and machine you and I are
machines animals and machines
everything's machinery and what that
means is it's made of unconscious matter
working in accordance with unconscious
laws and forces and there's no purpose
in machinery there's no consciousness
and machinery the whole universe is
unconscious the trouble is that you see
when you think of the big bang theory
the it doesn't look anything like a
machine our present cosmology it starts
very very small and it grows and it
cools down and more and more structures
appear within it the universe is much
more like an organism than a machine no
machine starts very very small and then
grows and develops and develops more
structures that's how embryos develop
the big bang theory is rather like
ancient creation myths of the hatching
of the cosmic egg so we've implicitly
got a kind of organic cosmology and
living organisms it seems to me obvious
that they're organisms not machines and
we call them living organisms and say
they're not really organisms they're
just machines which is what mechanistic
biology says is flies in the face of
common sense and and all our normal
instincts and and then it's oh that's a
Tony a metaphor it's not even a testable
theory it's just a way of looking at the
world it's a metaphor another Dogma is
nature's purposeless and that just
follows
machine tearing machines don't have
their own purposes organisms do you know
if you get on a horse it may have its
own ideas about where it wants to go
whereas you get in a car it doesn't you
know it'll go it's just a mechanism will
follow exactly what you want it's not
interactive in the sense that it has its
own desires the doctrine that matters
unconscious says the entire universe is
non conscious or unconscious all the
styles galaxies the whole universe
everything including you and me we're
supposed to be unconscious matter so
that's why consciousness in humans
becomes a massive problem the so-called
hard problem and that's clearly not a
very viable way of understanding our own
consciousness so it doesn't exist or it
doesn't do anything and that's the
reason we have consciousness studies as
now luckily as one of the most exciting
areas of science so then does the dogma
that all the laws of nature are fixed at
the moment of the big bang they all
suddenly appeared like a cosmic
Napoleonic Code and we're from
well-known explains that they just
suddenly appeared and I think in fact
they're more like habits as a kind of
memory in nature as my own theory of
morphic resonance is a theory of memory
being inherent in nature but it's not
just me I mean Buddhist and Hindu
cosmologies take it for granted as a
kind of memory in nature it's only
really in the West that this idea that
nature's totally a music then the idea
of the total amount of matter and energy
is fixed that again is a dogma that got
built into science in the 19th century
but since then to try and explain the
behavior of galaxies scientists have
invented Dark Matter there's not a shred
of evidence for it but they've invented
at least five times as much as regular
matter and then having made the universe
much heavier and they expected it to
slow down in its expansion more gravity
because of more matter all those extra
it and until about 1999 that's what they
thought was happening then it turned out
it's not slowing down this expansion
it's speeding up safe had to invent
another form of energy to push it apart
dark energy and now dark matter and dark
energy and 95% of reality and we haven't
a clue what they are so this isn't so
it's the total amount the same does it
change actually the total amount of dark
energy increases so the universe is not
a perpetual motion machine then does the
idea memories are stored in the brain
and I think that that is not the case I
think it works by morphic resonance the
brain I think it's more like a tuning
system than a video recorder all
inheritance is supposed to be material
or genetic or epigenetic and again I
think morphic resonance is a large part
of inheritance and attempts to explain
inheritance in terms of genes have run
into serious problems as I showed in my
book the scientists illusion because
they've discovered that genes only
explained 5 to 10 percent of most
inheritance it's called the missing
heritability problem dense the idea of
the mind starting with the brain
I think the minds much more extensive
than the brain and I think evidence for
that includes evidence for the sense of
being stared out and telepathy for which
there's plenty of evidence that goes
against the the next dogma that psychic
phenomena are illusory they ought not
happen because all the minds supposed to
be inside the head and the 10th Dogma is
that mechanistic medicines the only kind
that really works the body is a machine
so treating it chemically or physically
by surgery or drugs is the only valid
way of doing it but the host of
alternative therapies and a placebo
effect which medicine has had to admit
show that it's a great deal - more -
medicine than just drugs and surgery I
mean any sensible doctor knows that of
course
people's attitudes their expectations
their beliefs play an enormous part in
whether they get better or not people
are lonely isolated depressed have
reduced immune system functioning at
less resistance disease diseases people
who feel loved prayed for cared for who
hope they'll get better who expect
they'll get better who have faith in
those who are looking after them do get
better much more than people who don't
believe those things so the mind
influence is netted that shows up in the
placebo effect which is now very very
well documented so medicine itself is
it's very effective up to a point but
the point is it'd be much more effective
if instead of excluding all these
alternative therapies dismissing them as
pseudoscience and quackery and they were
looked at scientifically and wherever
anything works it should become part of
medicine and where did you whether your
interest in these subjects come from why
why do you have a different path to the
kind of classic material scientists but
I became a biologist because I'd loved
plants and animals so as a child I kept
a lot of pets
I collected plants and my father who was
a micro he had a microscope lab at home
and was a herbalist and a naturalist he
encouraged me so a lot of it came from
him I did biology because I really liked
animals and plants and by the time I got
to be an undergraduate where I was at
Cambridge and I realized that the first
thing you do in biology classes is kill
what you're studying and and grind it up
and analyze enzymes and things I was
doing biochemistry at Cambridge and it
wasn't really looking at the things that
I found most interesting and for example
as a child I kept homing pigeons and I
was fascinated I still AM how do pigeons
home I was no one knows even to this day
we were never going to find out by
killing a pigeon and grinding it up and
looking at the enzymes and the
so I was I just found that the questions
I wanted to look at in biology weren't
being looked at and it was just in this
reductionist molecular biological phase
and I wanted to find a more integrative
holistic kind of biology even as an
undergraduate I discovered the writings
of Goethe the German poet and and
scientist who had a vision of a
different kind of science and I didn't
know if that was possible but I managed
to get a year at Harvard to study
philosophy and history of science to get
the bigger picture and realized that at
any given time the beliefs of the
scientific system are not the truth
they're a paradigm the model of reality
Thomas Kuhns book the structure of
scientific revolutions had just come out
where he has the idea of scientific
paradigms and paradigm changes so from
the age of about 21 or 22 I had the idea
that could be a major paradigm change in
science and I wanted to find ways of
accelerating that process so this for me
is a very long term quest my book the
science delusion also and set three
years the most systematic a statement of
this that I've done but I mean it I've
been working on bits of this virtually
throughout my whole scientific career
and where you feel whereas because
there's a lot of people in this is a
broader conversation that are have a
sense of the need for a paradigm shift
and perhaps accelerating certainly even
even the structure or the way that we
frame what we're doing rebel wisdom is
we believe that a lot of the paradigm
shift is being speeded up by online
media like sort of the ongoing crises
seeing around us do you have a sense I
mean it's very easy when we're in these
kind of little worlds to think that oh
it's it's gonna happen soon or we're on
the verge of it do you have any sense of
where we're at
well at least his regard signs there's
no shift in the science education agenda
I mean there's tiny pockets here and
there of more alternative or holistic
science but the mainstream science
agenda hasn't changed really so
generation after generation of young
people are being indoctrinated with the
mechanistic world view it takes many of
them years to grow out of it if they
ever do so that's a major weakness and
paradigm shift
but the educational system follows
rather than leads of course it follows
mainstream scientific thought and
mainstream scientific thought is very
influenced by what you can get paid to
do most scientists do what they're
funded to do they're on a short leash
two or three-year grant cycles and they
do what the grant money is available for
and the vast majority of it is available
to support in medicine you know drug
companies molecular medicine sort of
that kind of approach the British
Medical Research Council spends about
just under a billion pounds a year of
our taxpayer money to fund medical
research how much of it goes on
alternative medicine placebo effect
mind-body medicine you know looking at
Chinese or Indian traditional medicine
you know acupuncture and virtually none
because it's all focused on molecular
medicine mechanistic medicine it's
extremely narrow focus so if you're
working in medical research you're not
going to get funded to do anything
that's outside that model so there's
plenty of people working within science
you'd love it to be different and lots
of scientists have more holistic views
they're in their spare time have a sense
of living nature and themselves as being
part
the planet and the ecological sense of
the need to change many have also
experienced psychedelics or
mind-altering substances or meditate or
have spiritual practices but when they
get to work it's a matter of doing what
you're paid to do so for me one of the
big changes that I hope to see is
changes in funding and this is an area
where private funding can make a really
big difference there are no more
billionaires there than there have ever
been before many of them have got rich
through science and tech II type things
and in the last two three years I've
been approached by at least three major
players in in the billionaire world
who've said that they'd like to find
ways of making science more fun more
exciting and prepared to put money into
doing that and I myself have been funded
privately for 30 years now by maverick
business people who made their money by
being Mavericks who liked the fact that
the kind of science I do is maverick
science they think is more fun and more
exciting than just more business as
usual and if it were possible to
organize people who've got far more
money they can than they can possibly
spend or to influence some of the larger
foundation is to be more adventurous
I think things could change and I know
enough people in that world know there
are big players who would like to see a
change
there's just they don't know quite how
to bring it about there has to be means
of setting up ways of doing this one of
my ideas is setting up a kind of dating
agency for donors who want to see
unusual science and people with
non-conventional science projects and so
that they can sort of meet you know have
dates and and and see what works and and
put people together this would have cut
out the middleman in the four
of funding organizations with big
bureaucracies who demand enormous ly
lengthy grant proposals and stuff
most of these wealthy people don't want
to wade through pages and pages of
reports and grant proposals they want a
personal relationship with researchers
who tell them what they're doing and who
and with the ability to fund something
really new and exciting so I think
that's one way forward in fact is
probably the most promising way forward
the other way forward I think will come
through a breakdown of the present
healthcare system which is just too
expensive and people will be forced to
look for cheaper ways of bringing in
healthcare and most alternative systems
are cheaper than high-tech healthcare
it's kind of going back to a almost kind
of Renaissance patronage yeah I think I
think that's what well it's it's
actually it's already happening I mean
it's how is worked for me that's why
I've been able to function as a
scientist since I was sort of
excommunicated by the editor of nature
in his famous book for burning editorial
that he proclaimed me a heretic
and tried to excommunicate me and
believed that that would be the end of
me but it wasn't because I've always
been very fortunate to have people who
believed in what I do and who've been
prepared to fund it and one thing that
helps is the fact that I both as a
matter of principle and personal
disposition I try and design the
simplest possible experiments to get the
most effective results with minimum cost
and you know I've brought up in the
British minimum cost experimental
tradition so luckily this research isn't
very expensive and actually in general
holistic research is much cheaper than
reductionist research if you're studying
very small things like subatomic
particles you need a 10 billion euro
Large Hadron Collider to do it
if you're studying the behavior of Jack
dolls all you need a binoculars and a
clipboard and paper or a computer so you
can actually study things more easily if
you're working at a holistic level and
your new book is going beyond the
science of spiritual practice do you
have a sense that and also it's a sequel
to another book called the science of
spiritual practice is that because
you're you're seeing that as a kind of
window of validating validating
spiritual practice as a way in to the
materialist world well partly I mean
what I think's happening at Memon is the
basis of my last two books science and
spiritual practices and ways to go
beyond and why they work my most recent
book is that in each book I discuss
seven different spiritual practices
which have been studied scientifically
which have measurable effects because
this is an area where science and
spirituality are converging it's not any
longer that kind of old standoff sort of
scientists saying all that stuff's
rubbish is a waste of time it's not
spiritual view saying you know science
is just too crass and and and and I just
can't appreciate these things what's
happening now is there have been many
thousands actually of serious scientific
studies of spiritual practices such as
meditation which show how they affect
physiology brain activity different
regions of the brain health and
well-being generally speaking these
practices make people happier and
healthier and live longer and so the
science actually illuminates the
spiritual practice and helps to validate
it and spiritual practices enable anyone
who wants to to explore the realm of
consciousness and its connections with
more than human realms of consciousness
which is what spirituality is
traditionally about the idea that we're
not the only conscious beings in the
universe and we I mean the normal
materialist view is we are the only
conscious beings apart from animals
less conscious than us unless there are
little green men with similar kind of
science and brains to us on other
planets but all traditional religion is
based on the idea that there's human
consciousness is one level of conscience
but there are levels beyond ours that
are more inclusive much greater and
higher levels of consciousness to which
we can form the connections and in which
we can participate through spiritual
practices you mentioned before some of
the forces that are stopping change are
we are we looking at some group think
we're looking at you think that mostly
financial or you think they're mostly
cultural well they're both I mean most
people have been to university have been
pretty well indoctrinated with the
materialist Atheist worldview and if
they're going to discover any other
worldview they have to do it outside the
formal educational framework so the
educational system is I think you know
basically a hangover from 19th century
materialism and enlightenment
rationalism which is enlightenment
rationalism is the idea that science and
reason are in the got Vanguard of
humanity religion and spirituality are
just superstitions left over from the
Dark Ages and the scientists of the new
priesthood and we march forward in
through science and technology to
progress I mean that's the standard view
there's some truth in it of course and
we have much better smartphones and
certainly much improved dentistry
compared with 50 years ago and there is
a major advance in technology all the
time but that worldview is underlying
the educational system in practically
every country in the world that's what
people are educated into and that I
think is a major obstacle because it
fills people's minds with this 19th
century materialism and in countries
like India and
in Japan people are educated with this
most some just don't believe it they
they believe it when they're at work or
when they're at school but as soon as
they get home an evening they become
fairly conventional Hindus Muslims Sikhs
Jains or whatever I lived in India for
seven years and very few Indians
materialists atheist types but the
science they do is like that it's just
that they see that as a separate
compartment separate bit of their lives
those are the rules if you want to get
ahead you've played by those rules but
you don't really believe it you don't
believe that's the ultimate truth
whereas here a lot of people do really
believe it and they feel that they can
reject all traditional religion and
spirituality because they now know the
truth and anyone who believes these
other things is ignorant deluded
childish etc so I think that cultural
thing brought about by our educational
system is a major obstacle the funding
thing is also a major obstacle to the
change in science on the other hand one
of the things that's positive is the
spread of spiritual practices I mean
millions of people now do meditation
where as 50 years ago most people had
never heard of it
millions of people do yoga millions of
people do martial arts which is
explicitly recognized as a kind of
spiritual dimension it's about the flow
of energy through you and between you
and your opponent is it's not just brute
force and muscles as sort of force
systems and bones as levers I mean it's
it's it's much more subtle than that and
and with the spread of psychedelics and
the this new wave of research on
psychedelics where many people are
actually experiencing altered states of
consciousness there is a massive shift
happening but it's not happening within
the educational institutions or within
the political institutions but it's it's
very much to the Internet is actually
one of the main media for this
and I mean your programs part of that
process and who do you think are the
really important thinkers that have
probably been kind of not part of the
mainstream of thought but are really
important that we integrate if we if
we're gonna move forward well I think
that the the I mean young is one you
know because he has a more inclusive
view of the psyche than regular academic
psychologists or the narrow and
explicitly and dogmatically atheist
views of Freud so I think Ewing is one
of the key people in psychology I think
that the shamanic traditions of
understanding our living connection with
nature or another and these would not be
sort of famous people usually traditions
from which many people are learning in
workshops and and so on but not they're
not like professors in universities an
area that most people don't think about
at all is is theology and there's some
very very interesting work going on in
contemporary theology you see after the
17th century the in in Europe
theologians had to adapt to the idea of
nature as a machine scientists all had
to side to nature as a machine and where
does that leave God it leaves God some
outside nature possibly creating it in
the first place like a kind of engineer
or mathematician a kind of mechanistic
God who's like a human engineer making
machinery and it's a view that worked
quite well for an industrial age where
it's all about machinery and engineers
and mathematicians and engineers are at
the top of the priesthood as it were but
the medieval view in the Christian West
and in
sufism in Islam and in Jewish mysticism
was that God is permeating nature God is
in nature and nature is in God that you
it's not that God separate from nature
but every moment the natural world is
sustained by the divine being there's a
kind of theophany or a revelation of God
in in plants and in animals and in
humans in the heavens and in all nature
what's happening now is there's a move
in theology to go back to that mystical
theology of the Middle Ages and
reconnect with this much more inclusive
view of spirituality and one of my
favorite theologians as someone called
David Bentley Hart har T who wrote a
book called the experience of God being
consciousness bliss which shows that
ultimate conscious reality as conceived
of in Western Eastern and in other
traditions has much more in common these
views than they have that separates them
it's basically a threefold model of
ultimate reality which the Hindus call
set chit Ananda being the ground of
being is conscious yet is the contents
of consciousness names and forms the
kinds of things you think about or
perceive and Ananda is a joy or bliss
which comes as part of this ultimate
divine consciousness the Christian
version is the Holy Trinity Father Son
and Holy Spirit the father's the ground
of being the son is the law gas forms
patterns ideas word and spirit is the
moving principle which is also blissful
and I think spiritual practices that
involve movement like music and sports
tap into this kind of spirit in aspect I
think practices like meditation which
involve going to the ground of
consciousness and relate to this Sat or
father aspect the basic aspect of the
divine
sustaining the universe through
conscious being and the logger saw the
form aspect it's what we appreciate
through beauty the beauty of flowers the
beauty of animals the beauty of art the
beauty of architecture so I think these
different practices relate to different
aspects of ultimate reality and that's
as I as I say in my new book ways to go
beyond and why they work I think why
they work is because they relate this
ultimate conscious being conceived often
is surprisingly similar way in different
traditions and even Taoism in Chinese
tradition which starts from completely
different philosophical principles is
this is essentially a Trinitarian that
you've got the yin and the yang these
polar principles that interact each has
a bit of the other within it they're
constantly interacting in this dynamic
polarity but they're contained within
the circle there's the wholeness that
unifies is the ground of both of them so
that again is a kind of threefold model
and these are any models all these
traditions say that ultimate reality if
it's the consciousness of the whole
universe and also transcending it is
always bound to be beyond human
conception given that we've got limited
Minds that have adapted to dealing with
practical problems on one planet in one
galaxy highly unlikely that we could
conceive of all we can do our best we
can make models but ultimately it's
going to be beyond conception and known
only through a kind of direct mystical
insight and how you describe your
beliefs now because I understand that
you you you have a huge interest in
different forms of spirituality but I
know now that you you are you a
practicing Christian or if you come back
to Christianity in some in some way I am
yes I when I was in India when I went to
India Rose still an atheist from my
scientific education but my view of the
mind had expanded through taking
SD in 1970 or 71 when I first took it
totally changed my view of what mines
were like then I took out meditation
transcendental meditation and yoga and
so when I first went to India I was
primarily interested in Hindu philosophy
and then I had a Sufi teacher for a
while and then I found myself drawn back
to my own tradition which I'd rejected
when I was a teenager partly because of
my ideas about morphic resonance it's
more more natural for me to be in line
with the whole line of my ancestors and
my traditions my whole culture is shaped
by that and to amputate it is a kind of
violation of the whole tradition and
much better to come to terms with this
and I thought and so I was actually
confirmed in India at the age of 36 and
then I found a wonderful Christian
teacher a Benedictine monk who lived in
an ashram in South India called father
bead griffiths an English monk who'd
been in India for more than 25 years and
he for me was the perfect bridge between
East and West he was deeply
knowledgeable and influenced by the
Hindu tradition we did yoga in the
ashram we had two hours of meditation
every day and so that was for me a kind
of integrative experience since I've
been back in England I rediscovered the
Anglican tradition in which I was
brought up and just came to appreciate
in India I'd appreciated the temples and
the pilgrimages to them I suddenly
realized we call these unbelievable
temples here in England the cathedrals
you know in astonishing buildings built
to express and expanded consciousness
they're not functional buildings these
vast vaults and soaring structures are
there to express a kind of altered state
of consciousness the stained glass
windows in the Middle Ages when most
people lived in huts and earrings sort
of mud colored
would have been you know psychedelic I
mean they're still psychedelic the
sacred chanting in these cathedrals
happens every day and choral evensong
the service sung by incredibly well
trained in beautiful choirs in the
evening all these things have just
incredible cultural wealth and to be
part of it and to be inspired by it and
is I found quite wonderful and then
rediscovering the tradition of
pilgrimage in England I'm a patron of
something called British pilgrimage
trust - we're reopening the old footpath
pilgrimage routes to the holy places of
England that again is so just a
wonderful way to relate to the land and
to the history and to these ancient holy
places but in a completely modern way
the one of the things the pilgrimage
trance does is has apps that work on
smartphones who can find your way as you
walk through the fields and the woods
you can just do it with your smartphone
now whereas a medieval pilgrim of course
wouldn't have had that and I myself make
a practice of going to church every
Sunday morning wherever I am which means
that I relate to the local community to
the local holy place to have a space and
the week when I can give thanks and pray
and sing with other people if I don't
get to church I don't have a space to
just other things crowd in the 24/7
cultural crowd soon and I find that you
know singing with other people is a
wonderful thing to do it's a spiritual
practice in itself praying for others
and for the world is with other people
I've joked myself every day anyway but
today with others I think is more
powerful and to be in these old holy
place when I'm in a village I get to the
village challenge may only be 3 or 4
people there but it's still I find
sometimes it's boring that sometimes
they're boring sometimes often there are
quite good ones actually but for me I
nearly always emerge feeling uplifted
and in a better state to start the week
and if I don't go and I just read
depressing news in Sunday newspapers or
or have to deal with emails or something
I so I found these really helpful these
traditional practices thank you
[Music]
you
[Music]