[Music]
there's a lot of work being done
nowadays with psychedelic there's a
rebirth in psychedelic therapy resuming
and in the UK in particular that is
being run by Robyn Carhartt Harris and
mostly psilocybin
why would psilocybin work for and
they're using often to treat depression
why would Silas ID and work for
depression well so a primary question is
why are we even looking at psychedelics
so we're looking at succulents for two
reasons one is that as I mentioned
earlier mental illnesses burgeoning
their society anxiety is the fastest
growing diagnosis on both side of the
Atlantic and more and more people are
depressed and some of the reasons are
mentioned in your on Irish about lost
connections rate talks about just the
loss of human communion which is not the
only but sonia major factor so for
social reasons mental illnesses or
mental discomfort is rising number one
number two there's the largely complete
failure of the Western medical system in
which I was trained and practiced to
deal with the crisis of mental health we
don't understand it I can go into the
many reasons we misunderstand mental
illness but fundamentally we're in
denial about the unity of the human soul
and the mind in the body and when denial
about the social nature of human beings
we live upon mental illnesses biological
problems so people are looking for
solutions outside the mainstream as they
as they have to because within the
mainstream their responses and the
Prevention's are so nautical no
psychedelics tell us I've been
specifically but not exclusively get to
a part of ourselves but usually we're
not in Access of so they get to the
unconscious part while we're conscious
so we get the experience or unconscious
while conscious and we can see what's in
there now why on the physiological level
the second let's do that I have to keep
looking it up I just I'm not keeping in
my head that particular neuroscience and
brain physiology that's involved but
clearly parts of the brain are being
activated that I usually are shut down
or we have no access to and so
psilocybin has been used in two ways
it's been used as single fairly large
dose experiences and through those
experiences people get in touch with
parts of themselves they usually have no
access to for example they might have a
deep spiritual experience a deep
experience of unity a deep experience of
the true self part of their real sub
that usually are shut down from their
daily experience well that could be
tremendously healing but what if I no
longer saw myself as an isolated little
ant crawling around for survival in this
huge ant heap but as a meaningful and
genuine part of a larger whole and that
unity is unshakable no matter what
happens to me and no matter what I feel
at a particular moment but if I could be
conscious of that unity if it gives you
a totally different experience of life
so along with other psychedelics like a
cell step you can do that and what's
striking is that it doesn't matter what
the psychedelic experience when people
describe their experience of unity it's
all the same language and it's all the
same language if people get there
without psychedelics so either
everybody's hallucinating and
everybody's crazy or they're having some
genuine experience of something that's
deeper than our usual consciousness can
permit and that's what happens I believe
it's either silent then people also use
it and this is still experimental on a
micro level where people are not using
it to have this deep experience in fact
I might have a
an amount that doesn't even give them an
altered consciousness in a short-term
but over a couple of weeks micro dosing
with am I used four to three days and
then not used for a few days but in a
small barely perceptible those yet
alters their being physiology in such a
way that they're no longer addicted any
image case they're using it like an
antidepressant the difference is that
I'm to use that every day they use small
quantities and they don't have side
effects which and I've taken
antidepressants I'm not against them but
you know they do come with side effects
sometimes and what are the risks of this
kind of therapy well the risk is really
only that if people have experiences
they can handle and leave them on board
so these expenses these plants
traditionally and the mushrooms have
been traditionally by native peoples
ayahuasca has been used traditionally by
native peoples iboga has been
traditionally by native peoples in
Africa and Latin America and North
America peyote and so on but there's
always in a context always under the
guidance of very experienced elders
who'd been through their own experience
now in our world mattenderle canavan ik
is taken individualistic sometimes
people might use these substances who
are not ready for it
who've not been prepared for it and it
might release emotions and visions in
them that they don't know how to
integrate in our handle so I've seen a
few people lose it as a result of
psychedelic experiences I've not seen
personally I don't know of some but I'm
not seeing any tragic outcomes but I've
seen some difficult outcomes so the risk
is using it when you're not prepared and
not under appropriate guidance now some
of these substances should also not be
used with certain people with various
mental health conditions for example if
you have a history of mania you better
not use Iowa
I don't think because it can trigger
your mania or LSD for that matter unless
she was working with somebody was very
confident and can be with you over time
and integrate and hold whatever happens
to you so again it depends on context
but there are certain kind of
indications because obviously there was
a huge enthusiasm for these substances
in the 50s and 60s there was a lot of
really amazing and very promising work
going on and then the entire field was
shut down what do you think of the
lessons that can be learned from that to
avoid something like that happening
again so in the fifties and sixties two
kinds of work occurred with the
psychedelic
the first work which preceded the second
was very responsible scientific research
work and some very important work was
done develop see for example in Canada
and in North America and perhaps
elsewhere where they found some very
positive results and its impact on
mental illness that was scientific work
very rigorous Emira its flaws but the
intentions were purely to advance
science and human health that then got
coupled in the 60s for the cultural
explosion of psychedelics with the
anti-vietnam war movement the whole
alienation between generations that
became very apparent in the 60s the
whole mistrust of tradition and elder
guidance not to mention the mass of the
experience need to escape from the
rigidity of the mainstream culture a lot
of young people were involved in he was
using psychedelics not traditionally not
under guidance and certainly not under
any kind of scientific inspiration so a
lot of people used it and there was a
lot of negative experiences there were
people who saw it off the top of
buildings only the impact of LSD
thinking they could fly and of course
finding out that
they couldn't really fly some people
went insane using these psychedelics
again because they weren't using in my
context for the right indications with
the right guidance the mainstream
ideologues and politicians scientific
figures who were suspicious of
psychedelics in the first place and who
didn't like this happening that didn't
occur under their control in the first
place then either in they were inspired
by these missteps or used them as an
excuse to clamp down on the whole field
of psychedelic research so there's a
retrenchment and a giving up of some
very useful avenues of inquiry that
persisted for decades until again the
cultural crisis and the general
inadequacy of mainstream medical
perspectives led to a resurgence which
is what we're seeing now and for the
most part what we're seeing now is much
more scientific and much more
responsible use of these substances with
some of the dangers that also attended
it in the sixties ago and one of the
other the fact that they're becoming
much more mainstream or one of the other
areas of concern I know for some in the
psychedelic community is that we now
have corporate interest we've got
companies coming in that are monetizing
this are you concerned about that well
just a reality the fact any economic
system is that the economically dominant
ones that will derive the profits from
almost anything that's popular that just
how it works so cannabis is being
legalized in Canada now it's not only
the little growers there's no really
profit it's gonna be huge corporations
they're gonna take advantage of the tax
structure and the whole economic setup
to make enormous profits that's just how
it works the thing with the psychedelics
saith ayahuasca it's not a product that
people will use everyday so when you
make prozac people have to use it daily
in fact they use it daily for years now
ask us something love ceremonies with
two or three times a year if your
devotee if you're a follower so it's not
as profitable because you don't get to
sell mass products to a large number of
people on a daily basis so there's less
risk with that but if psilocybin becomes
useful as I say as a micro dose
I can see corporations moving in under
the system I expect nothing else it's
less amenable to that kind of profit
motive because of the more intermittent
nature of these experiences and the
small quantities involved but nothing is
immune to profit and it is a profit to
be made yes I expect the corporations to
take advantage just going back to a
psychedelic therapy is there a sense
that we can get insight from from these
experiences but ultimately we have to do
the work ourselves of integration and
healing well yeah I've had deep
experiences with psychedelics really
deep insights I thought I understood the
world and I talked about this maybe 10
years ago I let every treated ayahuasca
and under the impact of the plant I was
really a girl I mean I was really right
on I was you know insightful and
compassionate and I could see through
people's stuff and I would guide them to
reality and I thought ok hey I've made
it folks
then I'll arrive home and my wife just
picks it up at the train station and she
just had a haircut that story upset by
all sudden life wasn't worth living
because of this haircut that bad bad
wife had so there's that this is unlike
my god you know that's all of a sudden I
look at my partner and I don't like what
I see an awesome I get all this kondal a
discombobulated that's my particular
neuroses
but that dioica experience and all the
answers I had they not liberate me from
my neuroses or having to have my woman
looking a certain way that's a dependent
I still was so the greatest insights and
experiences legion nowhere unless you
integrate them and as you say that
integration takes work and so what I've
learned and what I emphasize more and
more not affect when I'm said most now
is the experience opens the door
but you're the one has to walk through
the door and having the window open or
the door open does not get you to the
other side and that's a lot of work and
so it's like with every other kind of
spiritual work you can also have great
realizations on a meditation question
and people do have these direct
experiences of godhood but it is them
nowhere unless it transformed their
lives and for the trance on their lives
those intentions and those insights
those intuitions need to be integrated
and that's the daily work and there's
nothing that stops me so there I reckon
I to say people if it's a question of
having great insights on the one hand or
daily regular work on the other choose
the daily work forget the great insights
forget the great experiences no if you
can combine the two powerful support one
for the other but the work is the key
can you describe what that work is the
work made me different for everybody
excuse me but it does involve some
disengagement from the daily grind some
time that's devoted to your core essence
or to exploring it so for me and if my
ADHD I was never a great meditator I
mean I could sit to an inundation
cushion and if I was present for 10
seconds out of 20 minutes I could
declare victory however I've also
thought I wasn't a yoga person but two
years ago I found a yoga practice but if
I don't do daily now I suffer and I do
do it it is supports me it puts me in
touch with my body it stills my mind
and it provides a break to my constantly
running a going mind so that experience
myself as somebody different than just
somebody was always engaged in thought
and talk and and and and in process so
that's my particular way
journaling which is observing yourself
in writing about it so that there's that
observer self that you're actually
strengthening an observer self is not
the same as the daily rattled ordinary
self good work the Buddha talked about
the Dharma the Sun that the dyma know
the Buddha the Dharma and the Sun the
Buddha meaning our inner two cells the
Dhamma being the path the Sangha being
community all you have in contact with
others who are on the same path or do
you just belong to a bunch of Facebook
groups we discuss or the odds of life
star city winning the the FA Cup again
you know so is there some connection
with others who are on the same path for
some people will be meditation for some
people will be communing with nature for
some people it'll be revisiting the
psychedelic experience but without the
plant without the drug without the
substance just putting himself in a
space in the databases
some kind of olive or some kind of
practice some kind of practice which has
to be regular your work with ayahuasca
and curious as to well at in fact for
any any listeners who aren't familiar
with ayahuasca what the experience is
you give a short summary of what
experientially what happens in an
ayahuasca ceremony well speaking of
meaning it wasn't as ayahuasca I'll come
to that one moment it was when another
plant called iboga that I participating
in a ceremony earlier this year and
somebody asked me what is the meaning of
life and
and the this is what I was under the
effect and the immediate answer that
came up is life is its own meaning which
I thought was a great line
I don't know that I can live that in my
regular existence but I thought it was
the only answer that was needed but it
takes a lot to recognize that life isn't
on me now yes after my book on addiction
came out you just be published in
England but in North America
it appeared ten years ago I kept getting
a lot of questions about what I knew
about psychedelic plants particularly
ayahuasca and the treatment of addiction
and mansur was I knew nothing at all
until the answer in fact I should say
the question became somewhat annoying to
me because I just spent three years
writing a book how about asking me
something I knew about rather than this
is one thing I didn't know but it so
happened that I was exposed to the plant
and I'd opportunity to experience its
impact myself and at the first use of
the plant within a ceremony led by a
Peruvian shaman I understood why people
were curious about its potential to work
with addiction because it provided a
deep root to my own soul and to my heart
and also allowed me to observe just how
close my heart had been and of course
the dictions
are all about shutting down some parts
of ourselves that we would then have to
enliven through artificial means
I was called this particular plant also
sometimes gives people a deep sense of
their own suffering of what is it that
they've been running from all of our
lives
the addiction is all about running away
it's a temporary running away for
something unbearable which is that
simple and the plant shows you what you
be running from which can be painful and
difficult but it shows you in a very
compassionate way so both in the sense
of connecting into a deep core self that
doesn't have to run anywhere and in
terms of showing
just what you've been running away from
it can be a deep experience in the right
context yeah I mean I found from my own
experiences many of them have been a
sense of compassion combined with a lot
of pain but I'm really interested in
this idea of around especially the the
severely addicted people in the
beginning of your book you know they it
seems that their pain is just it's not
they don't have the capacity to bear it
well first of all none of us or they did
have the capacity to bear pain otherwise
it would be addicted the problem in
addiction is not the pain the problems
that we don't know how to bear it now
why is it that we don't know how to bear
it because the first time that we
experience pain is in childhood now if a
child experiences pain but there's
adults there that can hold that child
through that pain and and and show them
that yes
pain comes with it pain passes that
child will not be traumatized the
painful experience is not the same as
being traumatized traumatizes when
there's a restriction on our capacity to
handle life and and the child that the
infant whose mother's depressed for
example the mother loved the child my
mother loved me which was performing the
best throughout my first year of life
and terrorized for historical reasons
she couldn't hold my pain she would hold
me but she couldn't hold my pain it's
for that she need to have something more
than her own depression she needs to be
present and feeling somewhat optimistic
that ok kid young pain but it'll pass
now the pan was depressed or stretched
can't hold the child in their pain that
child will not learn how to hold pain
that child will only aren't going to
escape from being to soothe it from
suffering rocking masturbation eating
and later on addictions so addictions
are always about not knowing how to hold
pain but the more severe the pain is and
the more isolated the child is with the
pain the greater the risk for addiction
the cases I talked about in the
beginning of the book the really severe
drug
as you said there were horrendous
experiences and nobody to help them hold
it hence their incapacity to hold a
thing as you're talking about that I'm
also reminded of you've talked a lot
about H almaas spiritual teacher who's
also been very influential on on my life
and the concept of inquiry which is a
big you know kind of going in and I
suppose a talking meditation you you've
mentioned that ayahuasca is you see it
as a process of inquiry as well and that
that strikes me in some way because to
be able to inquire into for example our
pain or whatever it is comes with a
sense of like implicit is a sense that I
don't know and there's a kind of known
as implicit sense that I don't know but
there's also I'm going to find out and
there's also somebody there who's going
to find out here so pure pain if there's
no sense of the experience or just you
just want to escape from it but as soon
as you say there's pain in me and I'm
curious what that's about and I'm
willing to look at it there's
immediately a sense of the enquire which
is no longer identified with the pain
but is looking at it so that inquiry
strengthens both our capacity to be with
something and the person who is being
with it and so for me the ayahuasca
ceremony like many meditations is really
an inquiry it's not about I won't have a
beautiful experience of unity and
godness and angels and entities and the
stars which some people have I've never
had one but it's about what's going to
arise and how should I understand what
arises
yeah I'm struck by the difference
between that way of approaching contact
with someone or or ourselves and what we
were talking about before with the very
reactive nature of of social media yeah
and you think by having those kind of
dialogues with each other we can
get somewhere you know get out of our
box in a sense is there some healing and
just being able to have conversations
like that well so in the context of the
ayahuasca ceremony at least the way I
work with them there is contact before
the seminary people share our purpose
people indicate why they're there what
they're looking for we help them
identify their intention then is the
ceremony and then after assembly once
which people have slept and so on then
we talk about what what did you
experience and what meaning that you
find it and then look over the meaning
of the symbols that may be visited you
know divisions that you experienced or
the insights that you gained or the
physical sensations that your body went
through and having that conversation in
the context of the group immediately
allows everybody's experience to be
accompanied and shared and it breaks
through that isolation that's so many of
us experienced and the people who have
been struggling with addiction and gone
through a ceremony what what kind of
what kind of things are they reporting
afterwards about what what they
experienced and how are their lives
afterwards well I've seen people break
through significant addictions by means
of I was the semis behavior addictions
drug addictions and so on but it was
cocaine or sex having said that the
context and the follow-up and
integration have to be there in other
words for most people it's just not
enough to have a beautiful experience of
a deeply meaningful experience what are
they gonna do with that in their lives
that's a real an ideation and in the
downtown east side of Vancouver which is
a concentrated area of drug use right do
spend quite some time in the book
explaining and depicting the lives of
these people these people come to
ceremony they might have beautiful
powerful insights and really get aspects
of themselves that they've never
experienced but then they go back to the
Downtown Eastside there's no supportive
context they'll relapse into their
addiction and I've seen that so one
mustn't idealize the ayahuasca
experience is kind of the be-all and
end-all there has to be a supportive
ongoing integrative context so we talked
about a h almaas and I'm curious how how
has his work influenced your own
approach to your work and maybe to your
life as well I've had a number of I've
never had a spiritual mentor does not be
somebody that I've followed or but
really join their group or
or attending their teachings
consistently might question why I
haven't done that but basically I'm not
a guru type but but that doesn't mean
that I haven't learned from a lot of
people I have animus hamid ali's his
real name a charmer sis's non-deployment
huge he's been a influential teacher in
my life he's got these deep spiritual
teachings which you have to say many of
them I don't understand like he talks
about stuff I have no idea about because
he said he's a deep spiritual
experiences of unity and transcendence
that I haven't so the language he uses I
can only wonder about having said that
there's two major things that I've
learned from him which are absolutely
essential to my understanding one is the
formation of the personality we tend to
identify with the personality we think
we are a personality all most points out
through a combination of Western
psychology and Eastern spiritual thought
that the personality a false construct
but the personality really is a defense
against loss a defense against pain and
so much of what we think of ourselves is
actually a defensive structure and we
mustn't take it to be a reality and that
underneath the false personality the
defensive personality there's a core
self and that core self can recognize
the falseness of the personality and can
transcend it and he provides ways of
working it through and so it's very
sophisticated in in explaining the with
a common unparalleled combination of
Western psychology and Eastern spiritual
experience the arising of the fourth
personality in a kind of world that the
false personality creates and how it
keeps us track and at the same time or
the personality does point to the truth
in us because I think that the
personality wants are real enough just
like what the addiction wants is really
enough I ask people what does the
addiction gives you and they'll say
comfort
a peace of mind a connection with others
a sense of control power while boasting
the genuine qualities that people only
want they actually have but because of
the first personality false personality
we lost contact with them so just as
addiction points to the real human being
so does the personality and imma show
some ways are working with her and then
again he he does talk about essence
which is the true nature of all of us
that that underlies all our dysfunctions
and our miss directions so in those
senses and then his inquiry has been
very inspiring to me so those are the
main things I've learned from him again
when he I don't stay wanders when he
finds himself in more rarefied spiritual
realms I don't follow him there I just
haven't done that work I haven't had
that experience but I do believe in that
that he's talking about genuine human
experience and his own experience the
concept of essence and the false
personalities is one of the most useful
concepts for me from amis as well and
I'm curious if you've if there was any
sense when you were working especially
down in some last question again was
that down any side sorry so I'm I'm very
curious
you know this sense of essence for me
for almost is very very real and I
experienced that in myself and seen it
seen it in others and I'm just wondering
if Downtown Eastside in Vancouver
working with the people you were working
with whether there were moments where
you could kind of see an essence in I
could see it a lot of the time the
tragedy is that the people themselves
don't see it they don't see their own
essence they're identified with their
personality they identify with their
drives and what their dysfunctions with
their desperation that's what they're
identified with and of course society
for the most part mirrors back to them
the negative sense of self in essence as
almost acting points out needs to be
seen in order to develop
but I I've had more than a few glimpses
of it and there's that tragedy between
neither with somebody's essence and who
they really are
and then a level on which they function
because they got cut off from their
sense over there at least a connection
distance long time ago dr. Ngaba Matt
hey thank you very much oh my great
pleasure thank you
[Music]
you
[Music]