we can also get in a trap when we start
to think about purpose in terms of doing
exclusively and so very commonly people
think what is the purpose of my life and
they think that there is an answer in
words that relates to something that
they are going to do so I'm going to end
extreme poverty or prevent AI
catastrophe or whatever it is and of
course if that one doing is their
purpose then every opportunity to
relieve suffering or add beauty other
than that isn't part of their purpose
welcome to 2050 the no fluff podcast now
the big picture positive impact and life
purpose this podcast inspires you to
think big create your life purpose and
make it happen my name is Max AK and for
this episode
I spoke to Daniel Marton Berger Daniel
Marton Berger is a systems thinker and
thought leader he's director of research
and development and a co-founder at the
mirror hacker collective where he's
focused on developing processes and
technologies for advancing medicine and
human optimization this episode is a bit
longer than usual but well worth it
Daniel dives deep into the meaning and
different dimensions of life purpose and
shares his big-picture view on
civilization and the trajectory of the
world hi Daniel thank you for joining
the 2050 podcast hey max I'm happy to be
here thanks for having me Daniel
what is your life purpose I think I'll
start with sharing a little bit about
how I think about that question the arc
of how I've thought about that question
in my life which is probably going to be
more relevant for people than what my
particular answer to the question
happens to be as valuable as a question
as it is it's also a problematic one can
be a problematic one so
a kid I didn't feel like I could
actually make any choice without knowing
that because I didn't have the context
so the most trivial choices of what to
study or who to play with or what to pay
attention to like well what is the what
is the ordinate us for choice for me
what is it that I am making choices
towards and why and so I needed to have
a sense of the purpose of my life to
have a sense of the purpose of any
decision to have a sense of a basis to
choose and then to have a sense of the
purpose of my life I felt like I needed
a sense of the purpose of life writ
large to know what my life what the
embedding function that my life was
within and that usually looked like what
is the purpose of human life within the
whole and then even larger what about
life a thing we call biologic life and
then even deeper what is the purpose of
reality at all of something rather than
nothing and then of course we realized
that even the question purpose imports a
whole bunch of concepts that may or may
not be the right ones it purpose is an
inherently utilitarian concept and so do
I want to be asking what the purpose is
do I want to be asking what the inherent
value of life is what would I or what I
value do I won't ask what the
meaningfulness and the basis for
meaningfulness is do I want to ask what
the nature of it is so these are all non
sentence and all deep in terms of value
meaning purpose and all deep questions
and important ones we can also get in a
trap when we start to think about
purpose in terms of doing exclusively
and so very commonly people think what
is the purpose of my life and they think
that there is an answer in words that
relates to something that they're going
to do so I'm going to end extreme
poverty or prevent AI catastrophe or
whatever it is and of course if that one
doing is their purpose then every
opportunity to relieve suffering or add
beauty other than that isn't part of
their purpose and that means the
presence being present with and loving
their family members isn't their purpose
being present with opportunities that
present themselves that they could
contribute to the piece of trash they
walk by on the street and so we start to
realize that one of the other challenges
is as soon as I define it then the
outside nough something that is
meaningful outside of that has been
excluded from my sons of purpose right
so then we start to say well there what
is the purpose of my life not just at a
doing level but at a being level that
all of the doing relates to and
obviously my best understanding of this
now might also be quite different than
my best understanding of it in the
future so is is there is there an
evolutionary process for how I think
about this so with all that as preface
I'm obviously not going to address the
question comprehensively on this short
conversation so I'll speak to a few
things that are probably underneath a
question I'll say a little bit more
about and I'm gonna hold them as
synonyms for now because the
distinctions take more work
philosophically and most people hold the
missing items so the purpose or the
meaningfulness of life from a being and
a doing and a becoming perspective I'll
just say a little bit about this and how
they fit together we can say that living
a good life living a meaningful
purposeful life has different elements
to it and so I'm gonna offer a little
model here where there are at least that
will there are not at least there are
three elements to living a meaningful
life that are distinct but all necessary
so we can talk about the being mode in
which one way of defining it is the
purpose of life there is a to appreciate
the beauty of existence as deeply as I
can to take it in to be moved by it to
experience at a depth that the
purposefulness and the value of a piece
of art
requires it being appreciated there's
the relationship between subject and
object that is neither subject nor
object but but that triplicate the
relationship where the meaningfulness
comes and so when I am taking in the
beauty of reality reality is becoming
more meaningful and the deeper that I'm
taking it in right so we can think about
purpose from the being point of view as
being about endeavoring to be more
present to reality as it is all the time
and when we start to think about doing
we can say that doing is about adding to
the beauty of reality acting in ways
that change reality with the hope with
the intent to add to the beauty of it in
ways that will increase the potential
for the experience of beauty for others
right there will effect the beat of
others when I think about becoming I
think about evolving my capacity for
being in doing increasing my capacity to
both appreciate and add to the beauty of
life and so I get that being doing and
becoming are all meaningful and they're
all meaningful only in relationship to
each other the doing adding to the
beauty of life that's all anyone did and
no one actually appreciated it would
ultimately be baseless etc right so we
can see how those are those are bound
concepts we can think about the being as
related to our relationship to reality
on the perceptual side and doing on the
expressive side we can see the whole
thing as our relationship to life with a
capital L or reality with a capital R
and so then you know I just speak about
it again in a broad way I can say my
purpose is going to be expressed each
moment in terms of how much presence and
love and integrity I can show
to life and whatever aspect of life
happens to be in front of me each moment
and across the arc of my life and so if
I have an idea
about what I should be doing that
actually makes me less present with
what's in front of me and less available
to appreciate and serve what's in front
of me that can be a problem now not just
the moments of life but also the arc of
life I want to see how full is my
relationship with reality moment by
moment and also across the whole arc of
my life how relevant was it to what was
needed for the whole of life during that
time so these are all interesting and I
think generally applicable
considerations for everyone if we want
to talk about the doing side for me as a
specific person well it's different in
this particular time in the world than
it would have been in the past or in the
future because different things are
needed and I have different capabilities
than I would have had in those
developmental environments etc and
obviously it's different here than if I
was growing up in the Peruvian
rainforest and so what mine is is not
going to be what anyone else's is in
that way right so it's there are
generalized things which we spoke about
and then there's also the unique
expression of those generalized things
so having the orientation to think about
systems and complex systems that my life
brought that orientation to me and
various other capacities orientations
doing what I can to help transition
civilization from being on a path that
is currently self terminating to a path
that is not self terminating and that is
as supportive of the possibility of
purpose and meaning for everyone
enduringly into the future and working
on changing the underlying structural
dynamics that help make that possible is
what we could say my main sense of
purpose that are doing level is so if
you think about your you're doing level
do you have goals for the year 2050 of
what do you want to change in the world
by then so 2050 is just over 30 years
from now what I would like to see
different in the world by them is first
I think it weren't saying that there are
existential risks risks of us continuing
to exist or not that could play out in
less time than that so it is not a given
currently that we make it to 2050 this
is an important part of framing that
question there are other existential
risks and catastrophic not necessary
fully existential but civilization
collapse type risks that even there are
some that could actually play out in
that time there are other ones that
might not play out in that time but we
pass critical tipping points where they
will inevitably play out after that time
during that time so one thing by 2050 is
I want us to not have experienced
civilization collapse or existential
risk and I also want us to not have past
tipping points that are irreversible
towards catastrophic or existential risk
and to speak even more broadly than I
would say I want by 2050 that we that
there is a change in the vector and
change in the overall trajectory of the
path that civilization is on from one
that is heading
towards many different
self-determination scenarios where they
were talking about the a hundred
different versions of AI apocalypse or
we're talking about world war three or
we're talking about climate change
induced human migration issues that lead
to resource Wars or we're talking about
collapse of biodiversity peak nitrogen
peak phosphorus dead zones in the ocean
etc or killer drones or the gazillion
different scenarios we have we have a
civilization that is generating all
those scenarios at increasing speed in
magnitude switching off of that path
onto a path that is developing all of
its technological capacity for Omni
positive purposes is what I want to see
in the world writ large now if I want to
speak to some pretty specific things
that people could see by 2050 I would
want to see a I do want to see a
prototype of a new model of civilization
a full-stack new civilization model that
has in its design categorically solved
the generator function of all of the
catastrophic and existential risks and
is a civilization model that is not only
not moving in the direction of
self-determination but is one that moves
in the direction of increasing quality
of life and is actually more adaptive
than the current civilization so it
becomes a new gravitational Basin for
everything to flow and so who
specifically this requires new economics
new governance new law new jurisprudence
and philosophy as a basis of law new
judicial new medicine new you know all
those systems new infrastructure and new
technology development processes and new
culture and sense of what is meaningful
purposeful etc that the system is or
orienting towards and all of those
intersect each other
so we're talking about a full-stack
reboot from an axiom level and when we
think about all of the risks the
existential risks currently and we say
what do they have in common that is
driving all of them we see things like
well if we have a rival risk game
meaning win lose games in-group
out-group team dynamics that are
competing in in where they cannot both
win then harm definitely happens from
that right I my win requires your loss
oh I'm seeking army directly and we're
both trying to extract more resource
from the environment or external ism or
harm to the environment or indirectly
doing that through the harm that happens
through war or whatever so we're harming
each other and harming the Commons with
exponential technology which means
exponentially increased capacity to
affect the world through our choices
then to the degree we're making choices
that are directly and or indirectly harm
causing exponential harm causing choices
self-terminate on a finite playing field
and so for the for thousands of years of
the thing we've called civilization we
have killed people who had different
ideas than us as a reasonable way to
deal with problems and we have had
unsustainable agriculture that
desertified areas that were previously
non desert I mean that's not a new
phenomena the certification is a
thousands of years old phenomena we've
extincted species for a long time so
we're not talking about the existential
risk that many faces now are not
different in kind they're different in
magnitude and speed so solving those so
we say ok so exponential tech which is
the fact that we have tech that makes it
easier to make better tech computers
that help us make better computers right
exponential tech can't be put back in
the bag that's going to keep happening
but exponential tekmoto rival risk game
theory self terminates
therefore we have to create ante
environments that make us safe stewards
of the level of power that exponential
technology brings or the human
experiment completes in a in a
mythopoetic sense we can say as
exponential technology is bringing us to
have the power of gods we have to have
the love and wisdom and prudence of gods
to guide the use of that power or
irresponsible use of that power will end
up self-destructing and so what does you
know what does that look like so when we
talk about solving the generator
function there - anti rivalries games
that doesn't just be creating an anti
rival risk environment obviously
requires changing macroeconomics because
my balance sheet is the scorecard of a
finite rivalry scheme it requires not
having n group out groups like Nations
those things become obsolete or
religions or race identifications in any
deep kind of sentence right away these
are deep changes it requires not having
things like democracy where we make a
proposition that is ill-formed or if the
proposition goes through it benefits
something and harm something else and if
it doesn't go through then something
else is protected and something else is
harmed as opposed to had it went through
which will always lead to groups of
people based on which of the needs that
they have more cluster around one side
versus the other which now creates
polarization and eventually
radicalization which then eventually has
to be stabilized in war but Wars that we
can't keep having with exponentially
increasing military tech that become
actually unwinnable so solve creating an
anti rivalry environment is a
non-trivial thing it says kind of thing
humanity's never done but we have to do
something we've never done because every
civilization that we've ever had so far
has all collapsed and but now we have a
fully global civilization where the
collapse is actually catastrophic and so
when Rome fell it was a lot but it
wasn't the whole world right when the
Mayans fell the Inca fell Mesopotamia
Sumeria any of those they wasn't
everything now we have a fully
globalized supply chain economy that is
also connected to the biosphere in such
deep ways that collapse is really a
chemistry
claps so given that the systems always
failed for these reasons we have to do
something that the world has never done
before we also though have increased
capacities that the world has never had
and we have to realize them to guide the
other capacities that are coming onboard
so the reason I'm saying all this is
because creating an anti reverse
environment doesn't only prevent X risk
it also changes the underlying basis of
what has sucked about humans for the
whole history of humans the those
rivalry spaces are why we have fought
Wars and tortured and hurt the
environment and etc and we've made whole
philosophies around the nature of
duality and the mixed bag bag that
humans are that are really just based on
the game theoretic environment we've
been in we can create a different
environment that doesn't incentivize
write harm because as long as as long as
I am incentivized to do something that
is harmful to you it can't be prevented
at scale but we can actually change that
underlying incentive and make it to
where your well-being and mine are more
tightly coupled and yours mine and the
Commons are more tightly coupled it's
not communism or socialism or anything
that has ever been presented it's
totally new that again is outside
of the scope of what we can talk about
today but we can you know people are
interested when you talk about some time
there actually are very real paths for
how to do this
but in the process of create solving the
generator function so that one that I
mentioned is one there are other ones
solving the generator functions of
catastrophic risk we're also solving the
basis of the historical human sock
dynamics and bringing about a really
radically different humanity and so you
know if we have an intentional community
today that is trying to prototype some
ideals but they still to get the
computer that we're talking on have to
buy it from Apple which has to get
minerals that came from conflict zones
and rain forests over six continents and
was made in factories where there are
nets on the windows so the workers don't
commit suicide because the conditions
are so shitty and
then our lovely village is still being
supported by the tragedy of the whole
rest of the thing right so until we can
actually get a high-tech closed-loop
civilization that does not require
import that is actually more adaptive in
the previous civilization we haven't yet
shown we can do that thing that happens
at the scale of a high-tech city-state
city-state meaning it has to be
sovereign in law city meaning that's the
minimum kind of scale of
self-organization that could actually
produce all the ton needs so by 2050 I
want to see a fully operating city-state
new civilization model that is anti
rival risks that has the right
relationship between complicated and
complex systems all the other dynamics
that we need and I want to see that
having men operating long enough and
well enough that the rest of the world
is already starting to move in the
direction that it is setting an example
of and that means also off of the ex
risk path so if you think about the 2050
the full-stack prototype of the the city
of the new civilization model maybe you
can give us like a brief overview of how
are you going to make that happen like
what are you working on right now to
move civilization in that direction
well what I'm working on right now with
a number of other people that are
endeavoring similarly is what we started
with is really inventory all of those
risks in areas catastrophic existential
risks and then looking at what the
common generator functions is drive all
of them are at a deep level and then
looking at what would a categorical
solution to that generator function be
because whether I'm talking about the
depletion of phosphorous or the
depletion of nitrogen or the depletion
of fish or the depletion of old-growth
forests or the depletion of topsoil
those are all the police
dynamics that are driven by certain
things whether I'm talking about
the excess of co2 or the excess of
nitrogen runoff in dead zones or the
excess of mercury in the air or the
excess all those toxicity dynamics those
have something in common whether I'm
talking about this type of war scenario
or that type of war scenario or is type
of terrorism scenario they all have
certain types of things in common we can
go to deeper levels of assessment as to
what the generator functions are and
then say if I try to solve one of these
but all the other ones are still on
course at most I maybe move the curve of
like giving us a few more months you
know maybe a couple more years unless
the one I'm doing wasn't actually the
first one that hit so much case it was
kind of worthless so given that the
generator functions have so many
different expressions unless we solve
them at that level we we don't really
move we don't really change the future
possibility state that much so we've
been looking at being able to articulate
the generator functions in ways that we
can show our complete meaning that
solutions there are not only necessary
for civilization making it but also
sufficient and then actually developing
architectures for viable solutions to
those which means how how would an
economic system a governance system a
legal system and infrastructural system
etc work that didn't do those things
right that generated fundamentally
different types of behaviour so we've
been been working basically on this
level of understanding the nature of the
problem well enough and then being able
to characterize design criteria of a
solution and then starting to develop
actual instantiations of solutions that
meet those design criteria next is
starting to prototype then starting to
prototype governance methods we've
developed to see that they do what we
think they will and we'll find them and
then you know before we can build a city
state since it has an economic system
that isn't any economic system that's
ever been there's nobody trained and the
things that they will need to be trained
for how to administer it since it would
have a governance system etc the
politicians and lawyers and judges and
bankers of the
world would have nothing to do in that
world and the corresponding functions
don't yet exist fever into their that
people aren't trained on them so there's
a whole new civics right there's a whole
new set of stuff that people have to be
trained there's a whole new process to
technology design for how to do
technology that doesn't cause toxicity
issues as you know an externality so
that means that we have to have a lot of
people working on components of it and
getting trained in those components who
will then be able to help build the city
state scale and populate it you know to
begin with and that is it it's deep
enough training that lettle have to
happen in immersive environments which
means communities villages you know
places where people are actually
together working on training in these
new skills and capacities that will then
be able to boot and those will be not
closed-loop they'll still require
getting on a Boeing to fly somewhere and
buying a computer from Apple but but
they will be developing some of the
capacities necessary to build a
civilization with that along the curve
so we're working on kind of as best as
we can the full articulation and
description of the design criteria that
are necessary so that other people can
can play with those ideas also and see
if those design criteria makes sense to
them if they agree with our analysis and
then also work on those things
independently and then start to work on
instantiate and then evolving the scale
of them towards full-scale prototype and
then you know spread of that prototype
that prototype has to be not only right
in kind meaning that it is solved the
generator functions but it also has to
be anti fragile in the presence of the
fact that the rest of the world was
still rival risk and this is a new
system and it also has to be out of
poetic meaning it has to be able to make
expand and propagate itself so those are
all parts of the design criteria so
those are those are some of the things
that I'm working on now towards those
goals so if listeners want to support
you in your mission in your purpose how
can people help you mmm
thank you for that I don't know since I
don't know what skills and aptitudes and
passions and resources they have one
thing I would say is it all needs done
right it it all needs done so the if
someone currently is working on trying
to solve coral reef issues or carbon
sequestration issues or a I risk issues
whatever and they have a path to make
meaningful progress there keep doing
that our chance of doing what we're
doing
depends on assuming that lots of people
are trying to do lots of important
things right so knowing that we're
working on the same project at a meta
level the re trajectory of civilization
to a better trajectory that's one thing
I would say wow those big projects are
happening that children still need
raised and old people need taken care of
and food needs grown and all those
things and if you're doing those things
do them all so with full presence
integrity love realizing that they're
critical and if those are the things for
you to be doing as far as the specific
projects we're working on
go to my blog and read the stuff and see
if it can you know it's compelling I've
only written the tiniest little bit of
stuff on there I have a few podcasts cuz
most we've been focused on kind of a
research and thinking about it more than
sharing it just for a share time reason
but getting more educated as a valuable
part of it you can do a lot more that is
relevant if you understand the nature of
the problem space in the solution space
better and so in addition to my blog
there's a number of good resources some
of which I have linked on my blog to to
study and you know already right now and
over the next period we there's a lot of
research we need to do there's stuff
that we need to write this piece of
media to develop there are so people who
have those skills people who have funds
that could support people who have those
skills all of that is relevant so if if
you feel called send me a message great
Daniel thank you so much that was yeah
really really fascinating like hi macro
overview of the world from your
perspective and I really appreciate
appreciate you joining the 2050 podcast
I appreciate being on and I appreciate
the questions that you are asking people
and the way that you are supporting
people to think and inquire hi beautiful
people I hope you enjoyed this
conversation with Danielle to learn more
about his work and the new hacker
collective check out the show notes and
the blog article with all the relevant
links if you want more interesting
interviews like this you can help me by
a leaving a review for this podcast on
iTunes and be letting me know if you
know any interesting potential guests
for the 2050 podcast just go to the
contact page on 2015 org or write a
comment on the blog post have a
wonderful day
[Music]
you
[Music]