okay so as everyone refreshed from their
lunch yep fantastic veneer whoo our next
speaker is an activist and author slash
blogger who I first met on the streets
of London during the million mask March
he founded the website liberate mankind
calm where he details the inspiring and
progressive philosophy of The Venus
Project and many many other socially
conscious avenues of study in pop
culture
he also spoke to the speaker's corner
about the vast social problems for Ã¦lis
all in addition to promoting solutions
to move us forward here to give a talk
entitled getting the message across
please give a warm welcome to Eric Goode
after everyone and thanks very much for
coming I want suddenly many of you will
know Deepak Chopra I once saw him in
interview say that the only real way to
bring about change in this world would
be to spike the water supply for the
psilocybin and get everybody get
everybody tripping he was kidding
of course but there is truth in what
he's saying because what we are actually
seeking to do when we're communicating
these ideas what we are actually seeking
to do is to bring about a complete
transformation in the collective human
consciousness now this translation is
already taking place as evidence about
the millions of people all over the
world who are waking up starting to live
different kinds of lifestyles start
forming movement starting new
communities all of that kind of thing
and indeed all of the discord and all
the ridiculousness we've seen in the
world right now are merely symptoms of
this transformation in consciousness
taking place the question is of course
can we accomplish this transformation
without the debt of the all or most of
the people on this planet and without
destroying the biosphere so that we can
no longer inhabit it so it's a bring
about change we have to start reaching
out it's all very well sitting
volunteered something ourselves already
what mine we are already here right
already on what we've already woken up
so really if we are to bring about
peaceful lasting change in this world
we have to reach out for people who are
not here today millions and millions and
millions of people out there that have
little no idea of what a truly
precarious which is precarious forgiving
situation our society is in and so that
they are on board looking for solutions
to the same problems more Minds working
on the same problem is better obviously
now this is not easy but I take heart
from the fact that it has been done
before many of you will be familiar with
its quote this is a very very famous
quote there that a small group of active
citizens can envy bring about global
change and that is what we are trying to
do so I'm going to start with a few
basic principles of communication which
applies to anything conversation writing
rating videos whatever they may be I'll
give you a couple of examples and then
for the last part I'm going to have a
look at giving presentations such as
this you know in schools in workplaces
in community halls whatever it might be
so first principle is keep educating
yourself the more you know the more
you're going to do that the more the
more fully the more capability going to
be able to explain things to people and
conversations have a tendency to take on
a life of their own inherently
unpredictable and so the more you know
the more tools you will have at your
disposal to be able to adapt and to
explain to adapt to the changing
circumstances of a conversation jargon
masks ignorance do not try and bribe
people with lots of long flashy words
that you've learned all this does is
highlight your own ignorance your own
lack of profound understanding you
cannot explain things in simple everyday
accessible language then you need
certain need to learn it more thoroughly
yourself
thank you thank you very video second
principle is to go one step at a time if
you just jump in and start saying to
people you know our entire system is a
scam you've been enslaved by sitting and
don't give a about who your labor
is stolen you're forced to obey rules by
coercive system there has a monopoly on
force you're brainwashed by propaganda
and advertising and media wars are
started for profit our educational
system deliberately dumbs us down
hundreds of minutes of tens of millions
of people every year are killed through
various forms of structural bond with
decisions are made you know securely
based on the needs of the 1% and with
the needs of everyday people on the
planet itself until you stop doing that
you're going to get one or two results
or so you've got to start from a place
of common experience a place where you
can agree on and then going small
manageable sets from there for me
principle number three is the most
important one because that is the truly
important question is why do these
things go on people have to fill these
understandings on their own economy you
can get them started on the road but
ultimately you have to get to the place
where they are asking their own
questions they're trying to try to come
to these conclusions on their own at
that other people simply don't ask
themselves the right kinds of questions
they're not equipped to do so it's still
and they are not given right information
by our information sources in order to
ask themselves the right kind of
question so it up to us to build those
bridges from their common ground and
things that we can all agree on from
everyday common experience every day is
common common knowledge of things which
are wrong with the world both from there
and then lead them to some of the more
extreme things some of the more radical
ideas that we need them to talk about
that we need to talk about we need them
to understand you can use various forms
of media to start this up and this is
what I like to do when I'm sitting
you know with a friend or an
acquaintance I'm really putting people
that maybe don't know fix me well I like
to start with an article or a video or
something or maybe a song something like
that so there are various laws of media
rather than sewers now and if that was
mentioning yes Dustin I myself write a
blog with books as lethal as their
slogans this is my blog liberate mankind
calm there's visual forms of
communication I'm going to show you one
of my favorite little videos in just a
second and then there's spoken
communication what I'm focusing on today
is the thinking read his outer bottom
[Music]
the world is coming to an end the air is
polluted the oceans contaminating the
animals are going extinct the Academy's
collapse education is shot police are
corrupt intelligence is sharding
ignorance rewarded the people are
depressed and angry we can't live with
each other and can't live with ourselves
so if it was medicated
we passed each other on the street
simple if we do speak this meaningless
robotic communication more people what
15 seconds have saved in a lifetime of
meaning and purpose because most popular
is more important than what's right
ratings are more important than the
truth our government builds twice as
many prisons and schools as easier to
find a Big Mac than an apple when you
find the apples been genetically
processed and modified president slide
politicians trick us erases to the
tissue so it's religion your God doesn't
exist my God does and he is all loving
if you disagree with me out kill you or
even worse aren't you due to death and
92% of songs on a lady are about sex and
kids don't play tag they play toward
videos the average person watches five
hours of television a day and it's more
violent to the screen and ever before
the technology has given us everything
we could ever want and at the same time
stolen everyday we really need pride is
at an all-time high and humility in our
time zone
everybody knows every day everybody's
going somewhere knowing someone blaming
somebody not many human beings left
anymore a lot of human doings
increase in a pass not many human beings
whether you still all fell out cheers
don't get that degree the jobs don't pay
enough good deeds only done as a profit
margin Leon for the misfortunes of
others go viral we've added two children
to France to mess with us total autos
contains 60 years ago within examples of
it naturally states people can clearly
be discriminated against because they
report a certain way company
[Music]
because they were never pretty enough to
be don't impossible said corporations
come why is that important was been in
this will make you happy but it never
does belong
so what you'll be doing the face of Tom
is Madison class what is the solution
where do I mean real large who are
boundless love to be loved each other
from the moment we wake up to the poor
we don't of their active time is because
contagions we can be painful during
every interaction planning please
destroy him or compassion because you're
explaining your mother your father worth
it instead of trying to change those we
can change ourselves we do take Josh
watch we've been sold why they must
believe in that when you grab up
brothers and sisters in to exhibit anger
hatred cruelty who was we truly loved me
angry with sympathy it takes you the
compassion cream super kindness and now
the most common weapon on the face of
earth Robert Kennedy once said you have
the greatest being history of innate
surplus compartment seems a small
portion of this and total pongos
actually written the history legend
racing
the world leaders
and the pant was a new beginning starts
[Applause]
yeah so I was talking about building
bridges from I was slightly dubious
about playing actually make me cry more
often than not when I was that I was
talking about building bridges from
everyday common experience and then
taking them to slightly more extremes
slightly more radial places I just like
to go through a few possible examples of
that so he mentioned in their education
he does another video Prince EA by the
way his name is he's done quite a few
videos they're really good he doesn't
have a retail education system we put
the educational system on child and but
that's one of the one of the area I
think where you can really get things a
question why are things as they are you
know everybody knows that very very
highly prospective curricular constant
testing lead tables all of this kind of
thing is no way to run an educational
system so why then is our education
system exactly the same as it 150 years
ago why is it not been reformed and you
know in English for changing modern
world you know perhaps maybe the idea of
an entire education system indeed we
deliberately startle imagination
creativity in our young people to get
into a big authority without question
and to do with their bosses tell them to
the rest of their lives perhaps that's
the real reason behind her education
system here everybody knows that the
Iraq war was fought thank you very much
appreciate it
everybody knows that the Iraq war was
entered into under thought presented
with malice aforethought and it was
started for no reason other than
economic and political game and Tony
Blair lied to Parliament lie to the
public the Labour government of the time
set up a shining choir in the form of
the Hutton report to the exonerated self
and here the smug bastard no secret
also occasional patient education
education it's oxidation indoctrination
indoctrination raindrop will say don't
take a money another innovation
education education he said something I
do not know I just knowing that he was
saying earlier being what he does he
will burn up I mean listen it wasn't all
bad that later government right they did
spend a lot more money on some of the
things which we actually needed Society
thought never directly the smog grasses
home also the Iraq war the fact that a
full essentially a false story was
created in order to take this to war he
may even get people to look at other
wars how were those entered into the
sinking of the Lusitania attack on Pearl
Harbor the USS Maine bombing is used to
solve war with saying that going back a
couple of hundred years now the Gulf of
Tonkin incident that was used to start a
war on Pearl Harbor 9/11 we've started
the war in Iraq in Afghanistan you know
all of these things all of these things
were lies sold by government use of the
US government's in the public in order
to start war why that's the question
right we all know why do you have to get
people out there asking these larger
questions of themselves right divide and
conquer we all know that the right
confident in use to rule and tires
essentially if you divide the populace
who set them against themselves you
create false divisions in their society
and then they squabble amongst
themselves rather than you not to
overthrow their regressive so get people
to see how in today's well religious and
political affiliations house states and
ethnicity how even with funny football
team you support argued to dividers
seconds against these are keepers
arguing keeper slobbering prevent unity
get people to think about how every
single issue in our society obviously
the polygamous of every single today is
a confrontational one now you have this
sup you have this oliso amount of town
John you have this combatted kind of way
of solving any problems rather than
starting on common ground and then
seeing what we can agree on we start
with these adversarial conditions we
have one camp set against another camp
one end up winning one ends up losing
one ended up being right one ended up
being wrong you know our whole system of
organization operates on this principle
we all know that we live an entirely
wasteful and homely unsustainable way so
many people are aware of us now
disposability of product obsolescence of
product are everywhere you look people
don't expect to have a phone for more
than a year people don't expect to have
a car for more than five years you know
it's not as an incredibly it's an
unbelievable ways of resources our
wholly unnecessary reliance on fossil
fuels continues relatively are they -
despite the fact technologies for all
senators that existed far back out get
this hydrogen fuel cell anyone though in
the hydrogen fuel cell was invented 1834
you know I mean so technology has been
around yeah I know I couldn't believe it
either I've been familiar so yeah I mean
the technology been around for a very
long time see again I come back to why
why have these LED technologies not take
another why I'm still using oil
consumerism is running rampant and is
rewarded and encouraged at every single
turn people who have more have greater
safety in our society with constantly
bombarded with advertisement
advertisement and other empowering
parents other images of cheap credit etc
to continue to buy things that we don't
need and the consequences of this are
there for all to see in ever diminishing
fresh water supplies ever-increasing
pollution of soil climate changes right
here we are already getting more
frequent and more extreme weather event
you know it's already happening so given
the dire consequences of ignoring the
warnings that are before us and carrying
on as we were why are we ignoring the
warnings that are responsible and
carrying on exactly as we always have
done and why I repeat why is the
important question so I get him to keep
coming back to the line never
underestimate the
or the value of the conversation had
with a stranger in a pub or showing a
video to some colleagues at work these
little things however small they may be
each of these things are planting seeds
in mind and each and every one of these
seeds has the potential to grow into a
wake into an awakened vine which in
Danang go and class repellency and so on
and so on right I'm going to move on now
to I'm going to move on now to
presentations and I'm taking with my
main source of advice this chap here
simon Sinek who is the third most
watched TED talk on YouTube he is by his
own admission I've seen an interview
with him he throws out a mission
painfully shy and finds speaking to
crowds of people utterly uncomfortable
and yet as I said needs a third most
watched TED talk or on YouTube so he's
managed to come up with methods which he
uses in his own sort which allowed him
to overcome his tensed nerves and
shyness
it is nerve-racking standing up here I
must admit I'm not finding it all that
but then I on a teacher in order means
I'm regularly used to sending up a
photograph of the felicity whatever in
teaching so I told me find it less he's
an overacting on someone who wouldn't
have that kind of experience and but
yeah I'm going to use his top 70s and a
few embellishments that I put on myself
and doctor and then six that I've had
from from other Ted talkers
so sitting on the one
don't talk straight away when you come
up on stage get to your podium
put your note sounds survey the room
take a breath the audience will get from
this the sense that you don't feel the
need to rush and this lends you an air
of assuredness and certainty in what
you're doing
I've just done the second one on here
the ten second pause I have to say with
agonizing had said it as long as ten
seconds
it feels unnaturally on the idea behind
the ten second pause is that if you use
that once maybe twice in the body of
your talk what examples it we gathers
the attention of the room before you
move on to a new theme or a new section
something like that the Continental
Canadian customers offer this speaks a
lot whatever sentence or even people who
are who lost their attention and sitting
there texting on their further pause
that long will make them look I hate
what's going on before make them look up
and here we go the attention of Italy
even those that you might have lost tip
number two I think this is the most
important one please be there to give
and not to take and so there are various
ways that you can do this a taker it's
someone that the audience perceived as
being there to sell them something or
recruit them to something or trying to
convince them of something right this is
this is what a taker is a giver doesn't
do that a giver inspires trust in their
audience and therefore the audience
rewards them willingly with their
attention right so you need to try and
be a giver there're various ways of
accomplishing it first one is to open up
be emotionally available to you know
tell them things about you you know be
personal with them give them are well
really that kind of thing you know if
you can give them a moment like that a
fact or a story that they might never
have heard before which had an impact on
next thing is questions if you are lucky
enough to get a question from the
audience
treat it as a blessing if you get a
question what it means is they're paying
attention and they're interested in what
you're saying right so do not ignore
questions ideally
repeat them for the rest of the room in
case everybody hasn't heard it deal with
it straight away if you
and if you're going to come on so if
you're going to come on to the content
the questions shortly then you know you
know I'm going to get to that in just a
minute if you wouldn't mind wait to see
what I'm going to cover exactly that
right doing of it but if you fall off
the person or if you be worse ignore it
altogether you are likely to alien
certainly that person and quite possibly
the rest of the audience at the same
time it means you have to read your
order a little bit in your presentation
then so be it you should be well enough
prepared that you can make those kinds
of adjustments on your feet next time is
don't overrun remember the audience has
given you their time right this is
another gift this is a blessing from so
don't abuse it I'm hoping to finish bang
on the twenty four minutes tops the
video so it should finish hang on that
anyway will speak and finally and I kind
of alluded to this keep grateful
especially if they have towards you at
the end or as in he does happen partway
through today which has been lovely
so again appreciative giving you their
time they're giving you their applause
they're giving you their love be
grateful for that and if you can
communicate that in your totally your
body language so much the better for so
long as things drawn off there we go
alright next one I contact every single
person I've seen to scan and pandas
they're just looking around me around
the room not sorting on any particular
person is bad actually it just connects
you it looks like you're trying to
connect with the audience but actually
it is connecting and so the best way is
to go round of really make individual
icons with our five concept with
somebody move on to somebody else and so
on and so on around the room finish your
sentence of one person and then move on
to another one
let's create intimacy between you and
your audience and you'll talk will have
a more conversational feel rather than a
lecture it will feel a little bit more
like a conversation albeit at somewhat
one-sided one
tip number four I am I'm somewhat I'm
somewhat guilty of not doing is I talk
very quickly in my natural state anyway
and so I deliberately slow myself down
this is me talking slowly believe it or
not and if you're nervous you will tend
to rush and so you need to make
deliberate efforts to pause at the end
of each sentence even in the middle of a
sentence you really can't go through
slowly remember your audience wants you
to succeed they don't want to sit there
feeling awkward that you're not
succeeding they want you to see and so
they will hang on your every
one of the other speakers with it Kyle
alluded to this that violent language I
can't remember one of the other speakers
alluded to this idea of violent language
and yeah this is a very important one if
another one that I tend to be guilty of
are use phrases like rating the planet
and enslaving mankind as mass murder and
stuff like that and you know it is very
dramatic and writing it's fine you can
make important you can make it strong
and it can be quite relaxing quite fun
to read but if you knew this kind of
language in conversation with people it
kind of constitutes a form of verbal
assault from which people feel they need
to protect themselves right and so now
the content of what you're saying is not
getting in because of the way of saying
it right so you need to really try and
be gentle with your with your use of
language by starting on common ground
and going gently set by set bugs that
you invite agreement at every stage as
you retain attentiveness for the next
step if you said I mean this is one that
again I came across in more than one
place turn nerves into excitement again
you know when you're saying up here you
will experience the sentence of nervous
with clammy hand shake you know what we
need that kind of thing elevated heart
rate that kind of stuff so you know if
you're prepared thoroughly he's really
got nothing to be nervous about
notes up we just take I get lost you
know I put a little prompted in I've no
habit at Aeneid speakers corner and
standing there and all of a sudden I
just lose my throat my mind goes blank
and till I were you going to do so you
need to have something that you can just
give yourself a little kiss side but if
you've got that can properly prepare and
you can just stand up here and enjoy the
fact that you've got the adrenaline
coursing only bother your senses what I
can do a little bit more perky than you
usually oh you can just relax and enjoy
the sensation and then the seventh and
final tip is visual aid and notes and
the fun I just want to be exact because
that's one of the point but you know
they want to enchance what you're saying
that without distracting the audience
from what you're planning so you know
some kind of some kind of image or maybe
a bit of
additional information but generally
speaking a bad idea to read your slides
out and the audience can reach
themselves and it means you're now not
connecting with your audience if you say
is everything slide up you're not
connecting with your audience as you
should be and final thinking already
mentioned very briefly it notes I would
recommend very song you don't have a
full script with you and you read the
script for exactly the same reason as in
December because you lose any natural
intonation and sense of drama and you
will not be making sufficient eye
contact with your audience so props
sufficient prompts that if you get stuck
somewhere you can remind yourself
practice prepared thoroughly and and you
should be good to go I just think even
one final thought again is that this
touches on certain things that others
have already said but oh yes I talked
about that it's bubbly fade but yeah
it's very quickly summarizing the things
that I've said number one educate
yourself you can't possibly educate
others if you are yourself not so early
educators and get online watch videos
read blogs whatever start and common
ground one step at a time from there
small sets try and get to the why but
underline these things listen to people
being ready for after their classes and
finally each end talk this capitis on
that and if I'm just leaving with one
final thought don't be discouraged if
your word things initially fall on deaf
ears is what a lot of good supposed to
say that's all thank you very much
thank you
keep the import come on thank you very
much
[Applause]