howdy this is Jim rut and this is the
Jim rut show listeners have asked us to
provide pointers some of the resources
we talked about on the show we now have
links to books and articles referenced
in recent podcasts that are available on
our website
we also offer full transcripts go to Jim
rut show.com that's Jim ruts show com
our guest today is Jared Jaynes of Jared
james consulting hey Jim thanks for
having me on this is on this is gonna be
fun yeah it's kind of fun for us both be
on here together according to your
website says you spend your time
learning meditating podcasting and
consulting and of course last but not
least you are also the producer of the
Jim ruts show yeah it'll be fun to kind
of turn the thing around you you know
edited to most of the episodes yeah now
you can be one yeah this is gonna be a
weird at it later on itself I'm looking
forward to that yeah that's interesting
I don't know I'm not sure I could
tolerate editing my own voice I guess I
did do it once I did edit one episode of
the show just to see how it was done and
I decided never again I can avoid it
but I asked you onto the show not for
you know your relationship to the show
but because we had an interesting
discussion on Twitter as people who
listen to the show know and particularly
people who listen to me on other
people's podcasts I'm known to go off on
a rant whatever the S word is used
spirituality anyway we got into it on
that topic once on Twitter and so back
and forth and I thought we start at
least started to approach some sort of
almost agreement I thought it might be
worth you know some redo degree redoing
that discussion and then expanding it
and see where it leads yeah that sounds
great yeah I mean it was a good
discussion it really was it was lively
and since then you know based on your
suggestion and others I've been probing
more into the area you suggest that I
read Sam Harris is waking up which I did
and as somebody else it might well been
Jason Snyder suggests that the science
of enlightenment by Sinjin Yong
which I'm about halfway through so yeah
let's get down to it stealing
let me start why I cringe and or worse
or starting fuming when I hear the word
spirituality the problem to me isn't the
essence of what the word is often used
for in fact the more I've read and more
I've listened the more I've talked to
people like yourself and others you know
I can come up to a virgin of which that
word points to which isn't too offensive
in fact is actually good but why in the
world do we have to include the word
spirit in it to my mind you know it
appeals to Cartesian dualism ie the idea
that mind and body are two completely
separate kinds of material and are not
related in the real world you know it
brings up to my mind at least you know
ghosts and spooks and you know angels
and demons and all various kinds of
spirits that may just be an overreaction
to my youthful Catholicism which I'd
defiantly rejected when I was 11 but
that's what that word rings up for me
yeah I mean actually you know I can
sympathize a lot because I've been in
the exact same place so I grew up in a
kind of like hard-line secular
upbringing so it wasn't even around the
church and yeah that the religion or
spirituality were we're know goes for me
for my first 26 years or something like
that and even when I started to meditate
it was you know secular mindfulness was
the attractive point you know I wanted
to become the most optimal body mind as
possible and so it was a very much
self-improvement project but then kind
of weighted my way into some of the
deeper waters and now for for whatever
reason to describe the character of some
of the subjective experiences that I've
found along the contemplative spiritual
mystical path whatever it is you know
that they really lend themselves to
religious language that if taken from an
objective standpoint is obviously absurd
but yeah I think the the one thing to
keep in mind is when it's being used
correctly and not being applied to areas
that it shouldn't be
it's primarily a subjective exploration
and there is unfortunately this kind of
intangible non-material internal kind of
spirit to the practice that for whatever
reason that that word is just so
available and far more descriptive
rather than using more scientific
language like saying that you know your
your default mode network or a
prefrontal cortex or dampens and you
know we could talk about these from a
third-person perspective but it doesn't
do a ton of value when we're actually
talking about the practice so yeah I
don't know maybe there's there's a good
place to start
yeah then you've hit probably right
about on where the interesting seem is
which is the difference between the
first-person or subjective experience
and the analytical or objective
third-person experience and it's an
interesting question how we integrate on
one side or tease apart those two
perspectives yeah well you know what's
your thoughts on that I mean to what
degree are they two aspects of the same
thing or are they two fundamentally
different thing yeah well and this is
kind of the the interesting thing like
you said in the beginning that even the
Declaration of some sort of spirit to be
in touch with does kind of immediately
bring up this connotation of a dualistic
perspective saying that there's this
other thing other part of our experience
that we should prioritize and the
strange thing is that early on in the
practice it really does feel like that
there is you know it's trying to become
acquainted with this certain subtle
nuanced subjective experiences that feel
completely separate from our everyday
material reality when we're at work when
we're you know in a job interview and
we're going to grocery shopping or
something like that but I think you know
while that early practice can have a lot
of benefits there can be some major
milestones and shifts in perspective
that start to unify those two
perspectives and and this is what I
would kind of
in a blanket phrase point two as as the
the juice of the practice which is a
more non-dual experience we're subject
object distinctions and Cartesian
dualism applied in many different
aspects of our life it starts to break
down so it's kind of a yes and no in the
sense that dualism is kind of something
that's there in the beginning but if we
go deep enough it's it quickly dissolves
and and that brings some very
interesting impacts to our our
moment-to-moment experience as well
maybe for the audience's sake it may be
good describe if you can remember what
some of those subtle kind of spiritual
dualistic experiences might have been
early on in your practice well and maybe
we could we could also state as kind of
a bit of a distinction point here I
think that it's really common when we
talk about contemplative or spiritual
practices or specifically spiritual or
contemplative States to emphasize the
extremely extraordinary almost magical
elements of those states or those
moments and this these same things come
up with you know exploration the
psychedelic realm as well and can be
induced in things like sport is you know
it's it's it's available in pretty much
any aspects of our lives but we tend to
find it more in religious and high
concentrated States but I guess I think
it's important to separate two things
here's there's there are the states and
those are interesting and powerful and
often can be big motivations to continue
down the path but what I see is the the
real kind of rubber hits the road is
more of a trait conversion and this is
very subtle in the sense that it's just
you know now when I'm in that job
interview I you know it feels like a
sacred space or something you know for
the lack of the more enchanted or you
know so one of these words that is
problematic on a many different levels
and so yeah and really well in the
beginning the states can be very
motivating and fascinating in the long
run it's these character shifts that are
kind of lasting and durable and very
profound in shifts shifts and now we see
things do you want me to go into like I
mean I could talk about some of the the
heightened states I've had that we're
interesting I suppose yeah that'd be
great
and then I'll share some of my own cool
cool so he did quite a few different
practice
and depending on the type of practices
you're doing the type of experiences can
be drastically different one of the
first ones that comes to mind was
actually an experience of pain
so speaking of shins and young as you
mentioned he has this really great
equation that I think is really
foundational to understanding what is
happening to the psyche as we go on this
contemplatively and that is defining
suffering as pain times resistance so
it's a multiplicative equals the
suffering component and the problem here
is that by default in everyday life we
can't really make a distinction between
the resistance to the pain and the pain
itself and you can have these
experiences in meditation from time to
time where the resistance component of
the suffering drops out pretty
drastically or in a very clear decisive
way and so one time I was on a weekend
Solo retreat and meditating you know
eight or nine hours a day and as you can
imagine I was having some pretty extreme
back pain and you know I've been sitting
for like an hour or so and I knew I
could tell it was about an hour so I and
all of a sudden you know the back pain
was just screaming like it was
excruciating I was like I gotta maybe
I'm just gonna call it I can't make it
the full hour hour and a half whatever
it was and for whatever reason I just
decided well screw it I'm just gonna sit
through it and so I resigned to the fact
that there was gonna be pain and the
moment that happened you know my back
pain went from basically like a you know
nine or a 10 on the scale of discomfort
to about a two so all of a sudden it
felt like a very subtle constriction in
the middle of my back because there's
that room that resistance component
wasn't in there and so yeah and I think
that's important because the more
familiar you become with mental
resistance to discomfort or even mental
attraction to comfort the inverse the
more you can kind of start seeing on a
moment-to-moment day-to-day basis how
much of your own suffering is
self-created
and that was the first impactful thing
that comes to mind I've had you know a
number of other interesting things but
maybe they're not quite as applicable to
the day-to-day existence let's actually
branch a little bit here cuz have it
down further on my list of topics but it
comes up whenever one visits what I
would call Buddhist inspired approaches
and that's
focused on suffering and actually using
the word suffering in a somewhat
peculiar way yeah you know you come away
reading this stuff I mean Sam Harris in
particular seems to think it all of life
is suffering I go what the fuck right we
may have our aches and pains and
problems and this and that but is it
reasonable to think that all of life is
suffering mm-hmm well I think the first
thing to do when we look at the
suffering question is definitely to look
at the translation and so you know well
life is suffering is a very provocative
statement I think it's actually would be
actually more skillfully translated as
life is pervaded with unsatisfactoriness
and the real rub is that this subtle
unsatisfactoriness which every human
experiences from a certain degree in the
sense that we pursue goals and the hopes
of being able to achieve them and
possibly get to the place where
circumstances are right and we've kind
of arrived and sometimes we can tell
ourselves these stories about oh it's
all about the journey and and
conceptually knowing that that's not
entirely true is helpful but there's a
different way of seeing that that
sometimes we're still operating under
these assumptions that if we could only
get or if we could only avoid or we
could only be content you know these
these if the circumstances came in the
right place suddenly I would be happy
there would be no or nowhere to go I'd
just be in that moment and so I think
that's a far better description and the
interesting thing too is that this
unsatisfactoriness is very pervasive and
it's very subtle it's very like it
doesn't it's not really pronounced and
if it's always been there it's not
really gonna draw much of our attention
one of the things that I can think of
actually there's a slight digression
it's a simple fact that when I was
growing up I was diagnosed with cystic
fibrosis when I was born mr. dennit
genetic condition and one of the the
results of this is that you have a lot
of GI problems growing up so you know it
just was a standard thing that every day
or you know a couple every other day or
something like that I was going to have
some sort of issue with my stomach and
some days were worse and some days were
better and when I was in my early 20s I
went on a diet that for whatever reason
allowed my stomach to kind of reboot and
all of a sudden I felt what it was like
to not have any stomach discomfort at
all a zero and in that moment I realized
oh my God my whole life I've been at a
stomach discomfort level of five at a
minimum and I never knew that there was
a zero and this is very similar to the
kind of psychological effect of chronic
low-grade unsatisfaction with what is
happening in the moment and the more we
unravel this and understand the
mechanisms that that lead to this
unsatisfactoriness the more rich kind of
life gets because there's there's
nowhere to go and that you're kind of
just basking in the in the moment I
suppose that doesn't sound too good
sounds like a bunch of fucking hippies
in mud huts isn't unsatisfactoriness
what keeps us getting up in the morning
and punching the world making progress
and and all that sort of stuff oh my god
I don't want to be on what is it
unsatisfactory missus I want to be
unsatisfied with the way things are I
mean as you know I'm fairly involved in
something called game B which people can
find out more about at the game VIII
group on Facebook or game B dot wiki and
you know thinking about it you know Here
I am you know retirement age you know
very in theory well settled economically
etc and yet I have a strong
unsatisfactoriness about the world yeah
there's something fucked about our world
and I don't like I don't want to leave
it to my descendants you know I would
like to help make the world better
what's wrong with that
mmm-hmm nothing really unfortunately I
have to say I agree with you I'm gonna
come from the same place but I think we
could probably reuse this suffering
equation from Shinzon to talk about the
way there can still be pain there
completely still be discomfort so that
discomfort is a wanting to make things
better or address some sort of
challenges or help somebody other we
have we have a lot of biological drives
that are there for the right reason and
it's simply the way that we react to
these these drives and it's it's not
just the negative ones it's actually the
positive ones too
that we're adding this whole layer of
wanting something to either go away
when it's not or wanting something to
stay we know it's going to go away
because there's nothing that's going to
permanent in our experience and both of
these things create this unsatisfactory
quality that pervades all of our our
moment-to-moment so it's kind of like a
meta unsatisfactoriness that we're
trying to exclude but regardless
negative and positive valence continue
to operate on the human physio psycho
experience you have so it's the the
drive is still there you're just not so
it's it's like being on a roller coaster
and throw-in your hands up and enjoying
the hell out of it versus you know
gripping on to that that handlebar and
like you have some sort of control about
where it's going to go or not wanting it
to turn that way or not liking the turn
at the angle on this and resisting the
the ride that you are on regardless
yeah I don't know is that does that make
sense a little bit though I can't say
I've ever felt like I was existing the
ride I was on in fact my business
philosophy I people so what if I I don't
pay attention to business philosophy but
after I retired I could decided that in
retrospect my business philosophy could
be summarized in the Hunter s Thompson
sentence faster and faster until the
thrill of speed exceeds the fear of
death so I was always a letter fly
motherfucker kind of first yeah right
and just go for it right don't worry too
much right shit hits the wall explodes
which it did once oh well all right we
just you know get up pick herself up
dust ourselves off and go do it again so
how much I've ever felt this you know
white-knuckle oh my god oh my god life
sucks lifestyle yeah yeah well the and
the white knuckled metaphor is is a very
provocative one because it illustrates
and kind of caricature eyes is this
resistance but obviously it's on a
spectrum here right
and everybody's psychology is probably
leading to more or less of this
dissatisfaction in their
moment-to-moment experience and the
weird thing is that even if it is a
small portion of our experience so and
you know this is this kind
speaks to the the subtleness of a lot of
the components here in the the
contemplative unraveling they you know
it's a good metaphor that I like is kind
of like if we were to look at ourselves
or our experience as being comprised of
a puddle of water
I suppose so all of our experience the
totality of our experience is summarized
in a puddle of water and there is a big
difference between there being a drop of
red dye that colors the entire
experience and all of a sudden it has
this this lens or you're kind of living
in this very subtle this redness quality
and then what it looks like when you go
from just 0.01% of dissatisfaction to
zero dissatisfaction the
counterintuitive thing here is that it
feels significantly different and all of
a sudden you can see from one edge of
the puddle to the other instead of three
feet in front of your face and you know
everything's vast everything's open
everything is very light and yeah I mean
I know it's hard to explain but this is
part of understanding the component of
resistance to our experience is having
these subtle experiences that when you
say them don't really sound that
interesting and that's why maybe
sometimes this religious language is a
way of communicating the profundity of
the experiences because it sounds a lot
more interesting to dwell in the Kingdom
of Heaven than it does to you know
slightly damp in your default mode
Network so that there's a less of a
filtering experience but from the larger
aspect of your brain or something right
maybe I'm sure it's just me you know
there are probably people like me that
know you talk me about that kingdom of
God and all this stuff all my natural
knee-jerk just go bullshit balls it
balls it right you know we've had you
know a world plagued by these religions
you know as far back as anybody could
find it seems like we we seem to have a
weakness for it right you know even sam
harris says yeah you walk into the
aisles of any spiritual bookstore and
you're confronted with the yearnings and
credulity of our species by the yard
hey you've been into the spiritual
section of a bookstore you go holy shit
right you know sleeping under pyramids
astrology regressing to past lives
probably these this day and age probably
some flat earth stuff in there that
humans seem to have a weakness for these
complicated and ungrounded stories yeah
and you know I and as I've learned more
in particular I have really spent some
time trying to learn about this stuff I
can definitely see where the benefit
comes from I mean there's a large body
of work about just the plain old
physiological benefits of equanimity
that comes through things like
meditation or other kinds of
contemplative practices and I'm at least
willing to provisionally by this idea of
curing something like unsatisfactoriness
without making you lay in bed all day
which we kind of saw but I still resist
being taken anywhere near the kingdom of
heaven or any goddamn altars or chalices
or incense burning around that horseshit
right yeah and I'm sure about the only
one I mean you know Sam's book Sam
Harris his book yeah he's kind of a
bummer of a dude I'm afraid does not
seem like a very happy guy right it
seems odd for a person who talks about
the endless hours including like a year
one time doing nothing but better days I
mean Jesus if I was as miserable as that
motherfucker
[Laughter]
but you know nonetheless you know he's a
atheist too in it and yet he's able to
sort of buy into this but didn't doesn't
seem to have made him happy he doesn't
seem happy dude at all yeah I guess well
there's the interesting thing is that
when we say happy even happiness right
so one of the I think there's a million
ways that we could dissect it but one of
my favorite definitions of what
happiness is doesn't really have
anything to do with like joyful elated
States but it's actually just being okay
with everything the way it is in this
moment right and sometimes that might be
mean being okay with being annoyed or
you know
wanted to tell the Muslim world what
they need to be doing yeah whatever it
is right you know Sam Harris is variant
or anybody else the psychology of a
human still seems to unfold itself and
and maybe even to make a connection the
last episode was with Mohanji fran yeah
and I think one of the really important
things to think of here is that there
are multiple levels of human development
and they interact with each other in
interesting ways in the sense that if
you're rational understanding of your
place in the world and kind of how the
thing how the world works is very
undeveloped may be very salsa stick or
you know a very in group oriented where
you're only can have compassion for the
people that are you know the same
religion or come from the same piece of
land as you or something like that you
can still have some of these really
profound spiritual experiences and
unfortunately the way you experience it
will be through the lens of how
developed you are in the the kind of you
know for the I've really liked the the
phrase the growing up component of your
personal development and the spiritual
stuff is more related to to waking up
err aspect of our experience but they're
they're intimately connected and and
unfortunately a lot of our traditions
that explore these waking up elements of
our experience were created in a you
know pre-modern age and so they used
magical crazy ideas of how the world
works and they use those those elements
to to describe what the what the path is
like I suppose and yeah I think maybe
it's just a happy accident that that
they're they're being able to unbounded
Lee creatively choose the most
provocative things that they wanted to
that we're not housed by logic and
reason in the science it still somewhat
is is a there's there's still value in
the sense that it could be easier to
point out parts of our experience that
are profound using some of the religious
language still but if I'm using it it's
always from a very critical lens and the
one way it's complete bullshit and
it's the most it's it's far more true of
what my experience is actually like at
this moment yeah I love that I love that
line I still don't fully understand it
but I would you know like to over you
know the next year or so learn more
about just what that line is because
you're not the only smart person that
has said things like the end right and
yeah unlike Sam you don't seem to be a
miserable fuck either right you seemed
like you enjoy life which is good and
you know while I play a hard-headed
scientific realist on TV or at least on
my podcast and other people's podcast
truth is I've actually had lots of these
experiences and I did LSD
a half-dozen times when I was a young
adult I've done other non mainstream but
powerful psychedelics probably a hundred
times you know I've had very deep what I
call mystical experiences typically
involved in the outdoors and certain
kinds of lighting and times of day etc
you know and I can I think I even did it
on one of our podcasts was maybe that's
why I did with Hansie or or I can flip
myself into a state of non self that
it's actually just perception and
processing without itself there but it
can only do it for about two seconds yes
and so I do all these things and they're
kind of cool and for a while I was doing
some things with Bayern 'el sounds and
guided meditation and stuff there's all
interesting and it's kind of enjoyable
but I guess I don't see anything
profound it may have I not gone far
enough or am I just a naturally shallow
person well that's a big question
either we're all shallow in our own ways
right yeah I don't know um well one
thing that I think that you and I both
have in common
as you said I seem like a pretty happy
person you know a lot of people that
start this the spiritual project are
there because life's tough and they're
not happy and they want to address this
this very you know obviously pronounced
you know higher than than normal or
higher than average amount of
unsatisfactoriness in their experience
then there's other people myself I had
include where you know I actually
I was extremely happy I was always happy
you know I grew up as being you know in
my family known as the kind of always
equina meais always smiling making the
best of every situation person and you
know I never really felt any kind of
lack of meaning or purpose in my life
and yeah I was very self-assured you
know psychologically you know other than
maybe some some ego aggrandizement I
didn't really have many of pathologies
to solve with this and I actually went
in there into this project with the the
idea of making my the best self I could
possibly create and it can it definitely
as you said the practices do help us
from a just kind of a day-to-day
operating perspective you know how we
choose to use our attention is a really
important skill it's not only developed
in meditation people live certain lives
of as you said being in nature you know
kind of away from some of the abstract
concepts and things that of everyday
life and able to kind of just connect to
the moment and you know how be feel like
you're you're part of nature that
dissolves some of that boundary get
doing deep concentrate of things like
you know just reading a lot and being
able to hold your sustain your attention
make make connections can be a good way
of practicing mindful techniques and and
and a lot of these can also be applied
toward the the psychological you know
trauma and stuff like that as well I
don't really have much experience with
that but there's a number of ways that
it enhances our experience in a very
real way one I guess the best the best
way that I can think of I think you've
mentioned before the stories we tell
about our experience is largely
confabulated by the mind you know
there's a lot of psychological
experience that put people in situations
where they're they're being subtly or
subconsciously motivated to do something
and then they ask the person why and
they've come up with some story that's
somewhat self coherent but not
ultimately true in any real way because
they don't have access to or not access
to but but visibility of all of the
machinery that's leading to decisions
and things like that and one of the
things that comes up as you continue to
go down this path
is understanding the intentions that are
arising in your moment to moment
experience that lead to you doing
something and the the very fascinating
thing that we start to realize is that
because we're a ego in the trap behind
the head
in most of our waking life like you said
we have these moments where that kind of
gets stripped away and it's just process
happening and unfolding in a unbounded
way but when we're constricted into this
agent who's separate from his
environment trying to get wet he or she
wants it can be frustrating and all of
our decisions are self oriented like you
know that's like what do I need to be
happy in this situation and the more you
start to realize how prevalent this is
in our moment alone experience and this
is deeply connected to that
unsatisfactoriness what can I get from
my environment that I don't have the
more you realize that it's you're
working less in harmony with others and
so this is maybe something that I said
that was kind of provocative on the game
B topic on Twitter where I said you know
without sufficiently deconstructing the
ego collectivist action is going to be
really hard to solve because everybody's
acting selfishly
and the the rub is we don't know that we
ROCK were acting selfishly so we have to
kind of put ourselves in those spaces
where self other distinctions start to
dissolve in order to be acting from a
place of you know working toward a
common group goal and maybe that'll be
one example very tactical stuff and
that's connected or directly to some of
the game P discussion that you haven't
as well these days yeah and as you know
in my recent essay a journey to game B I
laid out a couple of good-sized sections
on psycho technologies for exactly that
reason you know I would say I'm less
sure of exactly what and exactly how but
it does seem to me that contemplative
practices psychedelics and neurofeedback
who knows what neuro stimulation even
who knows may allow us to operate better
together as coherent groups and cohesive
groups yeah than we do in our current
kind of toxic society let me go back on
a couple other things that you talked
about in passing one is indeed my
favorite topic of the confabulate er
mmm-hmm this isn't really to my mind a
hugely important topic
and maybe more central to our actual
human way of being than we'd like to
know the earliest good work on the
confabulate er comes from the split
brain experiments of Michael Gazzaniga
and some another and his mentor I forget
his name right off top my head where the
corpus callosum the big giant fiber that
connects the right and left hemisphere
of the brain were severed and then
images were presented that only one half
of the brain could see typically the
right brain and which does not usually
have much language capability and people
would make up these unbelievable stories
to explain what they had seen and make
up stories that somehow the thing that
they had seen but didn't see you know it
gets embedded into a story etc and
Gazzaniga and his people he worked with
called this confabulation a recent book
I read goes further an amazing way and
you know I'm gonna read this book again
and then I'm gonna have the author on
the podcast and the books called the
mind is flat and the author is Nick
shader CH a ter he takes the really
radical perspective that we are nothing
but a series of memories which can be
searched in pair in parallel and then a
confabulate ER which tries to make the
best sense out of them that it can and a
story that it tells to ourself yeah I
think it is a largely true description
of what is happening in human cognition
and so this is where maybe that that
spirit were where it comes in the the
interesting thing is that our experience
is also pervaded by non conceptual stuff
you know so we have our feelings and
emotions and the the feel you know
understanding what it means to be a body
that has all these different sensory
organs that are constantly taking a
bunch of information from arcs our
experience as well and yes that's being
incorporated directly with the the the
mind process what's interesting is that
so many of the practices that we're
doing is actually aimed at looking in
between the thoughts in the stories or
deconstructing the thoughts and the
stories and seeing how they're kind of
what where they're coming from and
seeing that their confabulations and
when we see it in a real deep way all of
a sudden we kind of take ourselves a
little less seriously you know like
these ideas like wow I mean they could
be kind of true and and yeah you know we
do have other tools to be able to help
out like the scientific method where we
can actually put them to the test to
help orient closer to what is actually
happening but the interesting thing is
that I think a lot of what's happening
and another reason that action becomes a
little bit more skillful where maybe a
little bit a lot a lot more skillful is
that we get such so tunnel-visioned on
the allowed conceptual elements the
thoughts the ideas the images of our
experience and don't see what's kind of
in between which is the feelings and
there is and there's also an element of
our experience that that pervades every
like that is prior to it feels making
any kind of objective claims here but
there is a a feeling of a more raw just
simple knowingness that you can start to
tap into and you realize that that
knowingness is not just attached that
allowed sensory experiences it's also
attached to you know more subtle things
in between that the space in between the
silence in between I think you've talked
about like hearing the the songless a
song or whatever it is yeah the song
with no words I mean when I get into a
very very deep you know with the
heaviest psychedelics or the deepest
trances or you know I shitload of
nitrous oxide I always get to this point
where the same song is playing and it
has words but it doesn't have words it's
just the weirdest fucking thing yeah
yeah I mean and that's the weird thing
right we have this you know these very
subtle elements of our experience would
you start never present in our
moment-to-moment experience and I think
this is what a lot of those those major
trade shifts like the the you know they
talk about kind of hitting certain
milestones where all of a sudden your
perspective is completely shifted it can
be not through effort but just
implicitly running in the background
where you're kind of have a broader
awareness of the context of your
thoughts and feelings and everything
like that you
kind of expands the available
information to cohesively make decisions
and you know I think this is actually
this is what it feels like at least and
and it points to a lot of the
discussions about meaningfulness how to
navigate toward the meaningful elements
of our experience it requires us to be
available to all of our senses and
everything that's going on and if we get
constricted into you know one small
chain maybe an idea or a thought of or a
string of words and images strewn
together if while that is going on we
can also be in touch with our emotional
experience and that may be the emotional
experience of others around us because
we're social humans we if we're aware of
it we sense into other people's
reactions as well all of a sudden
there's this like larger coherence that
can arise
instead of being localized into just one
tiny element of our experience and that
constriction comes from having an
agendas about things being different
than what they should be like even if
it's already there so like one of the
great and simple definitions of this big
word enlightenment that I like is simply
the complete cooperation with the
inevitable what has happened has
happened and you are only looking
forward as opposed to being stuck on the
things that you wish were different and
so yeah that but for whatever that's
worth that's pulling the number of
threads together and seeing if they they
work for you you know the last part I
like a lot of any people who work with
me and known with me that is very very
similar to the advice I my cheap five
cents worth of psychological advice is
fuck the past that's why they call it
the past right that's basically the
ruddy in psychotherapy which I can give
to anybody for a nickel right you know
why the hell do we get so wrapped up in
the past can't do anything about it you
know all kinds of fucked up things have
happened to all of us right not a
goddamn thing we can do about it
you know let's focus on moving forward
but I want to hit a couple other things
first let's retouch on that but you know
just some science touch points one that
speaks to this sense that you know our
actions are more ineffable than we
likely know the work of benjamin lai
'but the famous live
experiments which show reasonably
convincingly and as far as I know
they've not been refuted anybody knows a
refutation of the lie but let me know
but it appears we make a decision like
to move our hand to pick up a glass of
water before we're consciously aware of
it and so that our consciousness is
essentially the movie of rather than the
mechanism by which the the decisions are
actually made and the other one this is
a book I recommended I don't know how
many times I'm going to do it again it's
by Antonio Damasio and it's called the
feeling of what happens body and emotion
in the making of consciousness he's a
clinical psychologist and he goes into
some of his cases of people who have
certain kinds of free frontal cortex
injuries where the emotional signal
doesn't get to the decision-making at
all and they literally would starve to
death because they couldn't decide what
they have for breakfast yeah at the end
of the day most of our decisions are not
actually analytically derived by some
you know Aristotelian logic or some such
we got them sort of roughly framed up
and then emotion tips the hand for us
right that's what's really going on and
I think both lie bit and Damacio are
very strong support for that perspective
let me also jump back to something that
you talked about that cause my ears to
really prick up and if if true this
would be a cool and maybe a good way to
rebrand all this stuff could one say
that becoming an expert at meditative
contemplative practice is basically
learning how to hack the confabulate er
hmm
yeah I mean this is the weird thing
right like to understand the Machine if
you understand how it's being made it
gives you some influence on when it's
being constructed in the future just
because there's an awareness of it you
know it's kind of the difference between
being a UI designer who's putting
together the different elements for a
website but then there's also this
underlying source code that is actually
the thing that's creating the images and
the interaction that you're having with
the screen and so a lot of yeah that
confabulate ER is is kind of the process
of understanding the source code of our
find the fundamental components the
better you understand the system the
easier it is for it to work in harmony I
suppose I don't know yeah it's it's a
weird thing here as you say it's like
you're not driving but your action is
dependent on how much information how
much bandwidth you're getting in your
moment-to-moment experience and if that
can include the source code it can be
really powerful that that's interesting
but I have a slightly different thought
I'm just I'm sort of thinking out loud
here so this might end up being
gibberish but I'm trying to actually
formulate here on the fly a way that if
getting good at contemplative practice
allows one to hack the confabulate er
how long could actually use that to
steer the ship and that is if we assume
that labelling Damacio are essentially
right that a whole series of unconscious
mechanisms end up making the final
decision but nonetheless those
unconscious processes have to be working
on something and what they're working on
is our memories plus our conscious
contents now interestingly our conscious
contents also include and maybe only for
humans something called internal talk
you know we're talking to ourselves
internally yeah fairly often in fact
paulten yeah maybe not all the time
maybe not when we're actively engaged in
a hardcore activity the action mode
Network but when we're in the default
mode Network we're certainly talking to
ourselves a lot and so what happens if
rather than just letting the unconscious
throw up what the fuck up once this
level of awareness that's hacking the
confabulate err intentionally while
watching the moving parts of the
confabulate er from inside decides what
new internal talk tokens ie words to
shove into conscious content and then
you're not exactly sure what the
confabulate err will do with it but you
do know when you change the content it
changes the output of the confabulate er
and if you were to test this you could
become perhaps fairly good at out
hacking the confabulate er by instead of
allowing you know unknown words to pop
up from the unconsciousness
let this intermediate level of awareness
pop words into the conscious frank is
that insane or is that neat reasonable
it's reasonable but again that the
counter a paradoxical element here is
that something similar to that process
does happen the the wider you open your
moment to moment experience and less
hyper focused and tunnel visioned we get
on certain elements of it it allows for
these disparate connections and
awareness of the thoughts most of the
time we're not aware of the vast
majority of the thoughts that come up
they kind of just go under the radar and
we're very subtly aware of them or
something like that you know my early
what am i early meditation was like just
watching thoughts and you know that's
they're weird they just spontaneously
pop out of nothing and you know and if
you get focused on one of them all of a
sudden they start building on each other
but you know a lot of times they just
come out of nowhere and you you're just
watching them pop up but anyways so if
if you're opening the the playing field
for all of the potential thoughts to
arise it gives you a far better measure
of what to do but you know here's the
interesting thing especially when we're
talking about thought the thoughts are a
conceptuality mind conceptuality images
and words they are and sounds as we're
covering mentally generated content
there are a very important part of how
we're navigating the world but the
interesting thing is that the more you
become aware of your embodied experience
you know that a lot of people would say
emotional or intuitive you start to
realize that the body is far more
informed to actually make decisions even
though the mental content is kind of
triggering those emotional reactions of
go toward it or go away from it and
here's the other interesting thing I
think this is why it's still important
because if we're saying that we're not
controlling your thoughts then why the
hell do we read in philosophy or doing
science right we don't have control over
any of it but the thing is is that more
conceptual 'ti we feed ourselves
it actually permeates our psychology and
burrows its way deep in so the the
intuitions are kind of a combination of
all of the things all of your prior
experience that it knows but it's subtle
because it's non conceptual
because you have the are embodied
movement is probably evolutionarily far
older than the the mind oriented version
of it and so you kind of have to have
these two modes working together to
optimally move through your your
experience and it creates the space
where you know this is where sometimes
the word you know that has a lot of
baggage with it is weird
it requires sometimes that that there's
a faith in your intuition and you have
no idea why and you know that any story
that comes up any confabulation of why
it is that you're doing what you're
doing
is that really true even though there is
we can't always say that yes there are
there are truths in all of our
experience but our mental contents far
less true than we assume and when we're
in this subject object dualistic default
human mode we give most of our attention
to the thoughts in the memories and less
to the actual embodied censorial
experience of what's happening in that
moment and if we want to tune into the
the flow of things you know this is why
we call it flow and you're in the when
you're in play into sports or something
like that or having a great conversation
it's an embodied thing it's felt it's
not a not a thought process well I would
argue that the that thoughts might be
part of that right definitely part of it
yeah
for instance you know I've written about
how one of the ways I solve hard
problems is to go for a walk and get my
head in a state where it's having a
conversation with itself about the
problem yeah I do this particularly for
a really difficult programming problem I
still write software some time the time
and being not an everyday professional
ain't as good at is it I used to be but
if I can run into a dead end and I can
go walk for 20 minutes and let my brain
have a conversation with itself only
about the problem and about nothing else
it's astounding how far I can I'm almost
like a spectator at this show it's
really quite amazing and you know it's a
routine way I solve problems and the
body is probably in the loop of helping
choose what the next word from the
unconsciousness is in this dialogue and
to your point why study or why work why
read books the other thing that's key is
our memories are the raw material from
which the unconscious is hauling stuff
so the more relevant stuff you have in
your memory and the more it's linked
correctly I you actually have proper
knowledge structures in your brain
rather than just the garbage that so
many people have that a whole bunch of
disconnected words but they're not
structured in a in a rich fashion then
the intuitions in your memory and the
structures of your memory work together
to produce this dance of internal
conversation which was some kind of
magic prefrontal light self like touch
stays converged on the problem rather
than wandering off my what I'm going to
have for lunch or something and it's
just amazing to watch this dialogue take
place and fairly rapidly solve the
problem yeah and I would say the the the
core mechanism is that you know as long
as there's a strong intention to stay
with something I will stay with it okay
and the more you practice it staying
with something but the easier it is to
to do so yeah I agree
conceptual that he's huge it's a big
part of it you know like and even if you
get into the the deep waters of the
content of space you you spend a lot of
time reading and understanding the
philosophy behind this stuff you know
then it just comes down to to putting it
into practice so so in your sense what I
would say is that the thought is kind of
allowing us to explore a certain
territory or problem or whatever it is
but the body is actually the judge so
it's saying like yeah that that makes
sense or no that doesn't and you know
this also gets kind of echoed if we look
at the field of persuasion you know
what's the best way to convince of
somebody of something it's not to
convince them through a logical argument
it's to arise a certain emotional
reaction from them of agreement there's
there's tricks you can do to the the
other end to where you want them to get
them against something so that then
they're willing to fight it or something
like that you know we might be saying a
lot about some of our geopolitics right
now but yeah the emotion the body the
feelings are kind of the they're the the
vehicle and while they might be driving
based on what the mind is serving yeah
and what the mind is you know and and
other big thing here is as you say the
body's intuitions is informed by
previous
mind content so they are intimately
connected but yeah I would say when I'm
going on a hard problem and thinking
about it left and right I then realized
that once it's actually time to make a
decision and put it in action I need to
stop thinking about it and just feel
into the experience you know this is
this interview would be a perfect
example I've thought about a lot of ways
that this could go but I consciously you
know as soon as I can went in here set
the intention of having no agenda of
where a heads and and leaving myself
kind of opened up to the winds and you
obviously are bringing a bunch of
structure to the stew so I can kind of
draft off of your your conceptual winds
I suppose yeah I'm a windy motherfucker
no doubt about that you know we're
probably in a fairly similar place we
may think about it slightly differently
and that you know I see this internal
talk mediated by unconscious emotional
states which are coming from the body
and possibly also loops from the
conscious state and the conscious
contents is just a very complicated
multi-dimensional dance yeah
and I don't necessarily say anybody is
in control as demacia say you can't take
any part out of it and have it still
work if you didn't have your conscious
contents it wouldn't work or at least
would be no better than a chimp right
like it wouldn't even be as good as a
gym so you got to have them all let's
move on now we're on let me Dan we're
having a good time yeah let me just
delete it add something there to to puts
a little bit of meat on this bones of
you know the rub the reason that it's so
terrifying to think that we're not in
control even though we feel like we're
in control is because you're like oh my
god like you know this is this thing
that's completely unacceptable am the
agent in the situation and when we have
a lot of evidence to point to the fact
that actually it's just kind of you know
processes unfolding and and the this
little story that's coming up with from
the tiny element of your brain is is
just confabulating things this actually
speaks to the most profound experience
that I had which I guess you know sam
would categorize this as a no self
experiences where after being on a
retreat I came back the next day and not
while sitting you know this is another
thing that some people think is that all
of your your spiritual unfolding has to
happen while you're sitting on the
cushion but I was just kind of hanging
out the next day had been at my
and mulling over some of the concepts
that came up without the self on this
retreat and spontaneously just dropped
into this space where all of a sudden
all of those mechanisms that the
confabulate er was suddenly exposed to
me you know is like it was like knowing
I was a puppet to instantly go into
being able to feel the strings as they
were being pulled and that was profound
you know then all of a sudden there is
no agent there's just processes
unfolding and you know that was it was
such a profound experience and it
happened while I was you know just
walking around that'll last for a few
weeks and I was uh you know but that
that was that was really when you know I
had been already meditating for three or
four years but that was when my real
practice started so yeah just a fun
little kind of correlation here I was
saying like the S the confabulate er is
real and it can be seen yeah that and
that's the character by point that whom
I'm just thinking I'm just gonna think
some more about this how does one use
these methods to get inside the
confabulate er deconstruct it and hack
it to make it do one's bidding well
unfortunately the answer is you got to
get out of the way but now which is now
the transition to the next big topic
which you just set up perfectly is
suffering is something these guys talk
about a lot but they talk at least as
much about self right and what is self
right and they have somewhat different
perspectives though they all come back
at some level to some degree a
qualification to say life is an illusion
yeah yeah we could approach this at
different a bunch of different ways I
mean one of the first things to say I
think is that again translations
especially a lot of this languages come
from a Buddhist context was Eastern and
Tibetan is a very different language and
before that Sanskrit and and other
ancient languages you know kind of where
the source material for all this stuff
and we're translating it over to English
and I think there's a lot lost in that
process and a lot of people we all spend
their whole careers trying to you know
do some work to iron out some of these
things and so one way of thinking of the
self is like you know that it's your
personality it's like who you are the
unique expression of personality human
psychology that you have
and I think that that still exists that
that still runs that exists the problem
though is that our confabulate ER and
and this is on a moment-to-moment
experience as we make stories up about
our psychology you know well I bike this
and I don't like this and I have this
strength and I hate this thing and I
don't I love this one and this person's
an asshole whatever it is we believe
those stories like they're true you know
that we don't think they're
confabulations and so all of a sudden we
get this we start drying this picture of
this of this person this is just Jared
yo here's all of his preferences and
here's all the things but what's
happening as we start to see the process
at that confabulation as its arising and
we become aware of it and like notice
the source code of it we start to see
that it's oh it's you know it's a
confabulation it's a próximas ation and
if we really understand it we realized
that that psychology is constantly
changing and if it's constantly changing
then it's not a thing that we can can
orient toward and the other element here
is that not only do we believe this idea
of some sort of static self or ideal
self and probably a lot of this comes
from our kind of judeo-christian Western
perspective and then there's a
physiological correlation in the sense
that there's this sensation or feeling
that we have locality in our experience
like I'm behind my eyes you know in some
cultures it's different that's behind
there it's their heart they see it as
the center of the self but for whatever
reason the confabulate ER says okay
here's the solid story you know this is
who we are where are we located in this
situation it puts us in a place and so
breaking it it requires us to both look
at the stories deconstruct them and
understand that there's gaps and they
conflict with each other and none of
them are permanent and when you do that
then there's no kind of lasting you know
aspect of arcs of who we are and then
often when we have these insights it can
release that feeling of having a certain
location in our experience and all of a
sudden we realize that everything that
we're experiencing right now is
confabulated so it's in some sense not
true right not ultimately true
but but if it's not true in the sense
that you're separate you know really
that's what we're talking about here is
the truth of being separate from the
world if it's not ultimately true then
we all said and are connected with the
larger world and your experience goes
from being in one place to you know the
behind your eyes to then just being
whatever is happening now you're in the
matrix like it's all equally fabricated
what we're seeing and the stories we're
saying and then the realness is actually
fat like if there is a candidate for
what's real in your experience what's
lasting it's some of this stuff that
really is described well as saying
spirit it's this intangible raw
knowingness that doesn't have an
appearance it doesn't have a taste it
doesn't have a smell it's just this
weird knowingness but it's so subtle
that if we get fascinated with the
stories we can't we lose track of it but
it's also not something that's that's
foreign because as soon as you see it
it's always like a it's kind of like
rediscovery you're like oh that you know
that's what I call waking up oh you wake
up you're like oh this was a dream this
is a dream here's the real you know the
only thing that's not changing my
experience is just that there is an
experience and there's that quality too
you know everything all my sensory input
that is that is common that's why a lot
of traditions will call this like the
true self Buddhism doesn't make this
claim where they usually say no self
which kind of leaves things a little bit
more nebulous and I think there's pros
and cons in that that approach but yeah
I thought that's I don't know if that
sort of but that's coming to mind at the
moments when we talked about this idea
of what a self is well yeah that's good
I like it very evocative you know here's
my take on it which is that the self is
basically it's you know this is this
it's an analogy and analogies are never
perfect but it's essentially a program
that runs on the brain and sometimes
it's not running right when we know it's
not running when we're in a coma or in
deep Delta wave sleep and I think more
interestingly we know it's not running
when you take a mega dose of LSD you
know one time did 400 micrograms Jesus
Christ right true ego death right there
was no there there right it was some
entirely different kind of state and
as I mentioned early on I can knock the
self offline for about two to three
seconds it's just a certain little brain
move
so I basically caused the program to
suspend and swap out to disk and then
come back two seconds later so you know
it seems to me that it's a it's not real
it's not quite what I want to say at
least what I want to say is that it is
not the only thing that can run on your
brain it's just a program that runs and
I shouldn't say just because it's the
most important program that runs on our
brain because it's the program that
allows us to survive in the world
you know it's the piece of machinery
that actually makes decisions you know
you can't make decisions or take more
actually decisions are not the most
important thing actually it's actions
right you can make all the decisions you
want they don't take any actions you're
still gonna starve to death and so when
I think about what is it that conscious
cognition is actually at for it's to
essentially connect perception to memory
to processing and then optionally from
time to time trigger and affordance on
one of the conscious contents and you
know that could be as simple as walk
away or approach move to the left to the
right pick it up and use it as a hammer
etc and to do all those things requires
that the self program be running yeah to
it to a large degree yeah and to my
point it's not like you stopped being a
human if you were in these altered
states and in some ways that you almost
feel more human you know like it's like
this weird paradox of like to talk to
people who have had height in the States
whether it's you know psychedelic people
or extreme athletes or something like
that and in one breath they'll say well
that's when I feel the most like myself
and then in enough breath they'll say
well there's no self there you know it's
just everything is just kind of
happening I'm not nobody's in charge so
it is this this kind of strange paradox
I think yeah that's kind of the flow
self right or flown a question is is
flow a you know to my mind I've been in
some crazy flow states on a few
occasions I can tell you some stories
the shit I did and I was in these states
it's amazing but I'd always felt like it
was me it was definitely not the same as
four hundred micrograms of LSD egodeath
right it was a you know a best form of
self basically we might take on it at
least yeah yeah it's a strange one you
know and at the same point if somebody
were to slap a MRI scanner on you I'm
fairly confident to say that the aspects
of your mind that are largely correlated
with self confabulation would be very
deregulated in those spaces so you know
it but but really it's it's you know I
like to think of the the these things
all of these kind of conceptual overlays
as being really valuable maps there are
approximations of how to navigate our
territory and they're super valuable cuz
they simplify things because the world
is friggin complex man it's correcting
outright it's it's for a human it's
infinite there has to be some heuristics
to create a smaller world where we
actually could make decisions and not be
completely overwhelmed and just you know
gawk I'd look at the Stars all day long
every day yeah absolutely I mean that's
again my own model of conscious
cognition that's what consciousness is
for it actually turns out just to be a
simple hack the chops through all the
Komet auric explosion of possibilities
and forces the decision every 250
milliseconds basically and it's not
always right by any means right and
those of us who have lived a life know
we make mistakes
each and every day but not making a
decision every 250 milliseconds even if
it's only what to pay attention to next
you're never gonna succeed exactly
exactly
yeah yeah I mean you have to continue
this map metaphor it'd be like the
difference between you know going on a
hike and you know basically stopping
where you are pulling the map up to your
head to try and figure out where you
need to be going and holding it so close
that you can no longer see what's going
on and then try to walk right like so so
the trick here is to like figure out how
to to hold it it a bit of a distance and
compare and contrast because the real
world is far more complex than this 2d
map representation that we've come up
with and we're going to have to use all
of our other senses not just our sight
and conceptual mind but our feelings and
you know if we hit a run into a rock we
should that should be a cue that whoa
well the rocks not on the map but it
sure is in real life so you have to you
have to hold both of these things
in cognition for there to be a good
interaction and you know a lot of the
ideas of self that we have they continue
to run you know the colloquial phrases
that continue to run the maps are still
available it's just you just don't
believe them because we get so entranced
with them that we forget that we're
actually out of hike we're just staring
at the map all day long and that that
doesn't get get us very far that's I
like that it's a very interesting
metaphor and it gets us to my next topic
which is very closely aligned which is
attention mmm you know in my own work
I'd like to say that attention is the
cursor of consciousness that our
consciousness is actually made from the
changes in states of attention that's
the clock of our consciousness and can
happen probably no more frequently than
40 milliseconds something like that more
often happens at about 250 milliseconds
and when I think about some of the
writings I've read particularly Sinjin
Jung's talk about concentration as being
what he describes it it's central to
meditation he says anything that does
not improve your concentration is not
meditation when I think of concentration
I think of some ability to manage
attention mm-hmm your thoughts on the
relationship between Jung's idea of
concentration and maybe the more
cognitive science idea of attention hmm
this is fun because you know I spent a
lot of time with Shinzon the system
called unified mindfulness and went
through their teacher program and did a
bunch of online classes and and so I'm
very familiar with it and I loved a lot
of his the maps that he comes up with
the describe what we're doing here with
our minds and I actually when I stopped
doing the the unified mindfulness thing
it was because I discovered another
system by a guy named Joe dasa who has a
map called the mind Allah where it came
from a book called the mind illuminated
which is actually like a very
traditional old-school Buddhism approach
to the practice but one of the
heuristics is for how he thinks of
attention is he likes to break it up
into two different qualities so he
basically says that like optimal
movement through our environment
is the optimal interaction between
attention and awareness and I think he
also because he has a bit of a
psychological and neuroscience
background I know that he's made some
correlations to brain locations that
correlate with the awareness and
attention I couldn't speak to it with
any authority at this moment but I can
tell you what it feels like and you know
while these distinctions might be
arbitrary and we could just say it's
kind of like a on one end of the
spectrum we have attention which is
extremely hyper focused high detail
another characteristic of our attention
that is if there's an intention to it it
feels like we're putting our it's there
for a reason we put it there there was
an agent behind it and then we on the
other end of the spectrum we have this
really broad low-density peripheral
element of our experience which would be
more aligned with awareness and that
one's weird because it's you know it
doesn't feel like there's much of it in
intention in bringing that quality of
experience but this is also extremely
important because it puts whatever is an
intention in a certain context so like
one of the classic examples that I love
is just to think of looking at you know
a stack of the other Zen rocks on on a
beach and they're you know that's very
beautiful provocative and if you were to
see it right in front of you you'd be
staring at it and and you know it's in
perfect clarity and without thinking
about it you know immediately I'm on a
beach if my attention is really stable
you know the periphery starts to expand
a little bit and get a little bit more
detail a little bit more white a little
bit wider that can tell me about things
that are competing for my attention you
know somebody is jogging next to me and
I catch it in my periphery and you know
it's very very subtle but just enough
information to decide whether I want to
go bring my attention over there or not
if we're in either state in the sense
where there's only awareness where it's
just this completely open broad thing
you're gonna do anything in that
situation or if you're in complete hyper
tunnel focus then you can be completely
unaware of what's happening around the
edges you know a classic example that
everybody has is getting caught up by
anger yeah on the highway and somebody
cuts us off and we flip them off feel
like we're the anger is all of our
experience and we aren't seeing the the
periphery the larger you know like I'm
on a highway
this is dangerous you know all these
other things to consider you know and
you can strengthen both of these
elements and then a lot of meditation is
figuring out how to get them to work
together and you know you can't sustain
attention without being aware of what is
gonna be possibly distracting you so
that you can deliberately make the
choice to stay keep attention with with
what you've chosen and the the other
element here is the intention there has
to be an intention to maintain focus and
there has to be an intention to maintain
peripheral awareness so yeah that that's
my favorite like neuroscience
psychological pop psychological the
description of moment to moment
experience especially in a contemplative
perspective or frame I like it so you
would essentially describe a tension or
actually you could adjust presidental
these parameters between awareness and
focus yeah so you know very simply right
you could if you hold your hand up in
front of your face right now you can
really dial in on that every tiny little
detail and and you look the crack and
the more the more you get engrossed with
that the more your periphery starts to
dampen down so the awareness becomes a
little less but you can loosen it a
little bit and just be like oh I'm just
going to look at the whole hand keep it
in an attention but all the sudden I'm
very you know the periphery has become
very a lot more broad I kind of
understand the context of where the hand
is what it's doing so yeah it's a you
know we can play with both of these and
you can build both of those in different
ways using different practices as well
of course in normal life what's a person
who's not doing these kinds of things
the brain is basically driving itself
through a whole series of attention
changes I mean I use attention in the
cognitive science sense typically a
large amount of focus on one single
object within the conscious frame it
could be a visual object to sound object
there could be an internal speech word
it'd be a reading word and it basically
hops about on average no faster than
once every quarter of a second sometimes
a bit faster and we can concentrate our
attention on a single object but this is
the interesting thing the brain does not
like that
the longer you concentrate on one object
the
or it wants you to switch to something
else you know and after about five
seconds
it really gets pretty hard to keep
focused on one object because of
essentially the brain does not want to
do that because it has learned it has
learned quote-unquote
too anthropomorphic there through
evolution it has been tuned such that
changing attention you know no more than
once every five seconds is probably good
in terms of being adaptive ie being able
to survive to the point you have
children yeah yeah well and and I think
that this brings up a really interesting
evolutionary argument in the perspective
of if we're looking at you know the the
200,000 years of tribal life that led up
to modern society you can quickly see
that life would be a lot slower and
there would be a lot of deliberate tasks
and not a lot of other things demanding
our attention so if I were to make a
hypothesis here I'd say that the amount
of attention shifting in a tribal
circumstance where you're in nature
everything's kind of moving at a similar
pace there's not these clear
distinctions you're completely in
whatever you need to be doing you need
needs your full attention because you're
uh you know got to be keeping in your
safety in mind and safety of your family
and all these stuff like you know that
environment I think is far more
conducive to a more natural amount of
attention and awareness and attentional
shifting now we fast forward to today
and we just start bombarded you know
everything's vying for our attention you
know with our social networks our our
work environment that's loud and crazy
and the the TV shows they're getting
faster because people can't pay even pay
attention so it's kind of a self
amplifying mechanism here right now and
this is why I think it's that that
practice that leads to attention
stability is becoming more and more
important and you can like I said you
can maintain attention deliberately and
use attention awareness in any
circumstance you want it just so happens
that sitting on a cushion is maybe like
the power lifting variant you know where
it's just like that's all you're doing
it's all you know it's very isolated so
it's a good bang for your buck but every
moment we're kind of falling into
habitual patterns of how we use our
attention and awareness and to your
point we become so used to shifting
our attention and it becomes very
unnatural and uncomfortable especially
in the beginning to maintain it in one
place but here's the rub too if you
spend some time doing concentrative
practices and these are probably the
ones that take the most time and
commitment you know probably if you're
not doing an hour or two a day you're
not gonna get very far and it has to be
every day because you'll lose progress
you're not gonna get very far in the
concentration round because life's not
not very conducive to it but the
interesting thing is that once the mind
starts to get settled and comfortable
with being completely focused on one
area it actually is very pleasureful and
depending on how distracted we are some
people have well there's a bunch of
types of reactions to concept the
concentrated mind that happened to arise
but they go actually in a predictable
order - and it starts with like a very
ecstatic joy so all of a sudden your
mind has decided it's staying where it
is and it's not going anywhere that will
it can release these extreme bouts of
joy your skin feels like it's bursting
you know it's it's hot it's vibrating or
something like that and then after if
that can stabilize if you stay
concentrated you can move into a little
bit more of a tranquil Pleasant
sensation if you stay with that a little
bit things start to get a little bit
more a little more subtle it's just kind
of equanimity and eventually you can get
to the place you know where you you kind
of bottomed out and this is just radical
equanimity where everything is 100%
perfect and there's only a tiny thing in
your it's the sensation of of your
breath or a location in your experience
and that's all that's there and
everything has been dampened out so it's
actually they can be very pleasurable
and a lot of people who do these
practices get called so these
concentration practice is often leading
to these things called jhanas these deep
concentrated states and it's kind of a
fun little anecdote that a lot of people
will talk about how some people get so
addicted to the pleasure that they call
them jhana junkies where all they're
doing is sitting down you're getting
high concentrated states and bliss it
out so yeah it seems dangerous to me you
know that you know as I wrote my essay
I've seen this I've seen where people
get pulled away from the work of the
world and essentially become navel
gazers right and you know there is such
positive feedback and probably strong
dopamine
signals to do it again right that people
who get involved with these things
should realize that you know they're
like heroin you know heroin is you know
very very they tell me at least I've
smoked some opium a couple times never
done Aaron but I have heard people who
have done it that is like the best thing
ever right but hey you don't want to be
doing the best thing ever all the time
but there's the work of the world I mean
we're in the world to do the work of the
world at least I would say and these
other things are means to that end and
we need to be careful that they don't
become ends rather than means yeah that
when the rubber hits the road it's about
being in the world and there is an
uncomfortable reality that in some
senses sometimes sometimes people have
to dedicate good portions of their life
or time to pursuing these states in
isolation not interacting that deeply
with the world at least to kind of
unravel their shit so that when they do
engage in the world they're not so self
and other harming you know they're not
such a they're not a hazard we have the
default human psychology I'd argue is
kind of like a bull in a china shop
we're you know we're causing a lot of
damage so yeah you have to hold both of
these in kind of same hand and and and
that's just one you know the pleasure
getting attached to pleasure in your
meditation practice that's one of a
million koltes acts there's all sorts of
spiritual bypassing that people can fall
trap to so I think it's really important
to talk about how in the end this is
about being in the world effecting
change interacting with people and you
know and there's there's a Zen phrase
that's always fun and it says before
enlightenment you carry wood and get and
gather water and after enlightenment you
carry wood and gather water right it's
like I don't like that at all okay so
we've talked about a lot of the ways in
which this is useful right and
pleasurable and now and again this is
the area where I am still very resistant
and i think sam harris is too i like to
hear what your view is are there any
metaphysical truths to be found here in
these contemplative practices or they
just are the confabulate er fire and
shit up as we go into non-typical brain
rhythms and networks
this is interesting I do think it has a
role it's just we can't be
fundamentalists about it in the sense
that to be non-dual is to realize that
we are their bodies and minds right
they're like to your point this isn't a
Cartesian separation they're intimately
intertwined to not separate whatsoever
and so if that holds true then obviously
there's got to be some part of this
contemplative project that has some real
world implications when it comes to the
metaphysical and philosophical
underpinnings of what's actually
happening out there well here's an
interesting thing right so wisdom in in
a Buddhist context it's kind of like a
an enlightened quality and sense that
gets you know to act from wisdom is it's
very renowned and what wisdom is
correlated to in the Buddhist teachings
is actually something called emptiness
so it's not-- no thingness nothingness
and so I think that the the value here
and this this makes some connections to
the postmodern shift as well is
understanding in our experience if we
can get so intimately familiar with our
confabulate er that is making stories up
and some of them are more or less true
and and resonate with the larger world
the more we start to see that if they're
all maps none of the things that our
mind can offer up are going to be
ultimately true there are all
simplifications of what's actually
happening and that can be a terrifying
perspective from an objective stance
because you're basically saying that all
of our theories are can't ultimately be
proven you know and for a large degree
you know physics and and science
progresses under the auspices or the the
intention that maybe we can actually
find out what the the source code of the
of the world is we can boil it down we
can really understand it but when we
realize that it's something that our
mind is creating it allows us to view it
in a different way and the cool thing
about this here is that we can be
flexible with our metaphysics in the
sense that we can see that each of them
can have a valuable perspective or lens
to apply in different situations and
we're not really that worried about them
disagreeing with each other they become
far more about how their utility and far
less about their truth well not far less
about their truth but understanding that
there's there's no ultimate answer that
our mind our tiny little brains can
somehow grasp this totality of the
universe using our weird arbitrary
distinctions even though they are
extremely helpful and you know the
reason I brought post-modernism because
post-modernism is kind of very
intellectual version of this
deconstruction it's doing these really
deep dives to try and understand the
limitations of our stories so yeah I
don't know they're maybe we could start
there yeah that's good that's a good
play start you know first I would push
back a little bit and say that you know
real scientists don't think that they're
anywhere close to real ground truth
right you know especially the top
scientists you know they know that
percent that what everything we do is
coarse-grained simplified and certainly
wrong in the details and perhaps wrong
in the big picture right it hasn't been
that long ago since for instance
Einstein overturned Newton ISM right
Newtonian view of the world was so
amazingly ingrain and go back and read
your can't write you can't imagine Conte
without Newton right and yet Einstein
could turn that completely on its head
and then the even more radical craziness
of quantum mechanics right so as Richard
Fineman says if anyone says they
understand quantum mechanics they're
lying
nobody understands quantum mechanics and
that's okay and you know and I would say
the top scientists you know except that
on the other hand and I think this is
part ways with the New Agers and I'm not
sure with the Buddhists you know I'm not
sure which is I would say there is a
reality out there and that science is
incrementally and iteratively and
sometimes wrongly learning more and more
and more and more about that real
universe that's out there and that you
know we can't just make shit up about
the universe you know and that's the
difference between science and
metaphysics metaphysics is the art of
making shit up right and fact I when I
say metaphysics I hear the word
metaphysics I reach for my pistol
that's about the kind of meta Fez
what I call medic metaphysical
assertions for people just the SIRT
things right know that Yahweh is sitting
in a cloud or Zeus is throwing lightning
bolts or Thor causes thunder that's just
shit somebody made up and even
Aristotelian physics was frankly
something somebody made up Aristotle in
this case it was just bullshit he just
made it up and it was easily disproved
weirdly it took 2,000 years for somebody
to do a half an hour experiment to
disprove it because we clearly have a
bias towards these metaphysical
assertions and so I like to carefully
piece apart that we have some things
that we're learning about the universe
that while not exactly true are getting
truer and they are consistent and their
lawful that's the important thing at
least they have been so far be very
interesting to prove they aren't lawful
should be interesting but so far we
found them to be extremely lawful you
know the the laws of quantum mechanics
seem to be correct to have 14 decimal
points which is pretty amazing and while
the area of metaphysics you know people
just make shit up all the time you know
the anthropologists have found at least
10,000 religions for instance all of
which at the level of metaphysics
contradict each other hmm
interesting right and so I you know when
I run to someone with a religious dogma
I say at best the probability of being
correct it's 1 in 10,000 and they go oh
yeah they can't get that right I mean
the the people watching the Aztec
priests cut the hearts out of teenagers
hold the hearts up the beating hearts up
and then throwing the carcasses down the
stairs so the lower priests could eat
them they all thought that was great
that was the good shit and the true and
and and straight-and-narrow wait the
reality right so we can believe all
kinds of horseshit right and so that's
why I think it's hugely important to
draw this bright line between
metaphysical speculations which are
unbound and science like and some of its
friends math and logic though they are
different because those are both formal
systems rather than empirical systems
right and don't get too confused and I'm
gonna give you two examples just let me
get your reaction to one I won't point
at the the see
various meditative contemplative
practice people but the new-age versions
of song come back amazingly often with
what they call a they merged with the
universal consciousness right and I go
where's the evidence for this universal
consciousness you know what does it told
you that you wouldn't know otherwise
right and so far I've never never seen a
single proof that there is a universal
consciousness but millions of people
will claim that there are the other one
is from the fairly rigorous not as
rigorous as we'd like
DMT drug studies right we're amazingly
often people come back with these
similar stories of little green men and
you know strange doings in some other
dimension and again all right sounds
like horseshit to me and yet these are
the kinds of things that we see coming
repeatedly out of you know these kinds
of atypical mental experiences they make
a quick caveat to because you mentioned
that I can give the Buddhist perspective
here if there are any Buddhists
listening there's a good chance that I'm
saying some things that are very wrong
or heretical and there's a million
variants of Buddhism so definitely not a
spokesman and I actually would call
myself just kind of Buddhist you know
I've learned a lot about it but but
never taking vows I've been part of a
formal saga or anything like that so a
bit of a visitor to the space but but
yeah I do I do enjoy its philosophy a
lot that being said I think we're
pointing to the same thing that we
talked about in the beginning right is
that subjective experience and objective
experience our two lenses to view our
world and while they are connected
they're not completely separate you know
they they influence each other on a
regular basis if we get to over invested
in one of them it excludes the other so
you know what I'm basically saying is
that we should be non-dual in our
subject object distinctions and you
don't know enough about science and
rational understanding then you'll make
the mistake of thinking that the
experiences that you're having are
ultimately true but I also think that
the the fascinating thing here is that
when you view these from a highly
developed rational understanding
you get a bit of a metaphysics and that
metaphysics is uncertainty right so the
reason I said wisdom was empty is
because in the in this distinction
wisdom is knowing that we know nothing
and when we do that if Riis us up to
explore anywhere and to your point it
frees us up to constantly be refining
adjusting updating comparing our Maps so
we become the intellectual pursuit or
trying to understand our experience and
some profound way is one sense just a
grandiose form of cartography you know
we're really interested in trying to
figure out you know approximations that
are useful to us in everyday life but
the moment that we become
fundamentalists and think that one of
these areas is true and the other isn't
we limit ourselves to a large element of
our experience and the weird thing too
is that if we can look at these
subjective frames that might sound like
they're making metaphysical claims as
purely ways of describing subjective
States and not being predictive
completely of objective ones it becomes
more useful but I think emptiness or no
thingness in the sense that if
everything is moving and everything is
connected and interacting with each
other any distinction that we make is
going to be inherently false it'll be
it'll be wrong the moment we draw it
because things are always changing and
and you know maybe we could talk about
the the scientific implications of this
as were saying that some of the
fundamental laws of physics might be in
flux I don't know but I would say I've
never had an experience that wasn't
impermanent so it would follow suit that
maybe we could use that as a lens for a
certain exploration of objective science
and maybe we could learn something there
so yeah it's it's this strange polarity
of being able to hold both of them in
hand and navigate fluidly between the
two depending on when it's most useful
and useful it's key I mean it's my
favorite word I know you've probably
heard me say it a zillion times as
you've edited the podcast right and is
it actually useful and whether the
concept of being at one with the
universal consciousness or
being a conversation with little green
men on a blue crystal world is actually
useful I'm not so sure but I do know
that understanding quantum mechanics is
how we build the disk drives that we
have and you know we use general
relativity and the design of GPS systems
and how we send satellites on long
orbits that set there so I know those
things are useful yeah so I would
suggest that you know use usefulness as
a lens in general and I also came just
well I well we were talking listening to
you talk to came up with a little bit of
a interesting take on some of these
metaphysical assertions is maybe we
should think of our metaphysical
assertions as the most recent book
review on the most recent book written
by the confabulate er yes yeah I love
that I think we should wrap it up right
bear it this was a great conversation I
have another page of notes but I think
we did a great job
thank you very much Jared yeah thank you
this was a this is a blast I'm glad we
could make some time to dig deep into
these these contemplatively just confuse
the hell out of each other or actually
as usual I think I made a little
progress here every time I talk to
somebody about this I feel like I
understand a little bit better
production services and audio editing by
Jared Jane's consulting music by Tom
Muller at modern space music.com