[Music]
you
[Music]
welcome back to awakening from the
meaning crisis so last time we had begun
to take a look at the transformation
that was occurring in the eastern
Mediterranean around the time of the
advent of what was going to become
Christianity of course this figures upon
the person of Jesus of Nazareth a very
controversial figure to say the least
and as I said I'm not going to endeavor
to claim to give the absolute or exhaust
his account of this extraordinary
individual but instead I'm going to try
and do what I've done before which is to
show how what he did contributed to our
understanding of meaning and wisdom and
how that eventually pushed the history
that has led to the meaning crisis Ford
so we were talking about one of the core
messages of Jesus Jesus seems to have
understood himself or at least those
around him understood him as Kairos if
you remember that's a turning point in
the course of history because as we
spoke before the Israelites and by this
time they were known as the Jews had
developed the psycho technology of
understanding history as a cosmic
narrative and which there are crucial
turning points and Jesus saw himself as
such a Kairos whether or not he saw
himself as the Kairos that was known as
the Jewish Messiah is again
controversial I don't need that for the
purposes of my argument it seems though
that he had a sense of himself as deeply
participating in the way in which God
was directing and involving himself in
the course of history if you remember
the model of God we talked about when we
talked about the ancient Israelites the
god of the exodus is a God who is
creating into an open
future and that human beings participate
in that creation by identifying with a
particular course the auth loving it
being shaped by it as well as shaping
participating in its flow and Jesus of
Nazareth saw himself as having an
especially deep participation such that
he felt himself to be at one with this
God who is capable of altering the
course of history and redeeming human
beings he seems to have understood this
Kairos as having something to do with a
profound way of understanding the
participation in God which we've talked
about before makes sense we've talked
about how this participatory knowing is
a process in which you're coupled right
you're neither making it or be made by
it but it's this reciprocal revelation
in which you are you are making it and
it is making you the way you participate
in your culture the way you participate
in your language the way you participate
in history and you know this not by
gathering beliefs but the way in which
yourself is fundamentally transformed
and so Jesus understood this
participation this his participation in
God as the disclosing of this profound
kind of love and we began talking about
this the kinds of love that human beings
experience and how love is something
that deeply transforms who we are and
our salience landscape our character we
talked about the Greeks have three terms
and it's helpful because by this time
the New Testament is being run written
in Greek it's helpful to understand
these Greek terms so there's eros which
is the love of being one with something
right and it can be just you know
drinking water so I become one with it
but of course it could become what has
become more commonly known as becoming
one with someone through sexual you
Ioan erotic love then there's valia
that's at the core of philosophy yeah
this is the love that is born of right
cooperation
so I Ross is consumptive making one with
Phi Lea is cooperation we work together
we work together and a lot of of how we
succeed as human beings is by the way we
work together but Jesus starts to
emphasize a new kind of love agape and
then this is not the love of consumption
or cooperation this is the love of
creation it's the love that God is
demonstrating towards humanity in the
way God is an ongoing creation of the
open future so God is creating the
future is creating the historical
process and course of that history that
makes people possible see agape is the
kind of love that creates persons so the
main metaphor for agape if you remember
is the way a parent loves a child you
don't love a child because you want to
consume it in some way that's hideous
and vicious you don't love your child
when you bring it home from the hospital
because it's a great friend to you it
can cooperate it can't do that at all
it's fact it's not even a a person it's
not a morally rationally reflective
agent in fact it's exactly the opposite
you love it precisely because by loving
that non person you turn it into a
person this is the powerful creative
it's it's a god-like ability that we
have by participating through love in
another being we can transform that
being from a non person into a person a
person that could enter into a community
of persons and find meaning fellowship
belonging
so that radical transformative power of
of agape its ability to radically
transform us and reorient us brings
about a Metanoia a radical turning this
means above and beyond and this means
your salience landscaping how you were
fundamentally prospectively knowing the
world so metanoia I'm fundamentally
turning altering my whole field of
consciousness altering my whole
orientation and what's fundamentally
happening in the metanoia Rite of agape
is I'm having a personal Kairos my
personal course is being radically
transformed so Jesus is not only
teaching this he is exemplifying it he
he experiences himself as a Kairos and
he's giving to people through agape the
possibility of experiencing their own
personal Kairos see what happens in the
experience that Jesus is pointing to I
believe is we get a fundamental
reorientation at for a very long time we
are born out of we we are the receivers
of agape it is only because you as an
animal because that's what you are
before you're a person a biological
animals it's only because you as an
animal received the agape love of others
that you were actually transformed into
a person and what you actually do right
is you internalize other people and how
they are aware of you and that is how
you gain your reflective rationality
that is how you gain your own
understanding you find 'mentally gain
your self understanding your sense of
self and your ability to reflect on
yourself by how you are reflected
through like through other people
it's a fundamental thing to say and and
because it it is so fundamental and we
can say it with few words it can be
trivialized but we are in a very deep
sense born out of an a gothic love that
precedes us it's because of agape
because of the way other people have
devoted themselves and participated in
you that you went from a non person into
a person that you got the ability it's
almost like other people are mirrors
through which you come to see and
realize yourself that you got a sense of
self that you got the ability to reflect
on yourself that you became got a sense
of your own ownership there's nothing
that in fact is more transformative for
an adult than having a child so from the
child's perspective what's happening is
right they are in a sense consuming the
love that the adult is giving them
they're taking in this love and they are
becoming one with it you understand
yourself and can reflect on yourself
because of the way you have internalized
other people's attention on you but
that's the child's perspective view so
you can see for the child it's very
egocentric and Freud picked up on this
that in but I think he also twisted it
in this sense it's very our relationship
to our parents and please listen to this
very carefully is in that sense erotic
right in the sense that we are consuming
them we are internalizing them we are
becoming one with them now I don't mean
erotic in the sense that Freud
ultimately meant because Freud thought
that all of that was always a sexual
experience I think that's too simplistic
but I think there is insight here but
take a look at this from the parents
perspective from the parents perspective
the person giving agape it is not
egocentric at all in fact there is
nothing that will more
challenge your egocentric orientation
that everything is moving this way then
having a child if you're a good parent
and of course we all vary in how good we
are as parents I have been privileged to
be a parent myself but what happens is
you are no longer the center of your
salience landscape the child is because
the child is absolutely dependent upon
you do you see this is the Metanoia of
agape I mean the metaphor is turning but
the problem with that metaphor is all
turning is still egocentric you have to
think of the turning this way the
turning is I go from being egocentric to
being centered on someone else and what
I'm actually centered on is I'm very I'm
centered on the process right of
creating a person like God but not
egocentric like oh my god it's like I am
participating in that a gothic process
that made me the the agape that precedes
me
flows through me and transforms me as
I'm oriented and what Jesus was offering
I believe was he was offering a teaching
so that all people could experience this
not just individually personally with
their own parents but in terms of a
relationship to God we could all
experience this fundamental turning such
that we become vessels through which
agape creates other human beings so
what's going to happen of course and you
see this in the epistles of John is the
Christian the Christian community starts
to understand this capacity for
radically transforming people so that
they become conduits of this this
godlike creative process whereby non
persons are
turned into persons they're coming to
understand agape itself is God that's
what God is this is the that so the
Israelite notion of God creating the
open history becomes right it becomes
specified in the teachings of Jesus to
the idea that no God is agape God is
this process that we participated and we
put look it made you you didn't make it
you participate in agape it precedes you
it flows through you and you participate
in it insofar as you help other people
to come to personhood through you know
this is a radical idea as I mentioned
last time this is going to give the
Christians a psycho technology they a
grammar for how to transform
perspectival and participatory knowing
that is going to allow them to conquer
the Roman Empire I don't mean militarily
of course what I mean is what Christians
can do is they can offer all the non
persons of the Empire a process by which
they become persons within a community
of persons and mesh together in a gothic
love so all the women all the widows all
the sick all the poor all the non male
Roman citizens all the weak can come to
Christianity and receive the opportunity
and the community that supports this
opportunity of a radical transformation
now we know that the community around
there's many different communities
around Jesus I should say there's just
like around Socrates there's did many
different Jesus movements but this seems
to be the the key idea and it seems that
it carries with it some kind of notion
of a sacrificial element to it and again
there's a lot of controversy around this
and we have to be careful not to read
too much of Paul into this but we'll
talk about Paul in a few minutes but
agape has a sacrificial element to it in
in that you give yourself you for give
you give before the person earns it's
not fine Lea
it is not reciprocity it is not you and
I are working together you have earned
my trust and love by Lia is great and
it's important right and it's not eros I
love you because of how you can I can
consume you and right make you one with
me now
agape has a sacrificial component to it
because what I'm actually doing right is
I'm giving up I'm making myself an
affordance for your transformation from
non person into person so this is why
Jesus emphasizes forgiveness as central
to his message right and one of the
things we should remember and this is
controversial to say is Jesus does not
anywhere in the Gospels present himself
right as the wit means by which right we
obtained forgiveness from God he often
presents himself as a way and things
like that and we'll talk about that but
when asked how to obtain forgiveness
from God this opportunity of radically
transforming ourselves Jesus consistent
message
by forgiving other people we experience
agape from God the degree to which we
give it to others and this has been of
course radically trivialized in our
culture right we think about we think of
forgiveness largely as a matter of you
know somebody feels sorry and we tell
them it's okay that's not the core idea
of forgiveness the the court of the idea
of forgiveness doesn't depend on your
contrition the degree to which you are
trying to afford someone else growing
into their personhood and the degree to
which you are making a sacrifice towards
that it's already forgiveness some
forgiveness is when somebody has
slighted us and the relationship has
been damaged and we have to act
agape clay in order to re-establish the
relationship but in a very real sense
all a gothic love is forgiving love
because it is giving before right the
person that is receiving the love can in
any way be said to have earned it so
this idea that are we we are
sacrificially extending the capacity for
individuals to redirect their own
history experience their own Kairos was
often captured by Jesus in the famous
language of being born again you're
dying and you're being born again this
radical transformation of your entire
orientation your entire way of being now
the tragedy that befall --zz the Jesus
movements at least some of them because
not all the movements care about this
this is again something that many people
don't realize they
are many elements of the the early
followers of Jesus communities that
don't care about his death they only
care about his teaching but of course
Jesus does die and that has a profound
effect on some of these movements and
again this is hard to state anything
clearly or anything that we could have
any great confidence in but somehow his
death exemplifies the sacrificial
forgiveness that right that is at the
core of God as agape somehow Jesus death
enables people to internalize that
sacrificial love and empowers them to
transform other human beings now there
of course is resistance to the Jesus
movements into Jesus it's plausible that
his death was due to the fact that he
was angering and upsetting a lot of
people we see this as a right as
something similar to what confronted
Socrates one of the people that seems to
have been an early persecutor is a guy
by the name of Saul now Saul's a very
interesting person he's both a Jew and a
Roman citizen
at a time when these two groups of
people are quite antagonistic towards
each other there has been already wars
between the Romans and the Jews a new
one was about to come to major Jewish
revolts so the relationship is a very
tense one filled with a lot of tension
and this is reflected within this person
himself he seems to have he seems to
have integrated these two disparate and
warring aspects of his personality and
his identity together around a
commitment to law organized rules of
behavior and conduct and he sees the
Jesus movements the followers of Jesus
they're not in fact in fact just to
point out something they're not
initially called the followers of Jesus
initially call the followers of the way
because Jesus had presented a way
aka a it's see the word way is so
wonderful because it doesn't just mean
method it it's not just some procedures
it's also an affordance of how you're
going to move into the future it is a
new orientation so Jesus is the way in
which we can experience the Kairos of
metanoia and become forgiving
individuals who are constantly forgiving
Agathe CLE to others in Paul so it's all
seems to see these people right and
their their language of agape and their
adoration of Jesus as deeply threatening
to his Jewish heritage and also to Roman
order and so he becomes involved in the
persecution of the followers of the way
and it's about
the time that he's involved in the
persecution that they start being called
actually as an insult
initially Christians the followers of
Christ what means The Anointed One and
so he's involved in persecuting them
he's there the first time he's mentioned
in the Bible he's there when the first
Christian is martyred Stephen Stephen is
talking about this message and the crowd
gets angered and they stoned him
and Saul gathers every saul basically
holds everybody's coats so that they can
more effectively stone Stephen to death
so Saul becomes deeply involved in this
and he he gets basically a writ a letter
an official letter to travel to Damascus
and round up these so-called Christians
and bring them in for prosecution and on
the road he has what I think we could
call a transformative experience he
relates it himself and a couple places
it's also represented third-person and
the book of Acts and there's differences
in it as there always is in something
that has a mythological element to it
again where myth doesn't mean fable
where myth means trying to present a
profound pattern but he's struck by a
bright light and of course this is the
metaphor of enlightenment and we know
the transformative experiences often
involve this experience of radical super
salience often tremendous light then he
is struck to the ground by it's
overwhelming experience and then a voice
speaks to him and says why why it's all
Saul why do you persecute me and Saul
says who are you lord
Lord ease into title for God Lord is
anyone who
as some important higher status than you
and the experience carries with it that
on to normativity that we talked about
this
he Saul has the sense that he's
confronting something more real than
himself
who are you and the voice says I am
Jesus who you persecute and that's all
we need to talk about
I mean Saul is blinded by this light and
encountering this voice right and we can
think about Plato's metaphor here of as
we encounter these things were often
blinded by the light but what we need to
understand is this engenders in Saul a
deep deep inner conflict and in fact
when you read his biography as I've
already painted here you can see that
his experience of inner conflict is
really profound and this reminds us
again it's it's analogous but different
of Plato's concerned with inner conflict
the way inner conflict reveals the
psyche but as whereas Plato is going to
develop a scientific theory of inner
conflict Saul is going to undergo a
transformative experience because of
this inner conflict it is going to Riven
him to his core because how can it be
that he hasn't had this transformative
experience this awakening experiences
more real from the very being that he
was persecuting how can he reconcile
these together he's actually he travels
to Antioch and he actually gets taken in
by the very people he was going to
persecute do you see this this is this
forgiveness the very people he was going
to persecute take him in
so the people that he was going to
destroy are actually responsible for his
care and under their care his sight is
restored
what's all this pointing to again it's a
pointing to right he's at war with agape
itself and we all are like we all are we
have a very tough time and this is part
of the message of Jesus and John and
Paul at least to my mind we have a tough
time acknowledging the reality of agape
we like to create personal fables of how
we are self-made and self-directed and
self secure and self-sustaining when
agape challenges that in a profound way
so Saul goes into the desert to reflect
and this is always a biblical
mythological paradigm for a process of
undergoing radical reflection and when
he comes out he has gone through a
radical transformative experience so
he's had this higher state of
consciousness this visionary experience
he then experiences agape from the very
people he was persecuting he goes into
the desert and when he comes back he's a
new person he's gone through a radical
transformative experience and we know
that because he's changed his name
changed his name from Saul to Paul
and he has a radical message it's a
powerful message he comes to present
agape and one of the most beautiful
passage of famous passages in the Bible
you've probably heard it at some point
it's often misread weddings people read
this passage often at weddings and they
I think are misinterpreting it because
what Paul's talking about is Anna Gothic
spiritual kind of love now there should
it definitely be that aspect in a
romantic relationship but I don't think
romantic relationships typically are
understood by most people as venues in
which a Coptic love is the primary focus
let me read the passage to you so Paul
begins by saying and now I will show you
the most excellent way so he's showing
you the most excellent way this is and
notice the word excellent the way in
which we can most radically go through
transformation and grow I'll show you
the most excellent way now he's not
gonna make an argument like Plato
instead what he's going to do is he's
going to he's going to present
everything from the framework of a
participatory kind of knowing that's how
he begins if I so he's not making an
argument he's talking about what his
very identity how his identity is being
informed and transformed by its
conformity to a gothic love if I speak
in the tongues of men and angels but
have not love I am only a resounding
gong
clanging cymbal if I have the gift of
prophecy and can fathom all mysteries
and all knowledge and if I have faith
that can move mountains but have not
love I am nothing
notice all the language here this is
participatory language this is the
language of knowing by identifying if I
give all I possess to the poor and
surrender my body to the flames because
Christians are starting to be burnt all
right
but I have not love I gain nothing
notice this language it's very radical
love is patient love is kind it does not
envy it does not boast now this of
course is not romantic love because
romantic love does it experience envy
and jealousy it is not proud it is not
rude it is not self-seeking it is not
easily angered it keeps no record of
wrongs love does not delight in evil but
rejoices with the truth it always
protects always trusts always hopes
always persevere those are the those are
the features you need in order to help
and afford someone coming into
personhood love never fails
now we think what are you talking about
I've been in so many relationships and
they fail that's because you're thinking
of this as romantic love that love does
fail what he means is agape can't fail
we are always born from and always have
to give birth to agape or personhood
itself will disappear but where there
are prophecies they will cease where
there are tongues they will be stilled
where there is knowledge it will pass
away now he's trying to get them to
understand like what what are we talking
about here before we know in part and we
prophesy in part but when perfection
comes perfection here meaning completion
the Emperor
disappears and and people like what and
so he gives a metaphor one we've seen
elsewhere when I was a child I talked
like a child I thought like a child I
reasoned like a child when I became a
man I put child tyldus ways behind me
okay so when you're a kid you have a
particular identity you have a
particular salience landscape right and
things really really matter to you in a
certain way we talked about this when we
talked about software so when you become
an adult right your world becomes
radically reoriented what is salient and
what is central to you is radically
changed so I hope for many of you as
adults your life is not primarily
centered upon and oriented towards the
super salience II of candy and toys if
you're right really really oriented
towards candies and toys and playing
then of course you're not growing up as
an adult when we go through agape it is
like the change in our salience
landscape and our fundamental identity
how we participate in ourselves in the
world is fundamentally transformed and
that's what Paul is offering here then
he says look you've got to know what
this means now we see but a poor
reflection as in a mirror then we shall
see face to face now I know in part then
I shall know fully even as I am fully
known and now these three remain faith
hope and love but the greatest of these
is love okay so now it's like we're
seeing on a reflection we're not in
touch with reality
we're like the people in Plato's cave
we're looking at the right the shadows
and the echo we don't see things as they
are we're not in touch with reality but
with
gah pay the most excellent way we will
come to know as we are knowing right
he's talking about this participatory
love think about how when you are D and
now you can even use a romantic
relationship one with some significant
up when you're when you really love
someone how you know them to degree to
which they know you it right it is it is
such a participatory way of knowing you
you you get to be in touch with their
reality in a way that somebody else
doesn't that's I mean that's part of the
bargain of of a mature understanding of
a romantic relationship right you give
up the extensive erotic pursuit of many
different partners in order that you can
deeply know and be known by someone else
you and and then and that's that's like
growing up that's like going from being
a child to a man so Paul is actually
talking about there's a way of knowing
we're going to come back to this the
term that's being used there is gnosis
that is bound up with agape this way of
loving
see so all these things God is agape we
forgive agape we are forgiven by agape
we know as we are known we are
participating in the the the becoming a
person of others and then they are
participating in ours it's this powerful
new whole new way of being and it has
become so sedimented in our culture and
so ossified and so below how we live
it's like the ground we're walking on
and like the ground we walk on
we have contempt for it without
realising how much it holds everything
up I'm not a Christian I'm not
advocating for Christianity I'm trying
to get you to understand how profound an
expression of meaning transcendence and
way to wisdom is being on offer here now
there is a dark side to this I think and
here's where I will probably part
company with people who identify as
Christians see the difficulty with
participatory knowing and this gnosis
this is we'll talk more about this right
there's knowing by participation and
going through radical metanoia
transformation right this gnosis agape
that Paul talks so much about there is a
danger with it right there's a danger of
misunderstanding so look that we have to
go carefully here look when I am knowing
someone participatory a gothic
relationship right my knowing of them
and my knowing of myself are deeply
their inseparably bound together that's
why Jesus will say his for this
relationship he has to God is
I and the father are one and Paul will
say it's not I who live but Christ who
lives in me right this is knowing by
this deep bonding of identity you know
not by transforming your thoughts or
even right your mind you know by
transforming yourself but there's a
danger to this the danger is that any
aspect of yourself that you do not
properly understand has not come into
knowledge can get projected onto what
you love this is the great danger also
in under romantic relationship precisely
because you are so bound to this person
in your identity a lot of what is
unconscious in your identity getting in
get projected on to that person so see
this is why there's such a moral
obligation on you when you enter into a
romantic relationship to commit yourself
to a process of self-knowledge in the
Socratic sense self discovery because
the degree to which you are self
ignorant is agreed to which that
participatory knowing will be darkened
and twisted into a projection of aspects
of yourself and I think to my mind for
all of his astonishing spiritual
brilliance that's also happening in Paul
see the inner conflict in Paul was very
profound he comes up against the problem
that many of us encounter Aristotle
talked about this with a crazy and
weakness of the well we know what we
should do and we do the opposite of what
we know is the right thing to do I know
what I should do it's clear in my mind
that this is what I should do and yet I
do this somehow even though knowing what
I should do
I find myself almost as if I'm being
pulled to do something else and he
describes it Paul Paul uses the language
of like somebody in the midst of a civil
war who's standing sort of at the center
of their Citadel and the outlying
provinces are in revolt and experiences
this radical inner conflict there's lots
of different theories about what this is
what's he what's he so it conflicted
about but Paul comes up with a narrative
of course it's gonna be a narrative
right he's he he's in the Israelite
Jewish tradition he comes up with a
narrative for understanding this
conflict and it it's the narrative that
comes from a personalization of the
notion of the movement from the two
worlds as being right the liberation
from an old place and a movement to a
new place the Exodus because
Christianity is personalizing this the X
Paul experiences the Exodus personally
he experiences there's two of him
there's the old Saul right who wants to
write follow the way of the law but is
actually right it feels guilty and angry
and feels feels disconnected from God
and rejected by God and then there's the
new Paul the Paul of love who feels
connected and he sees he sees the old
man and the new man and what's happening
is the new man is trying to be born from
the old man and so we we have picked
this has become endemic to our culture
this idea of the old me and the new me
we think oh this is just natural I came
up with this such we tell
ourselves at times the old me in the new
me Paul understands this and he
understands this tension between the old
Saul that was committed to law and order
and justice and punishment and the new
Paul who
is participating in the liberation of
love and he's trying to understand why
do I have this in a conflict because
he's personalized the god of history he
understands his inner conflict and
here's where I think the danger of
projection is clear he understands his
inner conflict as reflecting an inner
conflict in God God was actually
conflicted within himself it's it's it's
a radical idea we need to know this not
because again I'm trying to advocate for
Christianity because we have to
understand Paul in order to understand
Augustine and in order to understand
Luther and we have to understand
Augustine and Luther if we're going to
understand the meaning crisis so you've
got this idea that God has two aspects
to him or herself one part is God
represents law and justice and order and
insofar as God represents that we are we
stand in judgment we have somehow failed
we have not lived up to the moral
perfection that morality demands for us
look the court made a good point about
this morality demands nothing less than
perfection from you you have to be
completely honest it to be completely
written courageous and none of us can
ever meet that standard now I mean we
need to we need to balance that with
compassion and love but what Paul is
seeing is he's saying well God is
perfectly just and therefore we fail to
meet that standard and therefore legally
we are condemned to death but yet God
isn't just a judge God is also the a
gothic parent that loves us
and so what he does is he takes the
notion that Jesus's death was somehow
sacrificial because we've talked about
our sacrifices borne up within a gothic
love and he gives it to this idea that
Jesus sacrificed himself in order to
satisfy God's demand for justice so that
God was capable of really loving us now
there and and you know and and how that
Redemption model works out there's all
kinds of theological bottles about it
and and whether or not we should
understand it this way or that way is
not relevant to our purposes what's
relevant right is that within this
astonishing foundational message of
gnosis and agape there's also an attempt
to project art like sorry this sounds so
radical and I don't mean to make it
sound ridiculous I'm not I'm trying to
be respectful but the the idea that
somehow the course of reality itself is
a meshed in a conflict between justice
and agape
what that's going to mean is that people
that experience deep inner conflict are
going to find a welcoming home within
the auspices of Christianity individuals
who are riven by a sense right of
personal failure of not living up to
what they can and should be that their
personhood has been thwarted they have
not come into a fullness of perfection
as Paul says a completeness of their
personhood are going to be deeply
attracted to the Christian message now
you are probably now seeing how this
might be relevant to the meaning crisis
because what happens if we still because
we are still participating in the waters
of Christianity within our culture even
if we're not Christians and most of us
aren't anymore how do we tap into all of
this the power of agape acknowledging
its reality the participatory gnosis the
radical transformation our own sense of
not living up to the fullness of our
personhood what if we still experience
all of that but we do not have the
machinery of Christianity with its
metaphysics of cosmic Redemption
available to us
that could be a powerful experience of
despair
I mean Camus famously said my whole of
my life I've tried to figure out how can
I be a saint without there being a God
and he of course famously came to the
conclusion that reality was radically
absurd and come back to that so there is
a price we pay and this is not a
statement of resentment but there is a
price we pay for the gifts to use a
Christian word the grace that's what
grace originally means the gifts that
Christianity has given us it has given
us expectations of love and
transformation and growth into
personhood and relief from inner
conflict expectations that I would say
are not well met in our post Christian
worldview so we carry the grammar of God
but we no longer believe any of the
things we say with it for many of us so
what I'd like to do is try and now trace
how Christianity coming out of the
Israelite Jewish heritage and I've
already sort of be giving making
allusions of this starts to intersect
with the actual revolution that was
coming out of Greece because
Christianity is going to take up into
itself it's going to take up into itself
the stoicism we've already talked about
Paul quotes stoicism in the Bible
as it does that it's also going to come
into conflict not conflict well some
conflict actually to be honest it's but
it's going to come into confluence with
that strain of the actual revolution
spirituality that came out of Greece
it's going to come into connection with
Neoplatonism it's going to come into
connection with Gnosticism so next time
what I want to look at is I want to look
at the Gnostics these followers of Jesus
because of course it's controversial to
call them Christians who really sent her
in on this gnosis agape
what they were talking about and the
Neoplatonism because all of that is
going to have an impact on the
generation of more orders of meaning
we'll review that again but if you
remember we talked about how with
Aristotle we had developed right in the
West a Noma logical order - meaning a
way in which we could pursue worldview
attunement we're gonna see that as
Neoplatonism and Christianity come
together we're gonna get two more orders
of meaning emerging an order by which we
pursue the most excellent way and an
order by which this cosmic narrative
history is a meshed into the Western
worldview thank you very much for your
time and attention
[Music]
you
[Music]
you
you
you
[Music]