that was my charm for my phone that we
went live oh there we go
welcome to the public round table
welcome to the Briscoe round table where
angel and I discuss our projects I only
just put the link on our Facebook group
I just made marked as an announcement so
hopefully people can see our faces
follow the stream yard link and come and
come and join the round table I do know
Raymond said that he would he would be
here so no actually was messenger let me
just see let me just send this - there
we go
brettly will be here shortly I think
that was the thing actually not though
he went live Bentley is like where's the
link on the Facebook group with the rest
of the grunts yeah although you and I
have the stream yards in the prototype
is it what is it in the prototype no no
I have not
I've not added it to there yet Bentley
there yeah I don't know it's driven
there's no elevate it before device is
not connected well let me add you you
might be - wait a minute we can we have
to go back and oh and in all reality I
think that might be the screen winner in
that pre-screen that like shows your
video and show your audio levels no okay
oh I see what you mean maybe we can test
it see good morning Shiloh so he every
time someone comes on they're not quite
in screen I want to change minds oh I'm
like that doesn't it Leigh should be
here be here shortly
the link is in the facebook but we were
posting it to a specific messenger group
and I have gotten slack about laxa
understandably yes or Bentley expects it
to be putting up the I'll do that again
tomorrow the entire list and then I'm
gonna figure out how to make events or
the solution raising on Wednesdays as
well as the two together tech ones under
the category I don't know if I figured
that out last week after I got your help
with it it was like I was sitting down
with missing any categories let me know
when I connect those easily you should
be able to add it without them
but I think the thing that you actually
but was adding
projects so I added this field but now
you can specify the project yeah and I
think that was I'd already went through
and added the event and then I was like
I did all that work okay no like we
probably should have waited to go live
until we were all here probably there
been a slow start sorry everyone know
what it is and one second should we go
ahead and yeah I can probably go ahead
all right
so project round table first part is we
all go around and give up to five
minutes although it never seems to
actually hit there up to five minute
update on what we've been up to with our
projects over the last week I think I
usually go first so if somebody else
wants to I can start us off apologize I
don't have my video go up again
hopefully next week so yeah for my
project I've been getting I've been
communicating with people in the space
of debating shoot see now I'm a little
slow today
like legislation on Pacific dog breeds
and licensing of that so I've got one
person on the side of the argument
giving me a lot of really good info now
I got to go find someone on the other
side I put out a call for people that
might want to help me do research
volunteers and got crickets as usual so
I don't know if I'm gonna have to pay or
just spend my own time doing it which is
painful to me and then or pick a smaller
topic I got to find something I don't
know so I might try some smaller topics
I also enhance the user interface quite
a bit kind of a lot of really good
features
I worked with so the scores are easier
to read there's still some problems with
it so it's not quite intuitive but it's
better and then I'm working with an
architect who wants to use it and
putting in some enhancements for him he
you know has to get approval from the
citizens to do certain things so it's
for citizen engagement on zoning and
such yeah I think that's my update I
guess in the coming week I'm going to
finish some enhancements that he wanted
I'm gonna try and find a smaller topic
and I'm gonna try and continue working
on getting I'm gonna try and find
another person on the topic I have and
see if I can get them used to going back
and forth on digging deeper and deeper
into the debate
I can go next yeah or not for solution
racing we had our solution raising on
the meta connection this week and then
this coming week on Wednesday we're
doing it on energy which I can't believe
we haven't done one on yet but it's more
of a how do you solve energy with 10,000
people at $1,000
I don't know last week was the first
week on Sunday that I put out the entire
all of the links to all of the different
broadcasts that I participate in for the
week that I'm you know these these to
the idea cafe all of the ones in the
morning although I'm not putting those
up on Sunday and the especially the
solution racing and and I'll be doing
that again tomorrow I'm also gonna work
on something for what Nick had suggested
where last week on our video he was like
how do I get involved it together tech
if I want it to be so I can't that
should be something that's in so working
on a blurb for together tech to be in
every description kind of like I I have
the IM jubilee document but that's not
pertinent to this it's just for together
tech and then maybe we do each one a
blurb of what our projects are so
whoever shows up those are the ones
we'll put in right so they won't be for
when we go live it'll be for afterwards
but having a link two reasons for my
collection and solution raising and then
a over all together tech and how you get
involved which I don't think we have is
direct path but we can talk about that
on Friday adjourn aboard medium um it's
a little gray area how do you get
involved how do you want to get involved
and will follow the path and so it
doesn't work but and then this coming
week as I said I have this such amazing
on energy I'm gonna put that up and I'm
still looking for people to a small
group of people to have meetings with on
how do we how to create a process for
10,000 people but that's falling a
little more to the wayside as I'm
figuring out the little pieces other
things forward like a description like
getting the stuff out there and getting
it on the events page on that on the
knack tool and so that is what I will be
doing during this week next
sure I'm next
so the last week I've actually been
doing a bit of work on sort of trying to
verbalize my description of together to
act because every time I try I just sort
of like uh what is together take how how
do I explain it but for wiki election
I'm still been working a bit on the
specs and trying to sort of take a step
back and figure out what should it
actually be doing one of the things that
actually accomplished over last week
that I had been meaning to was I went
through all of the content that I had
created so all the the various videos
from when I had act my Kickstarter going
and had done stuff for that explainer
videos all the different live streams to
sort of have a catalogue of what's out
there so I know so that I can easily
reference and say oh I can stop
reinventing the wheel I've already made
a video that roughly describes that so
started to do that just so I can get a
better grasp on what still needs to be
created and what what what does not yeah
and then I'm really hoping to have the
specs done in the next week or two so we
can actually get some cook some code two
screens and pin two papers and however
you want to
verb that alright and that's it
I guess I'll go next um for me
I've been haven't had access to my
studio for like four weeks now and it's
really difficult and I do have this
temporary space that I can work in but
it's just small stuff I can do anyway
I've struggled to get back into making
art so I did join a group on I guess
it's kind of on Facebook it's called
find your flow and it's like a 30 day
process so I set myself up for the next
30 days to hopefully finish I have a lot
of small pieces I could finish so that's
kind of good and I guess I've have
really been hoping to connect with
Raymond on with protocol dot love I'm
waiting to hear your second part of your
conversation do you believe with him to
see and I don't want to step on anyone's
toes but I'm really excited because it
sounds so similar to my like imaginary
system we're both based on the Medicare
inci project so it's kind of cool I'm
hoping to connect with him maybe in the
future but I am looking forward to the
second part of your conversation
[Music]
yeah definitely
I also impressed by the discussion we
had on protocol the cloth and um didn't
manage to take a deeper look at it this
week nothing but I feel like I really
need to and yeah so yes and the last
week I advanced my trying to prepare for
the presentation and to tell you more
about it today and instead of making it
more beautiful I decided to change some
things inside because I didn't worked
well and I did that though yeah it took
me all week so make improvements that
you're not going to see which is great
all right it doesn't sound like anyone
had any pertinent hotseat questions but
if anyone does they are welcome so jump
into the hot seat I didn't want to
mention what you had mentioned Shilo I
had our first part of a conversation
with Raymond's Monday Tuesday whatever
day that was and then we had set up one
for Thursday and it didn't happen so we
have one for Monday scheduled exam so it
has not happened yet which is why I did
not send you send you the link in the
link I'm sure they will be public I just
I'm not gonna make them public at the
same time the cards won in parts two so
Raymond and I are both high proponents
of transparency so I can't imagine we're
gonna have it not be not be public at
the end but you know
I wouldn't mind if there isn't someone
in the hot seat or conversation from
yesterday cuz I believe we were all
there right for the marketing and
getting more into into that conversation
and how we craft a message for both
together tech right at the overarching
umbrella but also I watched the videos
I'm just a few videos on on closing the
chasm so I would be interested in
talking about that especially since it
was written basically like 15 20 years
ago the action the first the first one
and whether like how much of that is
pertinent to current technology and how
much is pertinent to game B technology
and having that conversation but if
anyone want needs help in their hot seat
I did want to touch on on bit what
Bentley had said about that the dog
breeds and finding out which which side
you need researchers on and maybe we can
brainstorm how to find you those other
ones so you don't get crickets yeah I
mean I could use researchers on
hopefully both sides I don't know like I
have an advocate on one side I'm going
to find it I have I have a resource I
mean oh I know website to go to that I'm
going to reach out to and see if I can
get an advocate on the other side but I
don't know if I can actually and I'm
sure the advocates would be happy to
kind of like give some technical
resources but I hate saying hey I got
this project why don't you come and
enter all this data into my system but
maybe that's what I need to do because
if they're the advocates the passionate
people I'm guessing you have a pro pit
bull advocate and on because I'm okay
would be like talking about no no
actually I don't have I don't have a pro
pit bull person oh okay you have the
other because I thought that was easy to
get so the pro pit bull band people I
thought were the more the harder to
define so I got someone who's
corresponding with me a couple times
over email and seems willing to give
feedback but I don't know if I can
actually
ask her to hay criticize these hundred
studies with them each individual one
and put that in context and you know is
that something that you could start with
like the top you know 5% just to get it
in there to start showing people what it
looks like yes yeah and like she came
back and gave comments like I said
here's this kind of meta study that
disagrees with you why do you disagree
with it so she came back said yeah the
studies before X date there wasn't large
enough population stuff so so I do kind
of need to put that stuff in and I was
struggling with how to put it in so it's
also a bit premature to get a researcher
in if I don't know but you know yeah and
then there's also the problem that a lot
of those studies aren't aren't public so
one is like $10 a day or $50 to buy
permanent access that was just the first
so I don't even know if I can get at the
data unless I hire a research who
already has access to a lot of the you
know you can buy subscriptions to those
things yeah so yeah I guess I really
don't know what I'm doing it would
probably be helpful if I had someone
that would be willing to come that's
interested and stuff like that and would
be willing to kind of sit down and say
you know talk through these three
bottles from this other from this
advocate and then how to phrase things
so I'm just kind of getting stuck trying
to organize them all myself things are
coming to my mind or simply like
Facebook groups that are both foreign
anti-ben right like most of you with pit
bulls aren't even going to be in those
groups it's more like love of my pitbull
groups right like pictures of dogs and
like dog loving groups are gonna have
both possibly and then like pitbull
loving groups and then of course the
people who are strong advocates against
banning the breed are going to have
advocacy groups and actually
targeting like reddit subreddits that
are maybe focused on that and Facebook
groups that are that are for both counts
and finding a team of people to say hey
do you want to be the pro or the anti
the provost or the pro that side and
then letting them kind of figure out if
I guess is this is a project they want
to be involved in it's weird because
it's less rival risk less controversial
than a lot of the other ones that would
be controversial more for us but then
you have less passion behind it but I
feel like this one you actually have
both you actually have it's less
overarching I just you know I'm saying
yeah there's still people more
passionate about both sides yeah both
sides have a might be very passionate
about it which can be good and bad yeah
filled out now like if somebody goes to
view that that summary if you're trying
to be like hey come join this project
take a look at where it's at now can
they go and see like the start of it so
in theory yes I have been reluctant to
share it because it doesn't I need to
put a little disclaimer saying hey you
know that don't these numbers aren't
meant to be final this is just kind of
where we are right now so yeah so I
think what I need to do is create a page
add a blurb and then I also the other
thing I need to do which fits into this
is I have to have a quick kind of couple
sentences explainer of how to use it
because otherwise people kind of come to
the page and get lost right so yeah so I
think yes that that's a good point as
well make a a page for it and a
description yeah so I guess I really
need to take it to the next level of the
page to where I can even just put
comments on it so people can not comment
on the on the main thing but can comment
overall right um so I can get feedback
immediately and then yeah yeah so
explainers saying that this is
preliminary I don't know the good word
well I wonder if instead of going though
this is preliminary wrote if you kind of
want to use the whole page as bait right
- like pre-populated with three to five
five of the top things from each side
and say like hey this conversation is
still happening if you think that
something is missing or if you feel that
the score is inaccurate add to it yeah I
haven't quite figured out how to phrase
that like yeah yeah because I've done a
lot of this same thought for wiki
elections where I know that if one group
comes in and adds to a conversation it's
going to be one-sided to start with so
if you go to see the summary of
something you're like this is wrong
yeah great so tell us where it's wrong
and then you provide so much the other
side well the balls back in their Court
now you skewed it in that direction
great hey you guys come time in now
you're losing what's in sensitization
start with pit bulls are the devil
incarnate this is where we're at a
hundred percent that is accurate posted
on the reddit in the Facebook groups
look we've come to the conclusion that
the other side is right exactly stuck is
that the funny thing is just prior to to
this this meeting starting right when it
was just Julie and I were talking about
some videos that the Julie had watched
she had a quote that was like yeah I saw
that video but I didn't you know I
didn't disagree with anything so nothing
called me to come online and talk about
it I think that is an extremely
important statement for this whole thing
it didn't anger me so I didn't go online
and want to talk about it yeah although
if it's too much that way people will
just dismiss it yes yeah I think the
cool kinda needs to filter out the you
know anger and itch for you because
that's what's going to power I think a
lot of these conversations in both of
our tools to let that drive people to
use it yeah it says drop all that just
tell us your facts and we'll yeah I just
don't have the time to build that tech
that's already complex so I want to
preempt it upfront with the wording and
say you know this is what we have so far
and kind of like say I mean to get them
motivated we can't say if you don't put
in the reasons why it's wrong then
stay wrong and we'll be promoting the
heck out of it somehow
so yeah an invitation to contribute so
that people don't think that this is my
conclusion yeah yeah so it's just kind
of like phrasing that and a good ways
one of the challenges no not that this
is in any way your job badly but with
reasons for I feel like wiki election
would also possibly be um
because as human beings we have the
emotion right we get angry we get scared
we get to actually help people access
what is not under that but like right
but we don't care about right you're not
writing in that I'm angry and I'm it's
like what is under that anger what is
the actual facts that you did is that is
fueling that anger that is what we need
right but to be able to get to it and
get it articulated in a proper way like
I think a lot of people are gonna have
it is she difficulty with that right
they come there with the emotion and
they don't have a way to to deal with
that and it's like wait no I want to
rant I don't wanna put in facts but like
having it be I don't know like a link to
a tool something else that someone else
is doing of like right if you're here
and you're angry and you can't like how
do we get what we want out of what
you're here to give out of you without
it being trolls on the internet Lobby
things back at each other yeah I like
your idea of what when I get that
explainer down to go ahead and share it
with different groups
I'm taking us and it might almost be one
at a time so like based on who's winning
talk to the other group and say hey the
other teams winning go time is I've
never within that team chimes in and
tips of scale in the direction hate now
they're willing go chime in yeah start
the war yeah exactly what like the
emotion to cloud the conversation I
think it's important to be realistic and
realize that at least to start with
that's what's gonna bring people there
they won't get interested they won't
spend the time if they're not I hate to
say it if they're not angry
that's what's gonna drive ninety-eight
percent of the interaction with both of
our project Oh to be clear I don't mean
comments like the election one of the
goals is there are no comments you speak
with data not with words you can't say
we're data and evidence you've got
YouTube and everywhere else for that
gold spit your stuff there this is about
facts yeah the problem is it take a
couple more months of my time to build
right the UI to be able to handle that
so what's the MVP project and MVP part
does a lot of people what are you
thinking of adding that would take a few
months well to some sort of built-in
tool I mean like I can put a verb bitch
thing that says just put it in facts and
stuff like that but people don't listen
I've never I've done that or Facebook
post no one has ever done it so I don't
think that'll be effective I mean sure
I'll do it but it's not gonna be affect
else can say this isn't a fact right
you're ugly and your mother smells is
like not affect on pitbulls
you know like because they are breaking
it down right like I can't put in my
whole diatribe for or against pit bulls
and someone else go at it it's like
literally pit bulls are responsible for
70% of the dog attacks well is that true
or not true like is it you know like one
study says there are 70% one study
they're 10% will depends on who saw the
dog yeah
wait right now yeah right now they can't
go into the to the graph of claims and
add a child claim because I don't want
it to immediately go in and just have it
be filled with junk and people come in
and see it and leave so building a
system to where they can add it and then
like I have to prove it or something
like that yeah so that's that I mean no
one take a couple months but it would
take more time and I would I'm trying to
see if there's a shorter way to test out
the theory without doing that I think
for now you got the first half of it
it's you you just have those one-on-one
conversations and say like hey here's
you know and you can even show them the
front end of the tool and say here's
where the conversation is that now tell
me why this is wrong tell me why that's
right etc you know and then you can go
in after and and parse that information
into how to actually put it into the
tool and then that whole thing of going
back and forth from posting to groups
and baiting people you're still doing
that it's just you're acting as the tool
in that it's you're acting as the they
talk to you and you have a conversation
and then at the end of that you go spend
ten minutes ten minutes and key all that
in and then you'll figure out oh I can't
log this oh how do I log that yeah yeah
so maybe just finding the Advocate on
the other side that I haven't found yet
and just sending them the facts that I
got from the other Advocate yeah exactly
not responding then I could do it by a
specific issue in the groups yeah I'm
sorry so I could post oh here's the
study what do you think of this and I
almost wonder if you could like see the
top level of conversation actually use
part of the back and forth through
Reddit so you could kind of have lucky
now multiple comment streams and people
can vote it up and down it's sort of
like that can kind of maybe help filter
out you know like the most important
versus the stuff and then if you post it
in two different groups like you know a
pro people an anti pitbull group you'll
have different groups uploading
downloading comments that might help and
then you can actually make your sweeping
like here's this
you can leave it like a bait comment
that people will try to debunk and then
you did they're not feeding you what you
would feed into your tool to to counter
those points or also I'm watching it
crossing the chasm video it's a read and
at the end it's like here are the four
things you need to do one of which is
know your competition and your
competitions like debates and
documentaries write that like that is
kind of how a game a like right now
that's that's how we kind of try to our
news feeds or that kind of thing having
possibly a debate between a pro and anti
pit bull ban and then putting that in
and then having each side go at the the
experts debate right like but having
that as a starting point might be
because it both like brings in your
competition like people who are looking
for a debate watching a debate here's a
thing that's the next level that's not
not this it's like when they're looking
for your competition they find you and
vice versa I don't know if that speaks
to you even starting and then what a
turtle said about reddit because that is
also kind of yellow and I think it's
what it's called and read it it's like
what we currently have in the technology
space for debates of like a boat down
boat all the pros all the cons read the
whole the whole thing yeah using what
it's currently done as your competition
but using it as a way for you to get the
information that you need from it and as
a way to get future yeah are you
suggesting to find yeah I mean that
works too but yeah that that under under
reasons for right finding to people
debate this is what really looks like
and here's what we're doing with it and
you doing that to the best of your
ability I think it'd be really debates
tend to be harder just because it's all
like a live thing and our current format
for debates is completely
terrible
like it's a truck and that's just like
humanity's ability I've never seen a
debate that was actually good because
you can just spew what lies and it's
really hard to catch those in in real
time I think again for both of ours our
end goal is to be able to facilitate a
better debate system I almost wonder if
you could like figure out what you want
out of the debate and sort of act as
like the in between yourself I think for
a lot of it you're gonna end up being
the the system between nose until you
like are able to build these systems to
do it for you yeah so yeah I think it's
I need to find find a anti ban advocate
I I'm thinking about reaching out to the
public official that started doing the
Denver thing I doubt he'll have time
especially kovat going on but then
there's a couple of there's there's a
there's a couple websites that are well
there's one specifically against breed
specific legislation so okay they'll
have someone so I'll just reach out to
them yeah it's just it's really hard to
explain to somebody hey I want to kind
of like I want to have you do this slow
debate that's scored it's just yeah I'm
just being cautious because I don't want
to burn these people and have an
understand the situation but I'm
probably being too cautious this one
they're advocates they want to get their
story out as much as possible so they I
think they're wrong much more flexible
than I'm giving them credit yeah I do
you wonder maybe you don't even want to
lead with like the reasons core tool
thing like just start of it we're asking
them hey somebody said this how would
you counter that like just see if
they're interested in interacting on
that level
and then if they are maybe do it again
and if they are again and say oh my cool
thanks by the way I'm doing this for
this if you're interested yeah that was
kind of successful with the first person
okay so yeah I think I'll still lead
with that on the second and then I'm
about to share the reasons for debate
sometimes this this week with the
proband person
Antti ban and then yeah yeah so I think
yeah an introductory email saying asking
here's a few questions about there's
other thing I'm doing some research and
then if they respond and then I can
maybe share the debate after I've
caveated that this is very you know your
informations not in here so just because
it says you're a liar doesn't mean
that's what I believe right and that's
the like the caveat message you were
talking about that you want to add yeah
I think that make sense think so you're
dealing with pit bull bands and so
there's Pro and anti people on that and
then their reason their um their data
their information how they've made those
assessments and getting those in facts I
don't know if either of those people
like on the different sides are
necessarily the people who want to input
data into the system if it feels like
inputting data into the system but
there's going to be people who like
inputting data into the system that are
more focused on that right but they
don't care about pit bulls they care
about research score and those people
are like your free source of labor that
you want to use and those are like the
innovators you want to get that are
different than like the reasons for
innovators of how do you capitalize on
that like where do you - where do you
find the people who are the data they're
okay putting the data in whether it's
paying them five bucks an hour from a
different country where they're all
stuck at home right now or like either
crowdfunding for paying people and or
finding people who actually this is
their thing they really want to be doing
and I guess those people exist people
like right okay so you're saying like
focus on finding the person who's
interested in sense-making and actually
recent score is a project and they can
translate whatever conversation is
happening in the pitbull debate more so
yeah be Bentley because that's that's
the problem right you're doing the
coding you're doing you need someone
should actually put input the people who
are gonna be good at thinking about that
the pro and cons of the pitbull aren't
necessarily the ones who unless it
super easy films input that like in key
ello you don't I mean where they're
there for that yeah and then I don't I
liked debate and I don't like yellow
like I'm like this does not work for my
brain I do not this is not how I think I
don't add to that I don't want to add to
that so like tapping into the people
that want to add and the reason they're
there right I don't know if they're
necessarily overlap to the same people
you want the people who are passionate
to give you the information and you want
the people to put it in and they're
probably not the same people yeah and
even not just putting it in but I mean
the the people that are passionate
they'll do a certain amount of in-depth
research but they don't I don't think
they can take it far enough because well
maybe if I challenge them back and forth
but yeah I do think there are people out
there that really enjoy having you know
organizing data and having data in the
right place on stuff so finally that
would be great I also do like the idea
of doing a crowd sourcing for it and
that's the thing where I might do two
GoFundMe campaigns one for each side of
the debate and you know anytime one gets
above the other tell the other group hey
they're beating you you know once again
use this game a rivalry to to move us
into game B but yeah yeah yeah except
the thing is though the it's kind of a
bootstrapping issue I I don't think
anyone will donate to that funding
campaign because they don't know what
the value of reason score is so I have
to do one first so the question I'm
dealing with is do I just hire a
researcher with my own money and then
you used you know prove that hey this
really helped and then if I'm doing that
is this debate does this really show the
value of it or is there a better topic
so I don't know all that stuff but yeah
eventually doing crowdfunding to pay
people because I don't I don't know that
anyone's ever gonna be passionate enough
about data entry and research to do it
without being paid just because people
don't need to do passionate about data
entry they need to be passionate about
something like reason score where like
they don't necessarily care about the
issue they care enough about
okay I really like what you're trying to
do and I want to help you test it and
get it to that point so if I have to
enter you know about pit bulls or about
I don't know
yeah and that was important food or
whatever it is that's the same sort of
people that are passionate about
Wikipedia and stuff like that right I
just don't it's not at the place yet
where people can see the value of reason
score right well I think no matter what
you're still step one there's no getting
around that because it sounds like the
platform isn't built for anyone but you
to do data entry so I think did step one
is you are that's that that person
blocks your hopefuls thank you your next
step is to replace you with somebody
else a single person that can get
trained on how to use it and then you
can use that as sort of a a testing
ground for how you how usable it is how
much hand-holding do they need if this
is like a person who is good at data
entry and they can't use it probably
needs some uuuugh usability work if you
hand it over and they dive in and they
can make full use of it that's a
fantastic sign I mean the architect
right now he's put in 30 planes and his
thing the problem is the harder thing is
actually the research which I think if
right now I think what a drill said
finding one person to do it is it's
probably the ideal the MVP that's the
easiest finding and therefore yes you
will probably have to pay them so
outsourcing it finding someone who can't
afford to be paid what your you can
afford to pay under this one finding
someone who's also under the umbrella of
really liking this it'd be awesome that
they can see the vision and want to be
doing it and they're getting paid so
they can put food on the table in a
country where you know your whatever
much you can pay its the equivalent not
the point was I gonna say that and if
and when this can be made into piecemeal
information and I can do it in ten
minutes right I don't need to do sit
down for 40 hours a week to input this I
can do in ten minutes here in 10 minutes
their research if the researchers can
research and just like correlate code
that's the wrong word bring that
information together and pass it down to
the data entry people who then can
piecemeal it in a way where you're like
right ten minutes and you could you need
to be repetitive anyway right you need
to be putting it in like four people
putting it in to see is it accurate is
it the same as all four these people
putting it in when you have enough of
those people and there's millions of
people on there most because they'll be
able to see reasons for those who
wouldn't put in 15 minutes of time right
if they're able to do that it's is it
easy enough that and can those 15
minutes of time add up no not right now
now you do need a handful of people who
are rather dedicated to doing this
process you are both the researchers and
the data entry people and are be
probably paid for it decide on my own
how much money am I willing to put in
this I mean as it is I'm for going my
complete salary so but should I add on
to that and shorten my runway on this
project which you know if it gets there
faster it's not shorter but I think one
was a simple step but one possibly
useful step is as you're acting as the
system do super boring live streams
where you're going through it and say
okay here's what I'm processing here is
me putting it into reason score and it
sounds like right now it's gonna be
boring because it's it's data entry but
it's kind of to use it as again a very
dry like form of documentation that you
can continue to improve and you can go
out and oh that's a that's a great
two-minute slice of me explaining this
part of it I'm gonna pull that out and
now that's some some videos so that when
you have a collection that says how to
use it you can then pass it on to the
first person who's not you that you that
you that you want to use it for that
kind of data entry and then that becomes
your first form of documentation and
then you can bring in more people and
that might also paint a picture of where
you need to make improvements for
usability yeah yeah that's I'll have to
think about that a challenge of that is
that most of the time trying to figure
out how to put it in as it's done while
I'm taking a shower you know it's like
it's like you go and you do some
research how the heck am I gonna do that
and then like it's a couple hours of
walking around the house and doing other
things it's like oh I guess I can yeah
but I'm not the only one you
but but that's still definitely
something to consider especially after
I've had the thoughts maybe coming back
and explaining okay here's the response
I got from this person this is how I
think about putting it into the thing
and then explain you know it took me a
couple hours of pondering to figure this
out and of course it'll get faster as I
do it but yes that's like two people to
be in hot seat in one meeting yeah
reasons core discussion it wants to get
some opinion about my product yeah
if possible so it's kind of complicated
because what I'm trying to do is it's
big and it's probably way too big and
even difficult to describe it sensibly
in a short enough period of time but it
might be the case that my competition is
actually talking about crossing the
chasm write the book as I was looking
for competition so I could join them and
you know help because they care about a
small staffing being done then just
doing it myself and what I wanted to
have to be a part of was basically
mapping the call space of going be and
generally not game a stop right because
when I started understanding this
dynamic between they making me as we
call it now it was a couple of years ago
and I was unable to find like a definite
source of information about who is out
there what they are doing and what is
going on outside of the strictly
business and government
hierarchy what I was was able to find
was basically like lots of scattered
projects and people trying to do
something and it looked like Great
Plains and ivory towers all over the
place and what I was missing was like a
map of the territory and my impression
was that okay there are millions of
projects but they are sometimes not even
aware of each other's existence and that
might be better if there was like one I
know a web page was one system that
could hold the information about all of
them and preferably even facilitate some
kind of communication or some kind of
you know a big blackboard dashboard or
something like that so someone who is
either new to this arena Oh someone who
wants to join or someone who is just
feeling that there is something not
right with the world right now and
something maybe needs to be done and
what I can do myself it's not that easy
to enter the space and be able to see
straight away that okay this is
something I can actually do right now
where I am and what I with my skills
it's complicated so there's basically
the messages there's no math and that's
why they my mapping group exists I guess
there are tools but and they're kind of
similar but there is no database there
is no catalog there's no directory of
who is out there and what they are doing
so because I was unable to find
competition or rather to find this place
and I wanted to see it's just
it's not there I of course started to
build it and I managed to involve a
couple of threads from other stuff that
I wanted to do over years as well like
project management which I used a lot of
different project management software
tools but none of them was the best so I
want to have something better
preferably something that has also built
which has built-in documentation systems
and something that is like integrated
scene so I yeah mmm then I thought okay
if there was a map of who's doing what
in 9b space maybe something like simple
project management tool could be useful
because it would allow for example
tracking products of I mean if there was
a group doing something project 8 it
would be useful to see in what state the
project is currently right I'm not
making much sense but I'm trying to
describe define it like a bit more about
what you mean by project when you're
talking about like what is missing in
base mmm just anything so if someone is
building solo so that a panel thing for
a house for example yeah so like people
like a project is trying to create
something as opposed to like sort of the
theory crafting and B discussion and the
ideas or did give me both both I mean
anything is uploaded a group usually
gathers around something that they want
to run build and it varies from like
reconnections for example the projects
are examples of what is out there what
is not going right and what is dying MC
for the greater good
you know you know they mean nothing I
think right salutis and yeah I wanted to
something like that to be done and mmm I
also have an impression that people talk
about it and every now and then I hear
okay it'll be great if we knew that
who's out there like it would be great
if there was this one resource one page
one system this we could access and
immediately be able to see what's going
on because now we not and there is lots
of them not just not necessarily
everything as was revealed to us right
and right in order for cooperation to
happen between groups and individuals
information is needed like this is what
we have this is what exists and so these
are groups I could join these are groups
that are doing projects that are
interested to me because of something
generally yeah and I know this is and
did you see that you had already started
to build something in this space or you
were just doing as the competitive
research to see if something already
exists I also in some research not very
deep but I think I have quite a
comprehensive picture of the
possibilities starting with helloweb
which is awesome graphically at least I
was missing some functionality inside so
it's not quite although other what I was
looking for so yeah I started building
something but I want to show it like
full of data already which did not
happen as I said in the beginning
because I was busily fixing bugs now oh
so how much data do you have in your
version of it right now my data is
all over the place in various note paths
and stuff like that because yeah I
didn't manage to get it in okay how do I
showed last week I was able to show it
just we have a way to share screen here
if you want like I saw on the bottom
yeah but it says your browser doesn't
support screen sharing know why work
just using a regular browser yeah they
assemble with that cross through it or
something yeah double check to make sure
that like it it's not is heading for you
know I can only do two things neither
which is helpful I know other people
some random person trying to share their
screen yesterday and try to jump into my
broadcast it was not happy that I wasn't
letting them come on so I mean I know of
it yes I'm just cuz word mins that we
had sherry no and I in the after session
yesterday with his already ended up
sharing a screen and he was able to so I
almost wonder if it's cuz we have so
many people or no because there should
be a sales option and there's other
people that can join in so we can add it
in might you know I'm going to reconnect
because on my okay quick all right
something well he's reconnecting the
idea
I unfortunately I don't think Bentley
made the mapping call either and I
didn't make the mapping call I don't
know if anyone made the mapping client
oh if Medusa was on the mapping call but
there's something about the fact that
we're trying to map terrain that isn't
known that means you can't do it on your
own you actually kind of need almost
everyone to bring their map and then how
do we combine them or we need a
brainstorming session
on what
 is this train like like how do I
envision game a right because it's like
different things are gonna be for me and
therefore that's been reflecting game be
right that economics and healthcare and
finance and all of these things like
what does that look like to me so I
could map it into game B and because it
looks so differently right if we're
trying to map Vancouver or we can argue
right there's like measurements there
are squares when you're trying to map
terrine right no if you're trying to map
Vancouver what goes on the map do
mountains do rivers the streets yeah and
if you're trying to map game be like
what are we considering game be is it
sense-making is it anti rival risk is
like what goes on the map is what I'm
here yeah and what is under the one
versus the other that like there is a
might Russia just where did you have the
share screen option at the bottom now I
totally optional it still says it
doesn't your browser does a screen
sharing piece use Chrome on your laptop
desktop which is what I'm doing
you're on Chrome and it's not letting
you yeah that's that's pretty cool
what kind of a device do you want like
it what I find just a couple of days ago
oh yeah I hate it okay
is while you're doing that what it's it
like it sounds like one of the possible
competitors to your project is together
attack no and to be clear I don't think
that's a bad thing I was actually good
going to say that if you're trying to
find data you might want to go check
there and like you know you can like
pull out maybe with the election and
reason score I've been to yours to see
how it looks like to see yeah about it
everything you were talking about I was
like this sounds like together tech like
trying to create a map of all the
projects and what they're doing rat
who's involved no it's not that robust
yet like I think if you're actually
coding something that can get better
than a prototype fairly quickly so by no
means that this is like a competition
thing because what I want to see is some
great assistance
like a software thing and I think it
works just as its it's supposed to with
people who are like with you right
because I I started creating it for
myself so I have this map small map of
stuff out there and I think it has
potential to grow enough to be useful
for you know unless of course you want
to create a software system that does
exactly this in which case it will be
not even happy to join because as I said
I know I'm not doing this for like this
is my step project and I want it to be I
know financially successful for example
it's not this know these guys the cases
I want to see the system exist and I
want it to work know what we discussed
yesterday when we talked about hiring
some foreign programmers to do the work
and whether we should be worried worried
about them hijacking the project my
perspective if someone to hijack it
and to advance it by all means please
you know they were getting into the very
big difference between competition and
game a versus con game be and part of it
is what I was saying with Bentley with
the crossing the chasm is there's always
competition right when we first invented
the wheel there was no wheel so you've
run in competition with other cart but
you you were accomplishing with our feet
right what were people doing to
transport themselves from A to B and so
right now there isn't any competition
because we all know we need like there's
many people working on this mapping
problem of how do we get a directory of
people and projects and know what the
 is going on right but because
everyone this is well you popped off I
was just saying that I don't know did
you attend the mapping conversation last
week on this
yeah okay because I don't know I didn't
so I don't know whether part of my issue
with the game be mapping anything is
that we are trying to map terrain that
isn't seeable right so like even if we
were mapping vancouver we could
theoretically do it we'd have to have a
conversation about are we including
mountains or including the topography
but we could not vancouver because it's
not something we can physically see we
have to figure out what is involved in
it and then how do we even visualize it
how do we create it so that it makes
sense to all of us because if what
you're doing is creating a map that you
can follow it's all great that it makes
sense to your brain here but like if we
want a map that we can follow when
someone's lost to be like so we can
guide them to where we are right and
actually be a map then like I feel like
there's a big step game B as missing of
which is possibly what the conversation
was we need to brainstorm what that
looks like what's on the map and then
how do we visualize it and how do we put
it there what are the tools we need and
then making it together and that's what
together text doing is somewhat figuring
out what can we do from this space you
have the text skills to be able to
actually create what's in your mind but
is it any more useful if we haven't
brainstormed what is there yes you might
happen to stumble upon the perfect thing
that makes sense to my brain and a
journalist brain and Shiloh's brain but
the chances of that if we're not
involved in that process it's like
figuring out how do we brainstorm what
needs to be on the map and then letting
the coders code it is kind of like where
as coders just want to code it like I'm
just like I can visualize that I can
code it and then use it but it's not
usable because it's not for everyone's
brain if that makes sense like game B
needs date for the technology piece of
it take a step back which is kind of
like really trying to do it wiki and be
like what does that look like to map it
and I don't know what that I think it
was like a six hour conversation was um
did it get into the brainstorming did it
get into at least that piece of it that
we need to kind of come from the base in
order to get that or what was I don't
think it got to the point of actually
brainstorming what it would look like
what we discussed was the assistance out
there mapping systems
but like general mapping systems which
is the brain and some other mind mapping
software just yeah great
the software is dread what we can
discuss is how it translates to gang
v-space and whether it's the best of
even good enough tool to visualize what
you just said so yeah and I'm here to
literally show it but I cannot still
both of you see they share screen and
it's not great I don't even I have the
button but I haven't tried it which he's
getting in the hair or when he tries it
sure screens great tips start on these
tips again yeah I mean let's interested
if you can do a Jubilee because we're
admitting so I know but but even then at
least that's a bug that can cause screen
sharing to crash on Windows 10 it's
pretty rare if it happens you may want
to use Firefox to share your screen
we're working with chrome team to see it
fixed quickly Oh interesting so that
might be might be the issue is that
there's this glittering and chrome
doesn't want anyone else using any other
on the other thing I'm sure they're
working real hard to help stream you get
that big lion focus just well we're
figuring this out we only have a minute
left anyway so I feel like we should do
a project raising actually on your
particular vaping and instead as a sign
of time and then figure out the sugar
teaming actually actually do that but
that cuz it seems to be something that
most people in Gambino we needs need
this right we need mapping we need this
this a map and who are here who's here
what are your skills and what are your
projects and how do they interrelate
who's doing what and yet because all of
the tech people and the people who can
do it or making it it's like we have
eight different competing projects we
have Janelle's
system and Kylie's system and all of
these different things that are all out
they're all beta and none of them are
great like none of them are the thing
where you're like oh yes because we
haven't done it together right and that
is I think Adriel is me just because
we've had the conversations is the
closest knowing that nap isn't the thing
that it's gonna be but it's the closest
we have right now and how do we use it
and yet it's still that same thing
unless people are using it and all of
them are if we're if everyone used
Janelle is its work if everyone used
Kylie as it can work good enough but if
they own it and we can't improve it and
so like having something that we can
actually improve that's open to feedback
that's also the thing we've kind of all
decided is the beta that we're going to
improve so that we can focus both our
money our resort everything on improving
it and then this is the one place I know
to put together tech stuff in the events
you know every if I'm to put my events
on all the different things and might
even just the project on all the
different things it's dissipating the
energy instead of like bringing that
energy together like there's a need
there is a competition but there's also
like it's not quite fixing the problem
which is very like we're so in game B
right like right Slifer this is an omni
win thing we all need it yeah because
all of the people working in their own
not self-interest like in game a way
where you're trying to earn money but in
your own self and just like I want this
tool to work this way which is great but
then it will work for exactly one person
and then and then it doesn't work
because you need everyone needs
information on it and everyone to be
there to make it work and so taking that
step back and saying how can we
brainstorm together as game B to say
what do we want in a map you to live a
brand new what is exciting there's
commonality that we all like that we
want the project we want the people we
want to know what skills and interest
people have we want to be able to have
conversations you want to and then
create it from that base and we don't
even need to recreate it looking at
what's out there and then saying what's
the best we got right now and then
putting our will behind that one like
this is the one we're gonna use is I
don't but game B is so fractured that it
like you don't like that we can't even
have that conversation to bring those
people together to say hey let's pick
one I don't even know at that stage yet
it's basically just everyone fly with it
until one works which is a lot of people
dissipating their energy and our
resources right because I'm sure you
yeah like
b.p like not pay because I wanted money
but pay me like this cost money to
create it but there's all of those
things so we're not gonna pay for any
particular one unless it's like the wiki
for game B and even at is probably your
hating competing with all these other
things which although art competition
our competition like they're actually
costing game be something if any of that
makes sense
wait what when you're talking about
competition - there's multiple kinds
there's a direct competition is doing
exactly what you are there's like you
know quasi competition where it's like
maybe some of the same features but like
technically if somebody's shopping
around like it's probably gonna pull
them in one direction strongly or
another and then there's I think what's
called elastic competition where it like
they're kind of in the same space
vaguely so like in the game a world
that's there a direct competitor but
like you know since you're competing for
a share of wallet it's about like what
else could somebody be spending money on
we're like in their mind it's kind of a
part of the same you know lying in their
budget like entertainment and then for
game B it's not so much about share of
wallet but it's more like share of
attention like what could somebody else
be spending time on there where it's not
talking about that competition in
crossing the chasm because that's too
broad but the other two Cotton's like
where I say competition Bentley and I
are technically in a competition in a
lot of ways because we're both in sort
of sense making things trying to figure
out you know how you can get to the
truth using the information available
we're coming at it in different ways
most likely the end products gonna be
very different and it's not to say that
will necessarily step on each other's
toes whether there's definite overlap is
what yeah journal drive is how do we
work together as competitors to use that
as a strength instead of the game aim
where we're trying to eat each other's
lunch and it's a zero-sum game and only
one of us can win because for one of us
to win we have to sabotage the other
hurts so deadly past the hour but I just
wanted like I'm I think all of us are
Pro competition in that way right like
when we say your competition for
together tech we don't mean leave and
don't come back how dare you it's just
like yes this is also a problem we're
trying to solve yeah
please come to the conversations where
we're trying to solve together
technically enough my vision for the
tech I want competitors
I want people out there doing things
slightly different to see how that works
like you know a be testing for four
projects
oh he's doing something slightly similar
but he's doing it in this other way
great keep doing that we'll work
together and then we'll see how our
strategies differ oh you're getting more
users Oh interesting why is that
happening Oh cuz did this part is more
appealing cool you can adopt that or is
that project just so much you're better
designed for from the start that we
should just merge projects and keep
going in that direction and that is like
like this is an energy of dynamic and
something we have to figure out in
individuals and game B is like as an
individual I have an internal drive of
innovation that I want to be able to
follow and at the same time that's not
necessarily the highest impact for the
world and the project how do I use that
energy come together and create
something even better together right now
we don't know how to do that so our best
option is what we are doing which is
having our individual projects did you
want to come on board to ours do we want
to come on board to yours
versus like this brainstorming of like
what does that map you look like and
then how do we create it from from the
ground and I'm looking at that as
solution raising how what how do we
create a solution together because we
haven't figured it out so that we can
tap into that individual innovative
energy and have it kind of work in the
greater greater good because if we it's
like I don't want people giving me
homework right I don't want to give them
a to show where it can be like hey how
have a mapping session and then make
what we want you to make because that's
not necessarily what you want to make
but there has to be a like connection of
those two right that like what the
individual innovator wants to actually
code and have their brain work through
is what the group wants so that it meets
90% of 90% of our needs
instead of making 99% of the innovators
needs right of the person who makes it
and then it's not it's not making the
other one's needs like finding how do we
square that hole how do we actually
bring how the innovation work because
otherwise we have all of these
not-so-great betas any of them can be
made better by us coming on board and
putting in the energy
putting in the ingenuity but the fact
that they all exist dissipates it and
then the next person's like wait there's
no map I need to make the map there's
like oh there's no map
I need to make them out and we need a
map that we can all follow together and
it's like in that ickiness of like right
but it's mine but it's yours but we need
it but it's there's like so much energy
at play that that is like what we have
to figure out together is how do we get
that not focus then we have game be like
weirdly if we really do when we're able
to to innovate collectively together in
a way that satisfies the individuals
innovation where they don't feel like
they're getting homework and they're
getting other things put on them aren't
theirs and yet they're doing their stuff
and collectively together its earnest
for the greater good right that like you
making your project actually is great
but two tries that he's awesome at it we
know we can hand it to him and he's
gonna make him out for all of us because
he took in our stuff but he's gonna make
it his own unique artistic way it's
gonna bring that stuff in and and like
weaving that together is like the
mapping does it but we need the mapping
first what we need
beautiful any final compost another for
10 minutes over meeting on that sorry so
we're gonna do a meeting on that thing
do we want to do our own meeting on map
Ian very good six hours Mar - I
mean just Mar - she's idea okay of
course that's why I started to talk
about because years in my programming
cave doing my things and it's just not
an accessible life forward
so I am very glad to have cost yeah hmm
so either you can do the hot seat next
time or we could schedule a dedicated
meeting I'm fine with either way yeah
that'd be great
either way like eight different mapping
projects right now I made up a number my
brain but like there's definitely like a
lot of people have like the knack one
just to gather tech that we're trying to
fill the mantle of mapping projects yeah
it's true
but Janelle has her own Kylie has her
own and those are just the people I've
had like face-to-face conversations with
forget about all the whole Oh chain and
downstack projects that also have their
version of like actually just and then
you know everyone with their medium
articles like here's my understanding
about game B is that no one has actually
taken game B and mapped it and yet
because everyone cut like yes it's a
mess and it's a beautiful mess yes so
can we have in the meeting also everyone
who is producing their own version of
the map it would make most sense I think
I fix my subscription many people in one
in one session I think it's um like we
we can put it out there after we pick
the time and say hey we're doing this
for you know this if you're having a
similar project please come join we
haven't had great success in getting
people to join it's a lot of the same
crew we're just fine
but so far that a challenge that would
anyone so I'm just gonna ask me to
should particularly since it's your
project that we're gonna be doing a
project raising on would you rather do a
project raising on it in that it is it
is you're in the hot seat you're the one
setting the intention and therefore it
wouldn't necessarily make sense to have
my factions trying to cool off and stuff
that having whether you would want to
have a project raising or a solution
raising cuz we could do a solution
raising on mapping where we talk about
what it looks like what it could look
like and what we could do with and let's
go with a thousand people $10,000
because game B is a much smaller
community in the world I'd like to do a
solution raising where we're not
bringing our individual projects to it
right it's just here's what the map
could look like if we were doing them
out together or do you want to focus on
what you've already put your energy and
time into and making it better like you
want to go back to the drawing board and
brainstorm what it could look like it
doesn't mean you have to do it the
solutions aren't someone has to take
this now and make it it's just like
brainstorming in like an open blank
space okay solution racing sounds great
of course I'm going to be embarrassed
but not necessarily in my brought my own
projects why I am biased in seeing
things seen things my own way so what I
am going to be talking about probably
and is like this this way I see things
solution raising is better in this case
because I'm more happy to adjust my
whatever I am doing to fix something
that is considered better because I
acknowledge that my way of seeing things
might be incomplete
or in some way is not good for anyone
else but me and I would rather change
this idea of how it should look like and
then work do real work to make it happen
instead of just advancing my project in
hope that all the project does we will
be useful for like for the public so
solution raising is better all right so
you and I will set up a time for social
raising and then we can put it in the
mapping space in the game be space
whoever wants to come to that and just
it's a conversation it's not about those
five people become the mappers and they
create you know it like it's known as
five people getting together and then
brainstorming from that blank space and
we all bring our bias to it our
individual bias our project bias that's
kind of the point of of kind of creating
that blanks page and then after that
whatever comes out of that we could do a
solution or we could do it a project
raising on a Facebook post we
specifically call the people that we
know are working on similar projects
you're like take them Janelle and Kylie
and whoever else yeah sounds good and
just one final comment is yes we spent
six hours in the mapping meeting about
the solutions we talked about and
systems we talked about where I feel far
bigger and greater than what we can
simply do in like small amount of time
so it was great six hours definitely and
very successful in us having talked
about many many things
and many different things but something
some small specific solution that we can
have right now which is simple maybe not
that simple but still a map a catalog
something that we can create in short
span of time it's better to have stock
in and then work further and create some
3d interface on top of it having the
data already in place then starting with
like beautiful what we discussed
beautiful 3d sphere of everything and
then figuring out how to get data in and
how to show all the details
yeah sounds good solution Racine we'll
set it up together and then we can put
it out there and then we can see the
mapping people want to come it's not
really it's solution area seen as a
thing and of itself so then we can post
that and be like hey watch this hour and
get what you want out of it go with it
if there's a lot of interest I say we do
it on a zoom call and have people Abrego
and do the solution racing separate and
then see what they come up with right I
think I don't know how that's gonna work
because I'm it can't be of those
individual tables but it's structured so
it's not it's like 15 minutes on this 15
minutes on that and then 30 minutes on
the adjacent possible and I think
although I kind of do want to stick with
ten thousand a hundred thousand dollars
just because I think a hundred thousand
dollars is a more but maybe a thousand
and a hundred thousand dollars everyone
would be putting in a hundred dollars
which is ridiculous floor or the project
but figuring out what could we do if we
got together and created something as
opposed to each individual there is no
contradiction if we had a system that
Maps stuff like what already happened
food packaging energy is nothing these
are all subsets of like branches of the
main tree of problem which is how to fix
the world and then you have like
different stuff and each of those is its
own project each of them has its own
10,000 people there might be
intersection but still good singers
there is one problem and then it
flattens off to be
yeah all right yeah so we can set that
up we'll do and then we can do like I
said if you want to after we can do a
project raising on whatever comes out of
there for if you want to take that
project and run with it if someone does
need to take ownership and at the same
time in everyone's safe ownership it's
it's chaotic fun can be mess for like
when I first had this idea of 2014
something like this six seven years ago
when I started digging into like
alternatives to the current system I
mean long before that there were like
glimpses of there is other world
2014 I think that's when I started
really looking at what's out there and
for the past six years I hear people
talk about yeah we need this but
sometimes somehow it never materialized
you know do you know and that will be
useful and actually not an Athena so
someone needs to do it I am happy to
take ownership of the mapping thing
whatever is decided is the best way of
mapping yeah we see I'm just giggling at
a girl's message inside BYO bias bring
your own bias this conversation yeah so
we'll set that up your last name starts
with s head-on yes yes and yeah it's
there I will message you we can set up a
time for the two of us and then put it
out to everyone else to do this amazing
and then the rest of the game be space
and then we'll either be on Zoomer siree
nerd and figure it out from that we're
like 20 minutes past let's say bye to
YouTube and Facebook and then we can
thank you for wait