[Music]
we've all had conversations where we've
come into the conversation one way and
something about the dialogue right maybe
was super personal maybe was
philosophical but there's something
about the meeting such that you walked
away and you are different somehow
circling you could say is a yoga of
those kinds of conversations it's about
whatever those asanas those postures and
communication it's fundamentally
stretching strengthening that muscle
that is both available and generative of
those kinds of unexpected life-changing
conversations
so basically we've been on an inquiry in
rebel wisdom since starting the channel
about a a year and a half ago trying to
sort of see where the emergent
conversation is and found some really
really fascinating thinkers in that time
and had some really interesting
conversations why I'm really excited
about this is that so circling as a
practice that's becoming more popular
and a lot more people seem to be aware
of it and I guess it's possibly hard to
describe exactly what it is without it
without doing it but I'll I'll I'll do
my best now and I'd say it's a way of
making a conversation self-aware and
it's a it's a form of trying to be alive
to what wants to emerge in the moment
and often naming the dynamics that are
present in the relationship that allows
a deeper level of presence and
communication to be there in the
relationship and there are other as I'm
sure will talk about there are other
different modalities for doing that but
why I think it's so crucial right now is
that a lot of people and our channel
have talked about the need for a
collective intelligence as this almost
next evolutionary step and I think these
kind of they're often called we space
technologies I'm not sure I like that
that term very much
no you're shaking your head as well but
but there certainly I mean there are no
in a way there's no really good language
for this kind of inter subjective sense
making is another mouthful it's like but
I think these are hugely crucial
practices that I think our evolutionary
evolutionarily important so I'm really
interested in this conversation and what
what comes out of the dialogue so I'd
love if you could just briefly say we're
circling came from and and and how would
you summarize it so I want to say I
really appreciated your channel and what
you're doing on multiple levels one is
just just the fact that you're listening
for the emergent conversation just just
the
that's what you're doing is in itself
impressive to me and also watching how
the people that you're dialoguing with
are in some way cause shaping your
channel and watching the channel evolve
and in such a way where it almost feels
that the very thing that you have your
eye on is is making is making what's
emerging a kind of a self-awareness so
it's almost like rebel wisdom in a
certain sense is this way in which that
which is emerging in the culture is
saying I to itself and asking itself
questions and stuff so I've just
appreciated the multi dimensions of what
kind of comes through and all the things
that you're doing and really appreciate
it a lot thank you and I would say that
circling for me has been very much the
same thing it's more like it's it's it
wasn't anything that that anyone had any
idea of trying to create something right
it wasn't it was it happened
spontaneously in a moment it was a
moment of of what you could call his
deep connection and with a group of
friends of ours however stood out from
all other moments of deep connections
with groups of friends of mine in that
the it's the depth of the conversation
and the connection was a kind of end in
itself like the value of the connection
was its own end in a way it's what
shined forth and so in a certain sense
it was a you know probably a month later
when it finally actually somebody called
like named it circling which I've been
trying to understand even why it's
called that right ever since what stood
out was this what I would imagine you
referred to before is like a we space or
an inner subjective space that's
distinct and so circling has been
telling me what it is
ever since the beginning and it's I feel
like my job has been to listen deeply to
it and distinguish it from also what it
is at
so it's I would say that circling one
way of saying it is it's a it's a deep
inner subjective relational yoga or
meditation right just like with yoga
there are all these asanas that develop
capacities of mind and body that that
are basically extremes of or archetypes
of positions that you have psychically
and physically in the world circling is
you could say is a set of asanas in
which people get together and they do
these deep stretches of all the things
that it takes to be intimate with
somebody to deeply listen to someone to
like share the truth of your own
experience to move into conflict without
going to war right all of those all of
those capacities we do these deep asanas
so that when you're walking around in
the world and you're not necessarily
thinking about whether or not you're
doing circling when you talk to your mom
you can enter into that conversation
even on her own terms in a way that's
more brings more aliveness and more
truth and more closeness in authenticity
you know I want to pick up on so we are
you familiar with inquiry the as a
modality as I am familiar with it as
parts of modalities like like diamond
heart exactly it's the OL mass work so
the red one school or the Alma's essence
work yes which was the main influence on
the counseling training that that I've
I've been learning an inquiry so we
actually on our retreats get the guys
into a space of inquiry and the way that
we frame it is as a kind of talking
meditation they really glean alive to
what's what's happening at the moment as
we're talking and there's a word that
that I think is very powerful in this
space and that's curiosity this sense of
being curious because in
place it in that word is one there's a
there's a there's a not knowing there's
a sense of we're not in a fixed position
and that sort of opening up to curiosity
and then in a recent film we just put
out called the science and psychology of
polarization we we spoke with Stephen
Porges who came up with polyvagal theory
and with Peter Levine who came at the
somatic experiencing and Stephen Porges
why I think he's a very interesting
thinker is that he eat with Holly vagal
Theory came up with the sort of
scientific background of why curiosity
is so important because curiosity and
defensiveness cannot exist at the same
time that our physiology is wired
towards either expansion curiosity the
possibility of something new or
defensive nurse just being in a space of
knowing of saying what we know yes I say
that I'm reminded of what Maximus the
Confessor seventh I think he was lived
in like 1700s
he said he described like you could say
the ground of consciousness the
ontological ground of consciousness as
as he would put it as an existential
ontological astonishment at the
givenness being right that kind of that
fundamental sense of where a where I it
seems to me that what we tap into in
these modalities like inquiry or
circling is it's not just something that
we do like an act like I'm someone that
then acts and is then curious there's a
way in which curiosity could be a way of
distancing but when one finds oneself
interested in something right like
deeply struck by something to me there's
something so primordial to that it seems
like so primordial to the fact of
awareness itself is that part of
awareness this is always aware of the
world it's coupled with the world
and so there's a way in which like what
you're talking about when one is feel
safe when one feels deeply considered
one can relax into the ground of being
in what is just there in my experience
is something like curiosity or interest
it's those those two things between I've
noticed safety right safety and
curiosity seem to be go hand-in-hand
when there's danger when the well like
the relationship breaks down and that
other part of your nervous system gets
spread up I noticed curiosity is the
last thing that goes on I'm curious as
hell about you until you don't give me
what I want or you pissed me off right
then I know exactly who you are
so those two things between openness
safety and interest and curiosity seem
to go hand-in-hand to me in ways that
are I think are really quite mysterious
and deep hmm yeah you are you familiar
with polyvagal theory and the Steven
Porges work yes yeah I'm familiar with
it you're sure yeah yeah I loved how he
talked about the the neurophysiology of
spirituality or religion that if there
was a sit there's a synthesis even in
that perspective that that that
underpins a sort of philosophical view
and and in some ways a religious view of
the world yes yeah we're these these
places in which this is what's really
interesting what I'm watching on your
channel are lots of people making these
biological connections to all these
other dimensions of human experience and
there's something about when all those
line up that kind of shines forth in a
way that seems super necessary for in
today's society in culture for it to
actually grab hold and for people to
trust it yeah so those those those deep
biological links are and especially the
connectedness to embodiment right so
that there's a some kind of there's some
kind of logos even
my nervous system yeah I mean the word
that is coming up when you're speaking
is and you said connectedness and that's
is synthesis there's this sort of deep
need for synthesis mmm it's being called
out right now and there's there's an
intellectual synthesis there's a sense
of the sort of having lost the deep
mythos that something is something
desperately needs to be born in that
space well we're really feeling the
absence of that but then there's the
that there's a risk of that being
disconnected from the body of that not
being embodied and the of that only bit
yeah only being an intellectual
synthesis is sort of is lacking that's
not going to touch the sides I think
what we're needing right now is a much
deeper synthesis than that yes and I
think a lot of the but in some sense it
also can't really be named that there's
a sense of a lot of people on our
channel talking about something or
almost in code but in a way that you
can't really name it precisely you can
kind of name the outlines of it you can
name what it isn't but you can't name
the emergent thing that is what we're
we're all in some sense aware of and
trying to stay alive too and I really
liked just to I was just listening to
your conversation with John Vevey key
you you mentioned something about
circling is about what is most alive and
he let he then linked that to evolution
but that was almost an eeveelution airy
process there's almost like a natural
there's a natural imperative to be on
that edge where everything is most alive
yes and at the end is it like at the end
of that conversation was really in fact
I would say that interview is a very in
a certain way is an example of what I
would call circling right that because
there is his way where his ideas and
what was so true for him personally
really kind of cake they synthesized and
came together especially at the end and
that there's something about those
things coming together that look you can
watch both of our hearts just open with
each other where it wasn't just some
personal growth epiphany right or
insights about oneself it was actually a
a recognition of that of two things
coming together but recognizing it as
they come together that's what was so
beautiful for me and what I see often
over and over and over and over again
encircling and I think it's one of the
why what you're the exact reason what
you're talking about that sense or even
when you were going to talk when he
started talking about synthesis there's
this way where you went he stopped and
he went and almost like you were both
you're thinking but I also got this
sense at least my response to you as I
thought I was also feeling with you
there's a sense and sense is such a key
word right because sense in both
connotates sensation the givenness of my
sensations right in feeling of
sensations but it also has it makes
sense right so it's this link between
the you know the cognitive and the end
the physical so when I have a sense of
something so in a certain way you could
say that one of the things that
authentic relationship or the space of
we is a place of sense right it's a
place where were not just pontificating
and trying to talk over each other and
you know a victory over idea but there's
actual this awareness that were both I'm
opening the way I make sense to the
world in a vulnerable way such that I'm
proactively willing to be changed in the
process of opening to you right but it's
a a it's a voluntary openness voluntary
openness right
um that is demonstrates of courage and
and so when I when when the other person
registers the impact like that they say
something that actually they can
viscerally feel me adjusting my
worldview or adjusting how I'm seeing
myself or you or my life making more
sense to me through hearing what you
just shared with me what's interesting
is that the other person has this
incredible feeling of feeling heard of
feeling seen a feeling understood so
there's this link between me feeling
seen heard and understood through you
being willing to be altered and affected
by what I just said or the way I just
was for you and then was circling we
highlight that change live as that's
happening as an actual experience and
one of the things that that at the end
of that interview that I just thought
was so gorgeous is so it was so gorgeous
where John was talking about where he
grew up in it like a religious
fundamentalism and and he was talking
about always being feeling like this
this power could reject him at any
moment and he was saying there's a
danger in that though for me because
that
that intense ideology that he lived
inside of was also a kind of holding in
which that gave him a personal narrative
to live inside of and that what that
he's he was he was identifying the
danger of falling into that with that
sense of I that comes with that
dogma and what we ended up talking about
was and I really got a stronger sense in
the conversation it really impacted me
as I'm trying to articulate right now
through having heard him right is and
here's the inner subjectivity right here
is what I'm talking about is is that the
holding actually could be the process of
mutual fitted discs the process of the
activity of constantly finding each
other and adjusting each other and
contributing to each other in proactive
vulnerable ways that lead to more
stability so it's so a promise of
antifragile
it's almost an anti fragile conversation
yes absolutely it is and I wonder just
to just to kind of ground it a little
bit for people maybe who are watching
who are who are not familiar with this
at all
I I would say I mean it's it's really
making the conversation self-aware in
terms of I mean what I'm I mean I I know
means call myself an expert but I'm but
I'm very aware of how it feels to name
the dynamics in a conversation or to
once-once any net anything in in any
relationship even once we've named the
dynamics and the relationship something
lands and something becomes much more
clear and as soon as when that's not
identified there's an odd nurse there's
a there's a sense of some things here
but I'm not entirely sure what it is and
as soon as that is named it's like well
actually this is how I'm feeling or this
is what's present for me right now
suddenly there is a landing yeah and my
my mentor is a guy called raffia Morgan
who has been doing a lot of this work
since
probably the 70s or the 80s and he talks
about everything registering in the
field that that is is a really beautiful
way of looking at it and it's absolutely
true whatever is being thought that is
not expressed is still present in the
field it's still present in the
relationships between people it's still
present if some things are expressed say
if we're in a even a working environment
cuz we make this very much part of the
process between myself and Ally and
rebel wisdom we're constantly in this
process with each other of surfacing
whatever dynamics are there whatever is
going on in sort of internally because
we know that if we don't do that then
then things start to the organization
itself starts to develop a sort of lack
of congruence or it develops an
underbelly or like we've become very
aware of that and it's so when we're
aware of something we surface it and we
go through this process with each other
and I think right and that's the same I
guess in any relationship like in any
intimate relationship I think this is
such an important practice to to learn
I'm curious for you when you talked
about so what I heard you say is is that
everything in the field registers hmm
there is something that you said that
just caught my interest is like so when
I named it hmm what's what is it about
naming it that seems so crucial so
crucial such that you make sure it have
it be a practice and what you're doing
with your team hmm what is it about
naming it in like Whitney what happens
to the field or what what happens when
you name it versus say if you didn't
name it
what is it naming it do this is this is
a very interesting inquiry I I connect
it to something like this maybe as an
analysis I mean how it feels is a
relaxation how it feels is a relaxation
because part of me I guess was already
aware that
was present naming it is sort of like
okay that's what I was feeling well
that's what was there because it's it's
on the fringes of awareness but but then
in the process of naming it somehow it
becomes concretize dit becomes part of
it becomes a it's sort of there's maybe
something quite deep there about the
shift between awareness and conceptual
thought but there is there is some kind
of dynamic with us as meaning-making
animals who have this tool of language
that is somehow about concretizing
thoughts that means when we concretize
it it makes a shift now and there is
some deep sort of theological thing as
well I think I mean Christianity should
have been the beginning was the word
there is something I mean I I'm reaching
here these are thoughts that I have but
maybe never expressed there is something
about like in some way I think we are in
tension life is in tension in carne it
is in tension and words are in tension
and so by identic reiated principle is
identified with the word in some way so
when we when we name things we're making
them more real or this there's some kind
of shift that happens like an only I can
only really explain in from a felt sense
perspective of something relaxes in the
field yes just everyone knows their
place everything is suddenly it's like
okay that's what's going on and there's
an immense act of bravery often in doing
that because usually the things that are
in the field that are not being named
are things that are difficult to name or
things that are difficult to accept
about oneself or difficult to name about
some someone else does that that's sort
of I mean I feel yeah and I feel as well
that sense of slipping into an out of
this sense of inquiry as well like I
feel it in myself when I could when I
feel that that I'm I'm actually
listening to myself too
or can it and I'm I'm having I'm
actually interested in what comes out
there's a very definite difference there
between telling a story that I that I
know quite well there's quite a long
digression but I think I'm interested in
your thoughts well I just well one when
you said when you said these are just
been thoughts that I've never put the
language before it I felt very present
to a distinctive spaced leg of of
whatever that space is of where yeah
there's something on some level that I'm
somehow in relationship to I can I can
know that there's thoughts I've had but
when I come to terms with it but I've
never come to terms with them that like
to come to terms with something right is
a really interesting way of thinking
about it so I just known as I was on the
edge of my seat but it also felt a sense
of space a spaciousness in some way in a
relaxation yeah I think that the thing
I'm aware of well I think a one of the
one of the things that I want to look at
well what is it what is it that you're
not doing when you name the thing that's
in the space that doesn't have a word
for it right I think a lot of times the
the reason I don't say what's there
that's whatever's in the feel there's a
feeling or a thought or a hunch or I see
something in somebody else that doesn't
quite line up with me or something like
that when I don't say it it seems to me
that what I'm actually doing on some
level is I'm managing
my own perception of myself in your head
so one of the things about circling and
just kind of listening to it and doing
it was really realizing how complex it
is to be with another being there are so
much going on and one of the things
going on is is being another for others
the sense of that on some level I'm
tracking who I think you think that I am
and that if I'm really if I'm very
identified with that you think of me a
particular way right then all of a
sudden whatever I say or don't say is
gonna be about managing that hmm a lot
of times what I risk or the
vulnerability that happens right is is
it is as I'm actually getting ready to
say something that like actually to the
degree that it's authentic it's just a
degree that I don't know what's gonna
happen next and I've noticed that it was
like when somebody says all right you
know every people listening it's like
all those moments where you're like all
right I'm gonna be really honest here
and there's at a liveness that comes up
in that fear and that anxiety basically
what that means is I'm about ready I'm
now officially using speech not to
control but actually to relate meaning
when I get done talking I'm officially
gonna meet the unknown because I don't
know what's gonna happen next and I
especially don't know what you're gonna
think of me yeah that there's a link
that just came up when you were talking
about the stronger ones identity is the
harder it is to enter into this space
and I think there's a there's a link
here with so we've covered the the IDW
the intellectual dark web and the
excitement at the beginning was this
sense of kind of intellectual
exploration and maybe people changing
their minds and my my sense is if you've
really established yourself as a as a
name like
this intellectual exploration where
you're really sort of allowing yourself
to be changed by what other people are
saying is much harder to do because if
you've established yourself as with a
certain position if you've got any kind
of public profile I think in particular
it's very very hard to enter in this to
this kind of dialogue and
and it's very hard anyway just to enter
into this kind of dialogue in in public
. and also i know one of the people we
have on the channel jordan Greenhalgh
talks about this quite a lot how in a
world of zero-sum games and rival ruston
AMEX if you show up with this kind of
openness and this kind of attitude and
someone else shows up with a I want to
beat you in a debate I want to prove
that I'm right then you're the sucker in
that in that frame in a way or you would
be seen as the sucker in that frame
because this is inherently a sort of
generative way of of communicating and
there's a there's a huge level of
intimacy in a level of trust and it's
very hard to have that level of intimacy
and Trust in the public sphere because
there isn't that kind of psychological
safety a lot of the time especially if
what we're actually gonna be talking
about is a is a any kind of a charged
topic where people are really identified
with certain perspectives I really
appreciate what you're saying I a lot um
yeah because to be part to be a public
figure especially at this particular
time but I don't even think we have been
in a time like this I don't think we
have a time where there's such that we
have a history for so it's really hard
to even understand at all what's going
on right but to be a public finger today
I you know I have to say that I would
say I've been very impressed with Jordan
Peterson in the way he's encountered it
right and what I basically heard him the
way I think I've seen him encounter is
he's not responding to the the
downstream Indian you endows or
intentions of the interviewer he's just
when somebody when he kind of gets
somebody's trying to corner him he just
will just stay right where he is
and it'll just bring it back into what's
unarguable right no that's not what I'm
saying and he's been done a great job at
like being like sovereign in that way in
pressive Lee so I mean I'm like god I
don't what it takes to do that at the
level he's doing that especially
understanding his temperament right is
compassionate and more it can be
agreeable like I just kudos for him the
opportunity I've seen I've often thought
in interviews another possibility in
minute would be to actually shift the
level of the logical level of the
conversation right which what would
happen if we just actually named the
dynamic that's going on hmm
you know and we just went to a different
level of an arguable missus like it's
like whoa hang on a second I showed up
thinking that you're genuinely wanting
to know what I was saying however it
seems to me that I'm being paid into a
corner at least how I'm perceiving that
is that like is that what's happening am
I wrong
like what like yeah so where do you want
me to go in just moving the level of
conversation down and staying to the
level of unarguable ness in the dynamic
naming the game that has been played
being played as it's being played yes
totally yeah it's interesting because
that that's something that Jordan
Peterson you know the famous interview
you have with Kathy Newman yes yes he's
actually after that so there was the
famous moment where he said where she
asked him about freedom of speech and he
said well you have to have the freedom
to offend otherwise you don't have the
freedom to think and as a journalist you
should know this and she was lost for
words and he said gotcha afterwards to
his credit he he he said I shouldn't
have said gotcha I should have used that
moment you say okay can we have a real
conversation you've been playing this
role I've been playing this role can we
actually now have a conversation which I
think what you're what you're saying
yeah in that little moment that little
moment you're right was a window where
she was actually won't it actually I'll
make a distinction there I don't think
she was vulnerable I think she was
exposed
there was an opport there was an
opportunity to invite vulnerability and
for me there's a big difference between
being
posed and being vulnerable exposure has
that element of like you know what
usually why people are so scared of
being vulnerable because it's usually
they associated with you know your pants
being like pulled down at you know
recess and everyone laughing at you it's
got this element of this happened to me
and I'm suddenly exposed to the elements
vulnerability seems to be a volunteer
Ness it's like it takes a certain kind
of courage where I'm really aware of a
risk that I'm taking and I'm choosing to
take it there's a surrender yeah
absolutely absolutely and it's a
surrender and this is why this is the
important part it's a surrender that
although I'm vulnerable because I'm
doing it voluntarily whatever happens
after that right will have be much more
likely to be strengthening instability
like being bringing one more into
stability and so I would say that
following what's most alive fray is
identifying those moments where you feel
a felt sense of like Oh whatever's right
here right now if I stepped into it I'm
now stepping beyond my my own frame
right in a way that I don't know what's
gonna happen next
however to do so really takes a choice
in a sense of sovereignty and so that
sense of sovereignty goes to communion
in communion right then deepens your
sovereignty that which goes to communion
and you have those that cycle happening
and you could say that circling or inner
subjective practices are all about
enacting that and becoming better and
better and better and better and more
practiced at big my way yeah I'd like to
to pick up you mentioned Jordan Peterson
and also you mentioned something similar
in the conversation with John Beauvais
key and I think there's there's a
similarity in the way that they both
show up as lecturers there's an
aliveness to the way that they are I
felt that with Jordan Peterson before
and you
reflected that to John in your
conversation with him that even when
they're lecturing which is effectively a
monologue there's a sense of there's
something very alive about the way they
they do that it's not telling a story
there is almost a kind of inquiry there
they know where the pieces are they know
what the landscape is but they're
exploring it in real time yes I think
that almost more than anything else is
what has attracted a lot of people to
their thought is that sense of there's
such a different quality to a to a
conversation that's being genuinely
extemporaneously created there's an
aliveness to it to compare to la
academia is largely dead it's sort of
people recycling dead ideas or dead
concepts and there's there's very little
emergent about it but there is something
very emergent about John and and and
Jordan I wonder if if it's still the
same with Jordan because he's been
touring the same material for so long
sort of over a year doing 12 rules for
life but with John there's this real
sense of and he's such an embodied
thinker as well you watch him he he's
constantly just sticky lating there's
this sort of neat what comes to mind is
Nietzsche's phrase I think with a hammer
yes like it's a it's a kind of deep
embodied knowledge and that the yeah
that I think really but comes back to
this same sense of inter subjective yeah
into subjective dialogue of just being
being trying to be on that sort of edge
of what wants to emerge and being
surprised by it yes absolutely
that's I think I think I would say that
that's what
I think when people talk about what they
like about Jordan Peterson right for
example I don't know if it's that what
they saved the content that they say I
think one of the things that they like
the experience of here of listening to
him because both John and and Jordan
you're right they have this quality of
that to understand what they're saying
you must actually think the thought that
they're thinking and and because they're
right at the at onna just at the her
they're just always like trying to speak
what's just beyond the horizon right and
you almost have to allow yourself to be
changed by it yes yes yes yes you open
up and you have to there's it leaves
your ear and and what's interesting
about listening is what's interesting is
I can't think and listen at the same
time right I can feel and listen at the
same time right I can kind of look and
listen at the same time but I but if I
think while I'm trying to listen
I can't there is a very wedded leg
relationship between listening and
thinking so to really to listen to them
is to actually think the thoughts that
they're thinking in the moment right
which are are still being worked out
right so people when they listen to them
they don't it's not like they just got a
bunch of information if they went
through an experience and I really love
this about what you guys are doing and
one of the things I like about one of
the rare places where technology just
doesn't lead to more optimization it
actually creates a place such that you
can have a very untechnical experience
called deep meandering difficult
conversations to grapple with them and I
I like they were talking about this
because this is a real I don't think
there's a whole lot of language that
articulates this particular thing that
we're talking about but it can be very
very very transformative in that sense
so there's like a few different
levels like on one level they're there
they're teaching you the things that
they're talking about but they're also
teaching you how to think how by
understanding what they're talking about
you start to actually have to step on
the presuppositions that they're
stepping on to then think the thoughts
that they're thinking and I think that
that's why we want to go there's certain
videos you want to go back and listen to
over and over and over again it's
because you you have this sense that
there's a thought here that I don't have
the correct presuppositions to be able
to think all the way right so like I I
rehearse it I rehearse it I rehearse it
at some point I get the background right
that is required so like give the
foreground thought I'm feeling as well a
link back to what we were discussing
before which is naming what's in the
field because I mean Jordan says this
that a lot of people come up to him and
say you're saying what I already knew
right right I think John is doing a very
similar grand narrative and if a grand
narrative is true and Jordan also really
links this to evolutionary history and
the fact that these stories are so old
that they're actually encoded into us
there is a sense of their doing what the
process I described before that we're
actually sort of speaking making
conscious what was implicit and making
conscious what was there in the field is
basically what they're doing in a much
more in almost this sort of vast
cultural level yeah yeah it's genuine
philosophy I would say so giving a
Nietzsche talked about he's like the
philosopher the philosopher doesn't have
an original thought out of nothing
they're just the first ones to bring
into articulated thoughts what has been
emerging in the culture as they bring
into language right and indeed should
did this profoundly right and I think
which makes it an art in some ways I
mean that is that's the essence of the
artist isn't it to sort of
since what is coming before it
sense-making
right like it's really is that I just
something about I really like the way
that you guys are talking about sense
making as a thing that I'm hearing other
people use because something about that
word that gathers the appropriate term
for the the transformational activity
where knowing we're knowing one knows
through being transformed by what one
knows right that activity and there's
one way could happen is like what we're
talking about with John and Jordan other
people man when they're grap when
they're being existentially confronted
right you end up being confronted with
them if you really listen right the
other thing I appreciated it by talking
with John and then the interview was the
this connection that we that emerged in
the conversation of Christopher for
Bakey
he talked about being socially phobic
right so a man that's where it's like on
on some level Jordan Peter so don't get
the sense is he's socially phobic right
he's like loves people and you know
John's a little bit more like it's like
a little bit more introverted or
something
so there's another level of Terror for
him to be to have people know more about
him then he then he knows about them is
a very can feel very exposing but what
he said was really interesting is that
it's all the people leave but he's been
talking to like Jordan Peterson right
like like pezzi oh like the who's the
Christian guy with the white one the fun
yeah he's awesome and he was even saying
with Paul like what one of the kind of
insights that we had together as we were
talking was on some level but all the
people he's talked to he probably they
have very different like they they veer
from each other's views more than
anybody but in some ways because the
demonstration of risk that Paul is
demonstrating in doing what he's doing
right has allowed allowed John the
courage to transcend his own phobia
right and that's that link between
that's not that link where that that's
where it gets very heroic in that way
right and that other people are
demonstrating coming forward and being
vulnerable proactively right in the face
of of the risk and and it draws other
people even socially phobic people out
of the woodwork that kind of
vulnerability I think is maybe one of
the antidotes to some of the things that
you've been confronting in your channel
like some of the bullet polarization and
culture wars there's something about
that that like I think we can see live
as you're making self aware
of that emergent is that you're actually
you could say in one level you're you're
interviewing people that are
demonstrating like proactive vulnerable
courage in a way that's making them
stronger yeah and I think there's a real
hunger for that people to to see people
doing that yeah absolutely
in fact I the video that you sent me hmm
that is this the three-way conversation
between yeah I was interested to raise
that so this is a three-way conversation
between Jamie wheel Jordan greenhalgh
and Daniel SHM actin burger which we
will probably be making live on the
channel fairly soon but I but I think
it's one of the most it's about emergent
sense making it's kind of that's the the
topic of it just framing it for anyone
watching win8 when they say about that
video way hmm I just curious that mmm
like I just felt a-- hmm well it was
interesting because I already had in my
mind that I wanted to that was going to
be sort of my next question was to to
say what about that that film yeah I
just did that that when somebody says
mmm-hmm I just noticed ep
I always joke it's like if you want to
know how to circle just like going to a
room somebody says something there's
somebody goes hmm go could you put that
in another way and as they're talking
somebody else says hmm another way and
eventually if you keep doing that
eventually you'll hit god right that
there's something about that mmm that I
think is very I'm just curious what you
think about this is like feels like
that's that speaks to a sensibility mmm
when somebody says that it registers it
at both a change and a knowingness and
something got unconcealed
hmm I think I probably do that quite a
lot it might be a little bit of a verbal
tick of mine in fact I know I do because
I have to keep editing out thumbs at the
end of the well I'm doing my my editing
I pretty much do at the end of every
time the person's so I know that's
something that's but I'm sure it's not
unique to me but it's certainly
something I do quite a lot yes so
there's like the space filler mmm great
but then there's like hmm and I think
one of the things that registers is how
the ideal or the idea are actually very
connected to our bodies and sense-making
and so when somebody's impacted I've
just always noticed like encircling it's
like how I know where to bring my
attention is when some of mmm I was like
Oh something just emerged and then they
have they come to language with
something but they actually have to look
to describe it it's both intellectual
ideological right and sensory at the
same time I'm just really fascinated by
that
now who's mm-hmm the thing about that
conversation which I just thought was so
good it was so good and on so many
different levels right there's the level
of like the ideas that they talked about
right and how those those ideas got more
distinguished and developed as it went
on right so there's there's tons we
could we could talk about and in terms
of that however there is the the part
that was like one of the highlights for
me was when green hall
called out the topography of the
conversation remember that part yes and
it's really interesting because it's
like that was but like that was kind of
bugging me for about twenty minutes as I
was sitting there I was like they were
both talking to him why are they talking
to him and then he kept bringing out
more of like basically what I'm hearing
you say like the guy in the middle what
was his name again
Jamie will he was kind of that it was
really interesting to watch that
topography move in the conversation
right because he kind of was presenting
a lot of the stuff he was basically
saying like presenting stuff about yeah
but there's this rant reality on the
ground what about them dumped it and how
do we and for me that's when it started
to go towards him right like the the you
know everybody started talking to him
and then an angry I'm sorry dyslexic I'm
terrible with remembering names the
green yeah great green hole Jordan green
hole or kiloton hole he's changed his
name which makes it even even Hollow yes
I'll call him okay
George Jordan green Hall when he says oh
I want to call something out there's a
typography and then he did this other
thing like this is he is so he is so
like I don't know he he's got an
intelligence that is I I'm never quite
don't know if I've ever experienced
eighty in a kind of intelligence that
I've ever experienced there's really
something I'm still I don't know what
I'm looking at when I'm looking at him
but there's his way in where he called
out the typography but then he went to
this other move right and he was like I
think rather than focusing on it back on
Jamie
he focused in what's the nemi the other
guy the other trial Daniel Daniel it's
like actually I haven't heard anything
from you in
he just just awareness of that we're
having an experience together and
there's a way that it's going um it
disrupted things right but in such a way
that actually for me the main takeaway I
got from that like for me in terms of
content was this thing about urgency
what-what-what Greenhalgh said because
it exists like this the sense of urgency
in what Greenhalgh said was yeah real or
imagined urgency right is not to respond
it to it as in an urgent way right is to
not sacrifice the way we are with what
we were being with the way of being even
when it's a real urgency and he used the
analogy John Bob you know James Bond
right being like you know the world's
gonna fall apart and James is just kind
of like
like as if he's stirring his martini and
it's what's what's while about that is
that I I started to notice that that
typography started to happen when the
sense of urgency was kept being brought
up right is when James is like well what
about that and like he kept presupposing
the reality on the ground and like well
how are we gonna do this and he asked
the how question and that's when that
typography was was like started and then
it was named and when they named it
right and for me anyways the birth of
that conversation was like oh yeah I can
see all these places in my life where it
looks urgent and I I almost get get
dopamine out of sacrificing a way of
being in responding to the urgency and I
just is one of those ones it was an
insight that I could just frame all all
for my history and my whole life and and
that that was part of naming what was
happening in like in the fields in the
inner subjectivity
so that was my clumsy way of trying to
like
Circle circumambulate around all the
different multiple levels in which that
conversation was deeply intelligent for
me hmm
yeah I I think there were I think you're
right I mean that that was
that was a moment where it became more
self-aware in in observing with in
observing what was going on while it was
going on which then encouraged a deeper
level of presence and everyone there
yeah and yeah and I thought the just
there were so many gems in that
conversation so many different analogies
I love the Quaker example of don't speak
until spoken through was fantastic I
love the analogies with jazz as well
just the sense of being alive to what
wants to emerge and then we have and
jazz I think John also mentioned jazz in
your conversation with him because there
is or let's not link it to jazz let's
talk about any any band right we're
aware in any band it's like when someone
wants to go on a solo or when when
someone's kind of cutting someone else
and it's like you're biting my jam or
whatever it we have a terminology for it
and we all know or certainly the members
of a band know when someone is playing
from that place of real alignment and
when they're kind of spoiling someone
else's or their or their their
overwriting someone else's contribution
and that there's a whole implicit
knowledge that that we don't really have
as much in conversation or in dialogue
yes there is a way as you're talking I
really appreciate the way that you just
kind of brought that back into like oh
yeah jazz and and no not just jazz all
music and that we know there is a sense
that we know when somebody's riffing in
a way that's really gorgeous and when
somebody's riffing out of I even think
in the conversation he talked about like
some sense of narcissism or needing to
be seen or something like that right
yeah there's one really enjoyed the way
the way that Green Hall named it right
is that I got this sense of I even felt
this as he was saying it I felt this
like a little tension like something's
about to happen in the way the what
what he pointed to wasn't hurt like to
anybody personal because he could have
gone through out of well like what's in
Jamie's psychology right what's in
what's going on there like but he went
to there there's something were inside
of there's this that's happening as a
dynamic and looking at it as a Systems
sense of it right where it didn't it it
it felt like it it allowed
the personality basically right and it
and yet invited everybody to to see
themselves in the dynamic that was
happening but his spoke to something
that was transcendent and influencing
the the we if you will which led to
something in my in my view that then it
started to articulate they all started
to relax a lot more and it started to
get more jazzy right at the end of it it
was just I really think it was a
beautiful conversation and I think that
there's one of the one of the things
that I was how I was listening to it
because when my deep interest is with
circling
is beyond just people's personal growth
that how is it that we can have
dialogues and conversations even when
it's not about something personal right
that like how can that ideas be
expressed right and such that that that
can have this autopoietic self of world
work oh fitting each other and opening
and being vulnerable not having to even
talk about ourselves at all but be able
to talk about ideas right and just walk
away more ourselves and enrich then we
walked in so I think there's a lot of
different levels of intelligibility that
we could we could draw out of that
conversation so I really appreciate thee
that you were inclined to do it
mmm yeah when I knew that the three of
them were gonna be in the same place I
kind of knew that it was it was
something that we had to to get on
camera I wanted to just make one last
link which is this linking between what
we're talking about in terms of a kind
of interpersonal into subjective
dialogue and the sort of the systems
change and the societal cultural peace
which which is something that Jordan and
Daniel and Jamie as well a really
bringing this sense of the collective
intelligence is something that we're in
desperate need of as a next evolutionary
step yeah and what and that's sort of
the the piece of the synthesis that I
I'm really yeah profoundly like that I I
just I just love the way that these deep
systems thinkers and real cutting-edge
intellects have all arrived in this same
place that maybe you and I know quite
implicitly through our counseling and
personal growth experiences of
which is a sense that I had when I first
started really doing this work it's like
wow this this is actually a modality
that is is essential for us all to to
move into this this ability to to be
generative beyond the ego as much as we
can or at least when there is
egotistical stuff we can call it out and
then hopefully encourage ourselves into
a deeper level of connection to have
them saying which is something I also
feel fundamentally to be true this is
now existentially important for us as a
species and is probably the generator
function to use Daniels language it's
the it's the generator for the new
system that we all feel needs to to come
like this sort of sense of a paradigm
shift that many people have spoken about
for many years but we're all seeing this
this sense of cultural breakdown or
cultural stress and what's required as a
new system based on honesty based on
non-rivalry based on these kind of
relationships that are not zero-sum
they're based on trust they're based on
vulnerability obviously it's a very
fragile thing in a world and they use
the language of sort of game a and game
B to to talk about this but it then
links it all back together there in a
way that I find really pleasing
aesthetically I guess yeah yeah what I'm
just curious that that I wasn't
expecting you to say that like pleasing
your aesthetically something about that
seems important like that I may maybe
what we're saying is that it pleases you
aesthetically that there's something
beautiful about yes the way that we're
talking about it
I'm one I think if I look at the gravity
that I felt and that like and as I sit
with like the kind of gravity I get from
oh yeah it's because there is a way in
which I feel yeah
it's there there's something beautiful
about the way that we're listening to
this and sensing it and that maybe I'm
just wondering maybe that sense of the
sense of beauty that shines forth from
the inquiry in the way that we're
talking about it I wonder if that's an
indication of that well maybe were at
the right spot hmm I'm thinking about
well yeah I I did I had a sense of
direction too that I wouldn't yeah I
don't like that I don't like that
analogy of the right spot because I
think there's a sense of there's a sense
of movement I mean the aesthetic that
that felt right at the moment I think
it's it's true but there's also
something that I think a lot of a lot of
people are picking up from that the
people who are who are following what
we're doing and immediately recognize
that no like yes I can see what you guys
are doing even though we can't really
name it there's a sense of I can see
where you guys are going I can see where
you're yeah and there's a sense of
evolution as a sense of a teleology but
I think a lot of people are picking up
to this conversation so and it's and
there's a Reckitt there's a recognition
there's a deep recognition and I think
that is an aesthetic sense oh I see I
mean none of us know where the
destination is or what the that we know
those are there there but we don't know
what where there is yet and as soon as
we start thinking we do know where that
there is then we're no longer that's
when the journey ends in some way right
because we have
to keep alive - - and make that making
sense prematurely of okay it's this
thing is the trap and I think a lot of
people have actually I don't want to
name names but I think a lot of people
who've been on this emerging current
have crystallized around a certain
perspective and then once you're
crystallized around that you're then
dragged down into a sort of into a more
sort of polarized fixated position that
you're then having to defend rather than
stay open right right so there's a so
Dalek I experience beauty as you're
talking like in a way that you're
bringing that together I think it's and
you said something about yet spot the
Rick were right at the right spot isn't
quite the right word what I heard you
say is yes because I think that has to
be a sense of movement yes like I feel a
sense of movement rather than in the
right spot it's like where there's an
analogy yeah it's like surf surfing a
wave I guess or I think Jamie has used
an analogy that that works I can't
really remember what it is at the moment
but it's yeah it's it's not fixated in a
position and it's it is like an ecstatic
temporality in a sentiment in the Haida
bearing sense of the word I think that
awareness of so I made a video one time
just to try to get this notion of a
horizon I think it's a horizon that
we're talking about right of that the
ground right there's chaos on the ground
yet as I look up on the horizon and I
see more of the issues that give the
ground right as I keep looking at the
rising one hand to me look at the grass
the horizon is the sense that there's
something beyond it by definition of
horizon is something you can't ever
reach but you can move towards and by
the time you get to it you see more of
what it was what was concealed so that
sense of ravit revel reveal which is an
interesting word agree to the group
original notion of truth is La Fea right
truth is the event of unconcealed this
that and this is what I'm kind of
feeling is beautiful about the space of
the conversation is for me is that's
genuine sense of revealing where where
it's you could both veil both means to
Reeve ale and to unveil at the same time
and there's a sensibility that they're
the same word and there's something
about that what it seems to take to be
with what's emerging is a sense of one
recognizing a preciousness that's worthy
of mailing right and that and that
there's ways that you can reveal but
conceal at the same time and thus you
can't name it and make it a noun and
then become identified with it and so
what I'm hearing is you're just really
self-aware it's part of the self
awareness of it if I'm hearing you're
right is yeah it's really important that
we that that we not we be aware that
it's unnameable in some way because it's
the moment we name it I put a shell
around myself as the moment I become
Friddle mmm so there's something about
this strength vulnerability opening to
novelty in such a way that deepens my
sense of security yeah it rises out of
my grappling with or with Heidegger hmm
so it's like it's it's it's more like a
it's like a phenomenology per munetaka
phenomenology hermetic existential
phenomenology basically who was it
Heidegger who talked about the
thoroughness yep yeah yeah I was really
struck by that yeah Heidegger is one of
those ones are just like
I didn't even know how by grappling with
Heidegger for the first three years that
we started circling I had no idea what
the connections was until I kind of uh I
started realizing it after the fact of
how it transformed how I was seeing the
world because that's the thing about
Heidegger and phenomenology is you would
say that uh that that the greatest
mystery isn't so much beyond the horizon
is that which is most near it's
concealed nearness so lots of so that
and that's what I think what I realized
is circling is so much about is like
what's here like what's already always
having found myself already begun it I'm
inside of it there's reading Heidegger
over and over and over again of him
doing that not understanding what the
 he was talking about all of a
sudden I was like I look around and I
watched my single I'm like
German yes guy this has
been a really wonderful conversation I
think that I'm really sensing the
quality of listening an inquiry that
you're you're bringing to it which has
been yeah I've said I felt myself kind
of going into new territory just because
of the quality of the listening and and
presence that you've brought so thank
you very much for for that think you
received over here deeply and I'm sure
we will do it again sometime
absolutely
rebel wisdom is a new sense making
platform bringing together the most
rebellious and inspiring thinkers from
around the world if you're enjoying our
content then you can help us make more
by becoming a subscriber which will give
you access to a load of exclusive films
also you can then join our group zoom
calls to discuss the ideas in the films
and you can send us ideas for questions
for upcoming interviews we're also
looking for talented people to help us
out with editing graphics music that
kind of thing and if you're a regular
viewer you'll know we talk a lot about
the value of embodying or actually
living out the ideas that we talk about
so that's why we run regular events in
London check out the links on the
website for more and hope to see you
soon