[Music]
the intellectual dark web is a name
given to a group of alternative media
personalities from Joe Rogan to Sam
Harris and Jordan Peterson could it also
be a spontaneous emergence of a new and
more highly evolved level of
consciousness into the media landscape
that's what the integral philosopher Ken
Wilber believes and it's something he's
been predicting since the 90s Ken Wilber
had serious health problems for the last
decade that is now returning to the
conversation he believes that the
intellectual dark word is the start of a
genuinely next level or integral
conversation one that lets go of the
ideology and fixed thinking of the past
and can embrace paradox and nuance see
stages apply to an enormous number of
different skills and so you can have
dozens of different names for these
stages and it can get confusing so one
of the things we do is just give them
different colors so the previous
ethnocentric stage we call amber and in
this orange rational world centric
universal care stage we call orange
those two stages
amber ethnocentric conventional
traditional and then this new orange
universal universal rights these started
to arise again during the Western
enlightenment with the sixties new stage
world centric development ended to
emerge and that's what we call green or
it was multicultural so it wasn't just a
belief in individuality and its freedom
there's a lot of different opinions
about post-modernism on the intellectual
dark grip in general nobody likes it my
point some things we talked about they
said a lot of it really is off-the-wall
extreme if you
bad have you you want to think about it
but they it also had a core of some true
if they're partial notions and those
truths are initially what actually
helped to drive that stage of
development and it did start to call
itself postmodern because it was
reflecting on the previous modern stage
of orange liberal rationale Universal
care individual liberty freedom freedom
of speech it reflected on all of those
intended to have sort of a critique of
those but it's still having trouble
finding ways to actually integrate them
and so it tends to take a stance that
believes in radical egalitarianism and
so it's version of equality is unlike
the previous orange version of equality
oranges version is liberty and freedom
of opportunity for green and it's
egalitarianism it wants equal outcome
and this becomes enormous lee
conflictual is there there too they
don't get along well at all for starters
and given the fact that the original
orange equality actually meant freedom
of opportunity oranges version of
equality was also often just called
freedom it was in favor of the freedom
of individuals whereas greens version of
equality equal outcome and so it can't
just be called equality or equity and so
you had freedom and equality and Alex de
Tocqueville was one of the first to
point out that because human beings are
born with different capacities and you
can have either freedom or equality but
you can't have both
and that's exactly right you you could
almost frame this as the division
between classical liberalism and
post-modernism that a lot of people
by the intellectual dark Weber really
fighting hard on behalf of classical
liberalism that's exactly right and one
of the things that happen as you go back
and look at this original right and left
distinction and again there there are
several ways that those can be defined
but one of the ways that they can be
defined does have to do with these
stages of development I mean I'm not
just agreeing with the other ways
Jonathan hight has a particular
description of it
Jordan Peterson gives at least two
definitions of left and right one based
on big factor analysis progressives tend
to be more open and conservatives tend
to be more conscientious particularly
suborder a subset subtype order and they
also seized a hierarchies of competence
as necessary and so the right tends to
support those but any sort of
hierarchies tend to generate inequality
and so the left hates that and tries to
tear those down so you need both of
those interacting I agree with all of
that there's also a factor that you see
left and right as you track these stages
of development and particularly going
from the original amber ethno Center
into orange freedom world center into
green equality world center and so we
started out we had the original
traditional right tends to be a snow
centric and again it can be a bit racist
and a bit sexist and it's not
embarrassed about those it's fine with
that it thinks that's the way it should
be and then you have orange which was
the original liberal philosophy of
individual rights and rights for all
universal individual rights and that
really was profound that got rid of
slavery that means
enormous number of changes that happened
with that and then we moved up to the
green multicultural which was really
toast liberal in many cases became
anti-liberal it doesn't really like free
speech it doesn't really like individual
rights
it wants group rights group identity
it's very willing to curtail free speech
or even on the other hand compel free
speech in order to serve social justice
ends and that infuriates an enormous
number of people on on the dark ribbon
and I think rightly rightly so so what
started to happen is that as the
original left which started this orange
individual equal opportunity as I don't
know exactly how many of them but I'm
gonna say half about half of them as
progressive bumped up to the new green
starting in the sixties the other half
stayed for the original liberal left
values but now I had an old left and a
new left the right essentially given
this new stage that had been added it
bumped up a stage two or half of it did
so the old original right stated
ethnocentric including energy streams
white supremacist Nazis fascists but
then the other half bounced up to orange
and they actually started inhabiting the
values of the traditional liberal and
but these are now being embraced by
people on the right and so what you see
in the intellectual dark web as the
Democrats continued to move into this
multicultural egalitarian green equity
movement is that those progresses were
leaving behind the original liberal
values including things like free speech
whereas the people that have
come Volkl supporting those super values
were now people from the rain they were
new rights they were Republicans that
were doing that and why seem for example
Brett says I don't even I'm
flabbergasted at the fact that the right
is now holding the values that as a
leftist I grew up believing and almost
all the people on the intellectual dark
web including Dave Rubin Jordan Peterson
will say I'm a classic liberal and it's
not that they're at orange most of them
are actually second tier the second tier
is the stage that can integrate
literally all of the first stages but
what's getting left out is you have this
green multicultural Michalik arianism
that's being taken to such extremes it's
really becoming absolute istic in its
view so you have absolute istic to
multiplicity to relativistic and the
problem with relativistic is it becomes
very open to what's called performative
contradictions becomes very open to self
contradictory statements it does it
almost all the time so Edelman came for
example that it is universally
undeniably true that there is no
universal truth it'll maintain that all
knowledge is social construction it's
all an interpretation it all depends
upon which culture it's arising in and
yet everything that I just said that
represents the green point of view it
maintains that it's view is not
culturally constructed it's true for all
people at all places at all time it's
not a matter of interpretation it's got
real truth nobody else has truth his
objective truth doesn't exist
but that view itself is held to be
objectively true by the post modernist
so they do get caught up in this
enormous
kind of contradiction and they do tend
to absolute eyes their view there are
two ways you can end up an absolutist ik
beliefs one is that you're just on your
way up through the growth stages
yourself and you're at that stage and
people by the way can state that states
that entire adult life the fact that we
have higher stage doesn't mean that you
have to develop there it's one of the
problems but so they'll have that AB
statistic view just because they're on
the way of passing through it but if at
any higher stage you latch on to review
with such absolute uncritical absolutism
you can start to regress to the actual
absolutist ik stage because that's where
you feel right that's when you feel yeah
this is I know I've got it right this is
it say end up regressing to an
absolutist ik ethnocentric stage and a
problem with that is that it is
ethnocentric it is tribal and identity
politics lends itself to tribalism
because what you're emphasizing is your
particular tribe and you'll know if
you're doing that from a world centric
stance if when you talk about your tribe
in addition to whatever important
differences there are you also talk
about what your tribe has in common with
all the other tribes then that's world
center there's a unity and diversity
with that but if you just talk about
your tribe and how it's different from
all the other tribes and is there some
sort of special attention is gas
ethnocentric absolute istic tribalism
and so what we have is original
far-right ethnocentric tribalists being
joined by a really highly developed
progressive green identity politics that
have regressed
- that amps AB statistic retry Balai
stage which of those two do you think is
more dangerous right now well that
depends in a sense on what community you
look at the international dark web is
mostly alarmed by the fact that the
far-right and and by the way the even
them not many of them have an actual
developmental framework to interpret it
with they still intuitively understand
this stuff and so I think it was my she
thought was that first began referring
to that far left as the regressive left
and that's what they were in tune is
that this left is actually regressing
back down to this ethnocentric
absolutist at stage and the concern for
them from Jonathan hi to Jordan Peterson
to Dave Rubin is it college campuses are
now overrun and academia itself is over
run by believers in this absolutist ik
green multicultural egalitarian identity
politics and they're doing it so much
they really are continue to regress to
AB statistic stages and so in absolutist
ik stages you don't even have to talk to
the other person because your tribe is
right you know your tribe is right
anybody disagrees with you is Hitler and
what's your bizarre is that we used to
look at the far right for that kind of
absolutist ik insanity now we're getting
it from the far left that's exactly
right it's like what the hell happened
how did that occur and that regression
back down to retry belies polarize
stance that's part of the horrifying
problem that we're now facing in culture
wars that's when the main things
driving it so the only value that was
getting left out as you had these
regressive wrote it had the normal fart
right and the regressive far left is so
Green was down to amber and amber was at
amber and there was just orange sort of
hanging out there by itself it had old
Democrats who would really no longer
speak up for that because the new
democratic orientation is multicultural
egalitarian identity politics and so the
old traditional liberals and the
Democrats don't have much of a say it is
again Republicans that are now voicing
support for individual rights free
speech and so on their concern is that
far-right hate groups a very real
concern in the culture and very few
IDW people would deny that but their
concern it's the way it's moving into
into academia and simply sort of taking
over that that entire area most many of
the people that belong to the
installation so dye Club at one time
started out as leftists and they were
leftists when left meant orange liberal
and then his left started to move into
this illiberal egalitarianism and
identity politics the original Democrats
original leftists looked at and said I
don't recognize that party anymore
something's wrong with that and so most
conspicuously somebody like Dave Rubin
well actually you know have a whole pub
conversion and say you know why I am no
longer a member of the left and what
they mean is this green extremist
far-left regressive stance the
regressive left that's really really a
problem one of the things that needs to
happen in my opinion if you look at all
of these developmental models and you
see these stages up to green they're all
first here and you realize that first
here by definition can't integrate each
other they actually sort of disagree
with each other they're greater or
lesser extent but there's a disagreement
all the way down as soon as you start
getting to some of the stages the second
tier they tend to look at all of the
previous stages as being important they
realize if nothing else everybody's born
at square one it has to go through all
those stages so we can't just look at
somebody who's at ethnocentric amber we
can't just look at somebody who's at
orange we look at somebody at green and
give them you know a nice hour to
reasoned argument about why they're
wrong and they shouldn't be you know
thinking that way that's not how you
move through stages of development
stages of development you can't reason
somebody out of the stage of development
they're in somebody once said you can
only reason somebody out of his stance
that they were reasons dinh - well
you're not reasoned into stages of
development they start you know when
you're one month old and you go through
in PSA you know six stages of sensory
motor development and then couple stages
of pre operational development couple
stages concrete operational and then
into formal operational orange reason
and so on and you have to go through it
just a whole series of trial and error
and working out of the stage trying to
make it work when it starts to fail and
you start to open yourself to new
approaches and because we all have these
high
stages as potential in us them that
happen is the next higher stage can
start to come down what we're looking at
right now and and one of the reasons I
think that the intellectual dark web has
particularly arisen at this time is that
we really did have the emergence of this
new stage of development and it really
is radically relativistic radically
egalitarian prison great deal of
emphasis on equal outcome and she's any
differences at all as the product of
oppression or discrimination and that's
what so many of the intellectual dark
web people are fighting against they're
not saying okay well they're saying look
it's it's possible that some of that is
oppression no doubt but they're also
other reasons that we see these
differences and they might have to do
with different interests in male and
female for example nobody is holding
that as a absolutist ik view but it's a
view that they're not going to rule out
and you start to see this in a enormous
number of important areas in terms of
just how man on average and women on
average have different types of
interests in just what they find
interesting there's no evidence they
have different capacities it's not that
manner
cognitively smarter than women or
anything like that it's just they have
different things that they consider
important in life and they tend to
pursue those and part of the problem
that hasn't been answered well with the
green far-left feminists is okay which
is how do we handle that if we have that
in today's college the majority of
degrees
are going to women in almost every major
area they're more women in medicine more
women in law more women to psychology in
sociology in psychotherapy and so on the
only places that the men still dominate
a surges the STEM fields and so are the
fact that there are eighty percent of
women in psychology then does that mean
men are being oppressed I mean shouldn't
we be doing something about that if
we're trying to worry about getting it
to 50/50 and those are the issues that
aren't addressed very well the
suggestion from developmental studies is
it those kinds of issues start to first
of all be conceived more adequately from
second tier and second tier of canvases
meet two stages of development that can
actually integrate all the previous
stages they do have a capacity to
prioritize they do bring things together
into coherent systems they'd have an
enormous amount of diversity but they
also have a common unity with them in
your conversation with Tom and Mark you
mentioned something very interesting
about integral looks for what is missing
because I often get criticized or people
say you focus a lot of your content on
the shortcomings of the left which is
true and they say you don't focus so
much on the right but your perspective
is if the big problem for us moving
forward is are the blind spots of
progressivism then integral will
automatically look at those more is that
for exactly what you have with it
certainly as far as I can tell the vast
majority of the intellectuals on the
dark web there have been several
accounts of what they have in common
I wouldn't necessarily disagree with
those thinks a lot of truth to that but
the one that I would add
is almost all of them are thinking from
second-tier stages they really want to
know how all these things fit together
and what they really don't want to do is
just a priori exclude something because
they just know that's wrong they don't
do that and that's why there's this
intentional drive for example to have
open conversations among people that do
have disagreements and this is actually
set up as part of the ongoing dark web
that's what happens as you know there's
a whole series of shows on the road
where Sam Harris and Jordan Peterson
will argue these points and moderated by
Brett Weinstein or Douglas Murray
somebody like that and thousands of
people showing up for these things and
they last two and three hours people are
enormous ly interested in these topics
and that's what's so important about the
fact that they are coming together on a
place that this almost happened nowhere
else but the net that does seem to be
one of the ways the net is now kind of
overcoming how it got derailed a bit
when it started
you know decade or two ago everybody
particularly the boomers would say oh
this is going to be a global brain it's
going to unite all humanity it's going
to be the single greatest unifying force
in the history of the world and then
about 15 decades later it's the single
most polarizing thing that happened it
just turns out that how you can search
data means you can search for those
things it's just you agree with and then
you end up talking there and then you
end up in the circle echo chambers and
the polarization gets greater and
greater and greater and then it's added
to you by the so-called Mardi Gras
effect in Mardi Gras when you're wearing
a mask and people can't see you you tend
to do a lot nastier
things than if they could actually see
who you are because you have a you have
a mask well that's what social media is
like you can mask yourself and be
anything anything you want so it
encourages you to come uh it's a race to
the bottom in other words is a race to
the to the not not our better angels but
our worse Devils and those those tend to
come out so now what we're seeing with
dark webs a little bit of an overcoming
of that we're starting to find ways of
building these holes do you think this
polarization is an existential threat
yeah and certainly so what do we do
about it certainly in terms of the
degree of extremism of poet polarization
I think Jonathan Hite did a study
looking at polarization among typically
polarized groups so he came up with a
series of measurements that measured the
degree of polarization between groups
like male and female wealthy and
disadvantaged black in white you know
educated uneducated all that kind of
thing
and he has some sort of arbitrary scale
that was something like around the 0 to
20 where 20 was most polarized and 0 was
at least polarized and so he found
things like male and female and rich and
poor educated uneducated and so on that
degree of polarization went up to about
10 points of separation and then there
is a huge leap all the way up to left
and right and that was 18 points I mean
it was just that was off-the-wall
polarized and what was even more
disturbing is that if you'd looked at
left and right say 50 years ago and you
had polls saying what do you whether
your left or right
think about your opponents left to right
and and typical
answer would be things like I really do
disagree with them I think their hearts
in the right place but I I just can't
agree with what they're saying
the typical response now where the
majority of responses are the other
group they're evil
they're just demonic there's nothing
they say is right and the sooner we get
rid of them the better that's not good
and that's increasingly what's starting
to happen particularly and one of the
real problems is that as you look at
these ongoing stages of development
throughout human history you do have
kind of a leading edge and it does tend
to set the sort of tenor of the epoch of
that time so you have really brilliant
developmentalist like jean gebser who's
traced these stages in terms of their
worldview and so he finds we said there
were on average six to eight stages up
to today further stages coming but
gasser comes up with stages that he
named I'll tweak these a little bit but
on our cave stage a magic stage a mythic
stage a rational stage a pluralistic
relativistic stage and an integral
second-tier stage and those who are
unfolding over history as well and part
of what we're seeing right now is the
emergence of that integral or
second-tier stage really for the first
time in history now it wasn't that there
weren't very advanced individuals who
had that kind of cognition certainly you
know Aristotle patinas that kind of
individual but in terms of having like
around ten percent of the population
reached those stages whenever we see
about 10 percent reached that leading
edge we do tend to see a sort of tipping
point in culture and that's
what happened with the Westerner
alignment for example really only about
10% of the population was actually at
that orange formal operational cognitive
stage but those values just started to
kind of seep out a bit and it wasn't
that people would just fully accept them
if they did they'd actually be at the
Orang stage themselves but they were
more open to them and and they became
not as reactionary to them so even
something like the American Civil War
where you're having people fight to end
ethnocentric slavery they're still less
than 10% of the population is actually
at those stages but you know impacted
enough people that close to a million
young men and women died trying to end
slavery I mean that's those kinds of
things are just profound the same thing
happened in the 60s when we started to
get a green emergence as soon as it went
over around 10% we actually got the
so-called revolution of the 60s and that
was when we started introducing all of
these radically egalitarian civil rights
movements and so on and then even
concerning the environment as a living
organism we had to give attention to the
environment and all of those were part
of the healthy aspects of green is what
they introduced but the problem is that
as green continued to become more and
more extreme more and more radical more
and more egalitarian more and more equal
outcome period that was the leading edge
of our overall evolution starting right
around the 60s and that's where all of a
sudden we started to see this shift that
people are still trying to figure out
right now they're circling what the hell
happened to liberal values this is a
Democratic Party I grew up with and and
and then also your people like licensing
and this is
the Republican Party I grew up with
either there was this wild shift in
terms between these fundamental value
structures in addition to all these
other things that were happening but
this was happening and because green as
a leading edge was becoming increasingly
broken increasingly extremist and
absolute istic and even regressive
that's a disaster for a leading edge
because it started to fall apart
and it's self-contradictions caught up
with it more and more and more all it
really degenerative into four
foundational places to rest was Neel ISM
first of all because there is no
objective truth so truth is out the
window and then in terms of well what
values are right no value is the right
they're all equally right so narcissism
is that leading edge tended to be
governed by that tag team from
postmodern hell niall ISM and narcissism
and those are horrifying that you can't
have a leading edge of culture driven by
nihilism and narcissism because it has
no conception of which way to go
when all you've got is neo listen ok
well I got no idea what's the right way
to go so I'll just do my own deal and
then everybody's you know retry belies
and and it's a disaster
I know many people who would say that
your thought is one of the most
influential things in their development
in their growing up do you have a sense
why and there was a real high-water mark
for integral probably in the mid 2000s
do you have a set had the impact on the
world that you hoped it would have and
and and if if not why not
yes I've been very actually happily
impressed by by how its how it's doing
one of
major my my students have have divided
my overall work into five major stages
and you can see a continuity through all
of them and in an odd way they really do
transcend and include I mean each of the
each time I sort of proposed some some
new additions to integral theory they're
in almost all cases they've included all
the previous stuff I don't disagree with
that I've just added some more stuff
that I found that's important and so it
sort of keeps going like that when I hit
around so called
stage 4 it was a book called sex ecology
spirituality and it really did cause a
bit of a sensation at least in these
small circles that think about these
kinds of things and for about the next
10 years there was an enormous amount of
theoretical talk about it and so that
was happened all around the world there
were over like I say the book has been
translated into upwards of 30 the
foreign languages they're integral
Institute's starting or started in
several dozen countries and so on and so
there's this this really strong
theoretical discussion about these
issues again you can be critical any of
the good ideas that came up I
immediately incorporated but the net
result of all of that tended to be
essentially the same model that people
had started discussion discussing there
wasn't that many
radical changes to it that that were put
forward in unbelievable ways and that 10
years we went from around 1995 and the
book was done till around 2005 but then
after that 10 year period as the the
framework emerged more or less intact
people started taking it and just
running out and applying and when they
started doing that they they stopped in
a sense having conferences on that or
getting together in discussing that so
it looked like it had just dispersed and
in a certain sense it had but what had
happened previously is that if you were
theoretically thinking about something
like this and we had journals that were
being published at the time that were
peer-reviewed based on integral meta
theory and there were over 60 different
human disciplines that were
reinterpreted completely using this
integral framework to make more
comprehensive and inclusive and holistic
approaches I mean we had internal
education internal psychology integral
sociology integral art into pro history
integral medicine integral business
integral law literally over 60
disciplines like that and all of them
claimed to be happier with the result
they certainly included more aspects
than they had previously a lot of people
are quite suspicious of spirituality
yeah partly because they see that a lot
of spiritual communities go bad and
partly as a journalist I feel I have to
ask you this question as well and there
have been a spiritual communities that
have had a lot of bad press that have
gone bad the most high-profile probably
being Andrew Cohen and he he's been very
like even very close to him in the past
what lessons can we learn from that yeah
this is one item the
general framework has shed an enormous
amount of light on and again I'm not
saying that there aren't other factors
that are important but here's one that's
really really central and it came up
earlier when we mentioned things like
yes Brutus can be doing this practice
for certain Isis okay whoa I mean if all
we're saying is you know do this kind of
trying to find alternate unity
consciousness that's not enough because
it could produce Isis or it could
produce a nice Buddhist community so
what's the difference one of the most
striking things we found is that if you
look at that actual waking up or
enlightenment experience which again
wherever it shows up is claimed to be
just simply by itself the Silman bonum
just by itself it has everything that is
perfect and and you get that and you've
got it all you don't need anything else
that is complete liberation those
experiences aren't the first person
direct immediate experiences so again
it's not a belief system it's not even a
mythic system in a typical sense of like
Moses parting the Red Sea or Lot's wife
turning into a pillar of salt or
anything like that
these are direct immediate experiences
that you have so you can't see these
stages of growing up by introspective
and one of the things that that means is
that every major spiritual tradition
including the meditative traditions that
looked within and plumb the depths of
first-person state experiences not one
of them saw structures of growing up at
all so there's not a single meditative
system anywhere in the world that hasn't
understanding into stages of growing up
literally they're not there so that's
why you can be it almost any stage of
growing up
and go through the whole sequence of
waking up eight but you'll never know
that you'll just be interpreting that
according to the states of growing up
that you're at and that turns out to be
disastrous because up and kill around
the Western enlightenment when that
orange worldcentric grammar started to
emerge people were having waking up
experiences and interpreting them from
each ethnocentric stages because that's
essentially where they were and so they
could have this extraordinary experience
of oneness but it could be had only
through their own particular approach
and so they ended up being indeed
ethnocentric even though they had this
experience of oneness so that's how
somebody in Isis who's literally at a
viciously fundamental ethnocentric stage
of development can still have this
waking up experience but they're going
to interpret it in terms of that
ethnocentric stage this is an experience
that I'm having with Allah and only
those who accept Allah can have that
experience and Samuel even say you know
as these terrorist bombers are about to
blow themselves up many of them sort of
have this smile of bliss and contentment
because they're in this mystical state
of waking up and I'm sure some of them
are but they're having it at this
ethnocentric bigoted prejudice stage of
development and waking up won't cure
that that's the nightmare Loren Shorty's
is almost none of the Western
developmental models have any of the
waking up states they don't have an
understanding of enlightenment or
awakening or the great liberation or
moksha or Satori or any of that and so
you have these stages of growing up and
they have no understanding of waking up
and then you have these systems of
waking up and they have no comprehension
of growing up stages and these two
things are relatively independent it can
be very high in one and very low on the
other very high in this and very low in
this but the point is there's not a
single system in the world including
spiritual systems that include both of
those ever and that means humanity to us
entire history has been training itself
to be broken so part of the problem even
when you have a religious movement a
spiritual movement like Andy Cohen and
they are very much aware of waking up
station that's what they're after they
don't have an understanding of these
growing up stages and so they can be
very much at ethnocentric with highly
authoritarian guru dominant types of
orientations and still be having
stunning waking up experiences but then
interpreting it all in terms of just
this specific group is getting it and
just their leader is the one that's
giving this to you
and that's exactly what Andrew Cohen got
into and he understood integral theory
quite well and he and I actually would
do a dialogue in in their magazine what
his enlightenment and when he ended up
crashing well first of all he was always
very appreciative about the integral
model he talked about it a lot but he
himself still got caught in these
growing up stage aspects and he finally
ended up interpreting what caused his
crash is that he had this very mythic
ethnocentric amber aspect of himself
that really did take himself as being
the one in ultimate guru
it was the most enlightened person on
the face of the planet this is all
falling down into ethnocentric and he
lower the stage right under that is ego
centric and you had some questions about
or doesn't that happen yeah that happens
because it's just right there he got
caught in that and that's how he came to
interpret the problem and so he's it
took several years off did a lot of work
on that issue and he's now coming back
he has something that I think he just
calls integral Triple Gem something
along that line
and by the way Buddha Dharma Sangha
that's another version of the four
quadrants is another I we it Trinity so
most of the problems with spiritual
communities is that no matter how
awakened they are truly having great
degrees of waking up they're not
addressing and they have no way to
address that stage of growing up and as
we've seen that can be in virtually any
of these stages and it can be if you're
at a deeply ethnocentric stage and you
ever profound waking up all you've got
is an enlightened not see literally that
can happen by the way Himmler and those
guys were really into yoga and these
kinds of states josiah diocese one of
their huge problems that we have with
religion in the world today is it all of
them developed when waking up was
understood and there was no
comprehension of growing up and so none
of their teachings say oh and by the way
make sure that as you understand these
great truths that you're also developing
so that you get at least into
worldcentric
because if you're less than that you're
not helping you are literally going to
be open to a fascist totalitarian nazi
you name it bad news situation and all
having a waking up experience will do is
making you more certain of your presence
in your
and that is a disaster
[Music]
you
[Music]