welcome to the stola the stoah is a
digital campfire where we go here and
dialogue about what matters most at the
night's edge what's happening now
[Music]
all right welcome everyone to the stoah
I am Peter Lindbergh the Stewart of the
stoah and the stoah is a digital
campfire for us to cohere and dialogue
about what matters most at the knife's
edge of this moment and today my friend
Adam Robert who runs the the side view
which is an independent publisher in
media environment that integrates theory
and practice while running parallel to
academic and public conversations so in
a moment I'm going to hand it to Adam
he's going to give a 15 20 minute talk
on philosophy death and dying or the
philosophy the practice of death and
dying and then we're gonna do some Q&A
or warm-up Adam with some questions and
how the Q&A is gonna work is if you have
a question for Adam just write it in the
chat box and then I'll unmute you and
then call your name and then you reach
your question - Adam or if you want me
to read on your behalf just put your
name there indicate that somehow and
I'll read it on your behalf all right so
I don't hand it over to you great thanks
everybody for being here looks like we
got a good group I'm assuming you can
all hear me okay but just signal somehow
if I'm not coming across doing good okay
so I wanted to start maybe we can just
take a few moments to gather ourselves
and collect our attention together so
feel free to close your eyes or
sit still and let yourself catch up to
wherever you are right now
and I invite you to relax and take a
deep breath
and let's find just a little bit of
silence together
you
you
okay thank you so what I
do today is off reuse concepts and ideas
that come out of Western traditions of
contemplation and philosophy that I
think may aid us in navigating the times
ahead so I'll say a little bit about
practice in general and then I want to
talk about a few texts namely I'm going
to talk about Plato's dialogue the
Phaedo and I'm also going to talk about
peer hadou and his reading of philosophy
as a spiritual exercise
I haven't developed all of these ideas
as much as I'd like to just yet so I'm
hoping that we can have a little
discussion afterwards and maybe unfold
these themes a little bit further I'll
also post a list of the texts I'm using
in the talk if anyone wants to follow up
on them later but as a sort of preamble
to this discussion I was recently
reminded of a passage in Thomas mertens
book contemplative prayer which I think
might help us orient orient ourselves a
little bit before we begin he he makes
this really helpful distinction in this
text between what he calls a charismatic
monastic spirit and an institutional
monastic spirit the institutional spirit
is driven by like structures and history
and rules and it's more authoritarian
and it's a little bit rigid and it's has
a kind of ascetic nature to it but the
charismatic spirit he says is is rooted
more in in compassion and care and
prayer but it also has this interesting
quality of operating outside of
monasteries and institutions it has a
kind of it's more of like a this worldly
kind of practice and Merton is is he's
really clear that both types of
monasticism are really important you
can't you can't do too much with without
one or the other but he says that the
the charismatic type is unusual in that
it flourishes in what he calls offbeat
situations and so this is a spear
that grows out of people who may not
even have explicit monastic connections
at all so I kind of feel like we're
living in one of these offbeat
situations right now
and so mertens invocation of this kind
of offbeat monasticism felt like the
right attitude to adopt both in my life
and practice right now but also in this
in this kind of discussion right this is
a very unusual kind of virtual campfire
gathering sort of talk on the internet
here so I've been feeling a little bit
like an offbeat monastic and I have a
feeling like we all might be off mate
might be offbeat monastics for for a
little bit for a little while longer
here so I just I liked that framing for
the talk in general but when I talk
about philosophical and contemplative
practice I often use this word askesis
which just means exercise or training to
describe a process where we undergo some
kind of change in our being some kind of
transformation and especially a change
in our perception and so askesis is the
route of words like ascetic or
asceticism and so when you think of
ascetic practice you might think of
things like fasting or celibacy
physically and during trials or maybe
maybe this image of a monk living in
isolation but it also includes things
like meditation and prayer practices of
care and caring visionary experiences so
either sort of contemplative visionary
experiences or psychedelic visionary
experiences or also just like kind of
examinations of conscience like sort of
daily rituals of examination and and and
practice what connects all of these
different practices though is that they
they have this function of working on
our inner and outer senses and they
modify them right and on one level they
they change the physical senses or our
senses of touch smell sight sound things
like that but on another and probably
even more important one these are
practices that change our moral
sensibilities and intuitions our
intellectual vision of things our sense
of spirit and the spiritual and our
psychological maturity as people so
they're kind of like developmental
exercises in that sense
and so when we look at perception from
the perspective of practice we can see
that there's a kind of a deep connection
between our moral and our spiritual
lives and our epistemology or our
ability to know things and so I just
want to mark that connection between
between practice and knowing just as a
theme that I'm going to come back to a
little bit later on
but for now I want to focus on a
particular practice it's a practice that
we find in Plato's texts the Phaedo and
it has to do with a certain reading of
philosophy as a preparation for death
as many of you may know the dialogue the
Phaedo famously recounts the last hours
of Socrates his life before his own
death and so just to set the scene a
little bit this the dialogue starts out
fado is talking he's narrating these
last moments and this is just after
socrates has been sentenced to death for
impiety and for corrupting the youth of
Athens essentially for refusing belief
in the official gods the gods of the
state in these last moments he's
surrounded by friends it's a very kind
of tender scene and there but there also
it kind of still engaged in these deep
philosophical discussions about the
nature of life and death death and
rebirth what is the true aim of
philosophy the relationship between time
and change and eternity and all kinds of
other sort of rich topics like this but
I wanted to read just a short excerpt
from the dialogue and this scene is
again fado just kind of giving his
narration of Socrates in these last
hours and this is how fado describes
socrates and this this kind of sets up
the the attitude that I want to look at
and so here's fado he says I certainly
found being there an astonishing
experience although I was witnessing the
death of one who was my friend I had no
feeling of pity for the man appeared
happy in both manner and words as he
died nobly and without fear it struck me
that even in going down to the
underworld he was going down with the
God's blessing and that he would fare
well when he got there if anyone does
had no feeling of pity such as would
seem natural in my sorrow nor indeed of
pleasure as we engaged in philosophical
discussions as we were accustomed to do
for our arguments were of that sort but
I had a strange feeling an unaccustomed
mixture of pleasure and pain at the same
time as I reflected that he was about to
die so this image
of Socrates going to his death nobly
without fear seemingly unperturbed he's
almost casual about the whole thing this
this is the kind of mood that I want to
focus on and just ask kind of like
what's going on here how did how did how
did he get to this place
how did Socrates become this kind of
person and I think elsewhere in the
dialogue he has a he has a very famous
passage that I'm also going to share
with you in a second that that I think
gives you some hints into how Socrates
is able to approach his own death with
this kind of equanimity with this kind
of balance and so in this famous passage
Socrates himself says I am afraid that
other people do not realize that the one
aim of those who practice philosophy in
the proper manner is to practice for
death and dying and so I think we can
find some answers to these questions
here
the simple line is that Socrates
approaches his death the way he does
because of the way he practices
philosophy and so I think it's worth
putting a bit of a microscope on what
are these practices exactly what is he
what is he doing how did how did at the
end of his life how did he reach this
place and so I want to look at some of
those practices a little bit more
specifically but I also want to call
attention again to our context right now
just to point out I'm always at pain
pains to point out that when we're
talking about these practices we're
putting them into words and the
practices themselves aren't necessarily
about the words and it's really easy to
especially innocent setting like this
move into a place where we we kind of
replace practice with this whole
discourse about practice so I'm gonna
give you a little discourse about
practice whilst keeping in mind that the
practice is actually what matters so
this phrase practices for death and
dying that Socrates uses it's its own
whole genre of askesis or ascetic
practice and it falls within a group of
practices that philosophers called
Mellet a Thanatos Mellet a finito and
Mellet a just means to study or to
meditate and the modern term meditation
is actually a Latin translation of this
Greek word Mela Tate
Thanet Oh some of you may know just
means death or to die or to be dying
so Mellet a Thanatos means
meditations on death
now these practices aren't all as
literal as they sound and instead they
circle several different kinds of death
that include physical death but also
include all kinds of other notions of
death and so one place where I go to to
kind of unpack these practices is peer
Hodos work
and if you haven't read
ago and if you're interested in practice
and contemplation and things like that I
really recommend that you pick up he has
one book called what is ancient
philosophy and another one which is a
collection of essays called philosophy
as a way of life and these are just
fantastic studies in philosophical
practice philosophy as spiritual
exercise as he says so hadou picks up
the theme of melet a finito
and I'll focus just on the Platonic
tradition just because that's that's
what we've been talking about in the
Phaedo so there we saw it already with
fade owes description of Socrates actual
death so in the scene just prior to
Socrates dying
fado talks about how Socrates is
actually washing his own his body he's
bathing his body he's cleaning himself
and this is something that you know the
the people working working as
executioner's and and so on and so forth
would have to do after the execution
they would they would clean the body and
Socrates is taking that upon himself
because he doesn't want anybody else to
have to do it for him when he's dead so
he has this kind of this is this kind of
strange calmness about the whole thing
so that's that's one example that we've
already seen but it also shows up in the
Republic where the the soul is kind of
stretching itself up to the perspective
of the divine you see a similar image in
theaetetus
where Plato describes the the
philosopher is kind of achieving a kind
of a glance from above or a kind of
overview effect a larger perspective a
perspective that's not just the
perspective of an individual ego but
some some kind of larger self that has
some kind of a deeper sense for the
whole a deeper sense for the whole that
it's a part of and then he also talks
about it in the symposium as kind of
beholding the
the image of eternal beauty so he's
circling these different examples of
death practices practices of death
whether it's death of the body sort of
death of the individual passions a kind
of assent to a divine or a spiritual
world or just a beholding of a visionary
experience which like I said at the
start I I also equate to a kind of a
psychedelic vision or a psychedelic
experience and what these practices all
have in common is that they kind of ad
Center the individual person or they
kind of strip it away almost leading to
its death so that the the ego identities
kind of pulled apart and so death in
this sense can be a literal death but it
can also be this kind of philosophical
or visionary or spiritual death but what
in in every case you get this kind of
liberation of the soul from the small
self or the small ego so for hadou
philosophy then is this kind of learning
to die it's a learning to die through
these spiritual exercises and he
describes these exercises as a kind of a
tearing away from everyday life it's a
conversion or transformation it's a
transmogrification of one's vision that
changes one's lifestyle and behavior the
old person dies then a new person comes
forth and so this is this is kind of the
image of philosophy practiced rightly
that that Socrates is aiming at but of
course in our contemporary scene when we
think of philosophy it's easy to think
of this sort of academic scholastic
exercise that's it's all it's a lot
about concepts and discourse and reason
and arguments and logic things of that
nature and of course it is all of those
things those things are all an important
part of philosophy but philosophy in the
sense that we're talking about here
can't be reduced to questions about
knowledge or knowing
and so there's this other famous
philosophical injunction to know thyself
right probably most people have heard
this phrase know thyself know dee tseio
Tong
and in another famous dialogue the
apology Socrates is said to be wise
because he's the one who knows he isn't
wise and so in that dialogue he says I
do not think I know what I do not know
and so even though he's kind of
affirming his lack of knowing the
fulcrum is still knowledge right
knowledge knowing versus not knowing and
that's kind of the image that we've
inherited of philosophies that's really
about knowledge but in this text the
Phaedo knowledge isn't necessarily the
most important fact about philosophy and
this is the other thing that Socrates is
trying to say is quote about practicing
it correctly and so in the Phaedo and in
other dialogues the really important
thing is caring caring for yourself not
knowing yourself but caring for yourself
at Pamelia Hayato Socrates even goes so
far as to say that those who don't care
for their own souls are in terrible
danger
and so that if you neglect yourself if
you don't care for your own soul you
won't accomplish anything you can't live
the philosophical life and you can't you
can't gain the kinds of philosophical
insights that you're probably after as a
philosopher you're you're in pursuit of
wisdom you're a lover of wisdom and that
means care that means knowledge and care
so from the perspective of practice this
this phrase know thyself has to be met
with this equally important phrase care
for thyself and this is what I think s
qisas especially when aimed at the
question and mystery of death suggests
practice is a kind of it's a kind of
knowing caring like a knowing - caring
or it's like a caring that's also a
knowing or a knowing that's also a
caring simultaneously to know is to care
to care is to know and all of this is
done in service of death which was
viewed in this light as is a moment of
falling away as a revealing as an
opportunity for seeing
through a new kind of being so I think
then that the practice of death as a
kind of meditative exercise aimed at
conversion transformation preparation is
at bottom a kind of caring it's a mode
of caring attention a caring and
deliberate attention aimed at the self
but also at the other we take care of
ourselves so that we can take care of
others and we try to learn about
ourselves so we can better take care of
ourselves we try to learn about other
people so we can get we better take care
of them so these practices are
philosophical practices our
contemplative practices really if we're
doing them in the way that Socrates
suggests in this dialogue they're geared
towards training for preparation for
these moments of catastrophe
transformation death rebirth falling
away and then being ready for these
moments is then one meaning of
practicing philosophy in the proper way
so that when such events arise our
training comes into play so we're
something like philosophical or
contemplative athletes were people who
maintain our sense of care and lucidity
even in these times of death so that's
what I
wanted to say there's a lot more that I
want to say and could say but I'll leave
it there and we can maybe have have a
little discussion maybe 20 30 minutes I
don't know what do you think Peter yeah
let's let's feel some questions see
where it goes so if you have any
question for Adam just write it in the
chat box
I'll read it on your behalf unless you
indicate otherwise and I'll warm you up
with was a question or two Adam it maybe
this'll be a high level one Zach Stein
was in the store earlier today he was
talking about how we are in this liminal
state he was talking about that article
that he recently wrote for a merge and
sort of in the state there's kind of
like we're seeing kind of different
narratives kind of competing right now
like you know we need to go forward to
something better or we need to go back
to what was normal and when
situation started occurring this crisis
or meta-crisis like usually I don't talk
much about my stoicism like them kind of
like a closet stoic most of the time but
it really just came online and I'm like
okay I had to really kind of um you know
you know turn this to turn this part on
and it felt really important to do so so
the question for you is in this sort of
liminal state that we're in what do you
think the role of philosophy is going to
be or should be and specifically the the
practice of death well I I mean
philosophy has a lot of different modes
obviously and I'm kind of zeroing in on
one and it's it's the one that I'm drawn
to as a person in any situation but it's
also the one that I think is is relevant
right now and so this this this idea
that we're in training we're practicing
we're athletes of a certain kind of
certain kind of contemplative athlete or
something like that the whole idea there
is that you you'll be response sort of
response able in the context of a
situation that you can't predict that
you can't know the idea that we could
build some kind of a system that will
predict what next week will look like
what next month will look like what next
year will look like seems right now more
unlikely than ever you know its
prediction is a hard business anyway
system is a hard business anyway but
right now having that kind of
flexibility having that kind of ability
to navigate the unknown without needing
to know what's about to come
seems to be like the most important
thing so these these practices
meditative practices it they ready you
for unknown things and so that that's
kind of how I really do
and the other question I had Massimo
Pigliucci you know the popular stoic he
was one of the first guests here in
stoah he said something in kind of
retrospect I didn't like that much
he's the whole you know the arena
metaphor
you know the athlete metaphor in the
binos doses and like straining and he
kind of said oh yeah it's too late now
though we're in the arena you know it's
too late to practice for it right and
people are gonna be turned to things
like stoicism her philosophy in these
times I don't think we should push them
away I wanted to throw that to you to
see what you think yeah I mean not to
start beef with you Massimo exchanged
some messages before I mean to a certain
degree I think the sense of what he's
saying there's something to the sense of
what he's saying that if things are
happening you know and so if you've
already been practicing that would be
better but it's never too late to start
practicing so I don't really agree with
the idea that you you couldn't get
something out of it right now I think if
you just abstract lis just like day one
it'd be a great great moment to start
practicing
yeah I'm I'm on Team practice right now
as well so Michael I'm going to unmute
you if you can reach your question
you're unmuted Michael okay thanks Peter
so Adam I just wanted them you know kind
of give us an example of your daily
practices of askesis and kind of what
that looks like just so that we can kind
of take something away that we can
actually am implement in our daily lives
yeah yeah that's good
well you know I think the main easy one
is to just get yourself into just a rig
getting practice just a meditative
practice kind of how you know we opened
up just with a minute or two of silence
and just kind of be be with yourself in
the silence and I've learned to let that
silence be its own kind of teacher and
to pay attention to what emerges in the
silence and so not to come into it with
a lot of expectations and and things
like that but to just just let let that
intuitive side of yourself speak and and
you know listen to it and that's that's
one thing that's been really helpful for
me especially in these past few weeks
but then there's other things you know
like the the practices that we started
about like I think I think if meditation
is difficult for you if the loss of
philosophical texts aren't really your
thing then like like I found like
fasting to be like a really helpful tool
to like clarify thoughts and emotions so
that's another one that I do you know
when we can go out into the world
martial arts has been a big practice for
me so I think I think the number of
practices are they are pretty diverse
and it's like I said it's hard to put
them into words in a setting like this
and just have them kind of land but fact
that kind of just like just a
a kind of a practice of Merton calls a
contemplative prayer or mindfulness or
you know just a regular sitting
meditation and following where that
thread kind of takes you would be the
best right now cool okay let's go with
Richard tarnis I'm going to unmute you
hey hey I just unmuted myself if that
helps thanks Peter and thank thank you
so much Adam for your your timely
thoughts so I was just asking you know
you focused on Socrates this very
well-known
cheerful equilibrium as he faced his
death and you also brought up
philosophical meditative experiences
that in some way resemble psychedelic
experiences and I was wondering if you
found any if in thinking about this you
see any connection between Socrates
attitudes and and the widespread
participation and the Eleusinian
mysteries in Athens at that time as they
used some kind of cycle after drink and
of course we know how you know the many
people who have psychedelic experiences
undergo a really radical transformation
in their view of death and often will
overcome that fear of death that they
had previously been affected by though
often unconsciously I just wondered if
you had any thoughts not not that I'm
asking you to I don't know reduce
Socrates's you know mmm equilibrium and
and kind of philosophical contribution
to to the Eleusinian mysteries but just
whether you see any connection there at
all or hadn't thought about that at all
yeah I thought about it quite a bit I
know others like Michael Pollan digs
into the scholarship a little bit in his
his newest book on psychedelics and I
think I think his name is bill Richards
has a book called sacred knowledge where
he kind of they but they're both kind of
examining the evidence for psychedelic
use in the Ellison Ian mystery writes
mostly in a beverage called Chi kyun
right which isn't kind of like a
psychedelic sounds like almost like a
kind of a psychedelic beer like a like a
real it's some kind of a brew I think
that the the connections are there I
think that even some of the scholarship
points in that direction I don't think
that's the I don't think that's yet the
mainstream view and like this historical
scholarship I find it convincing but I
also find it convincing because once
you're on the other side of those other
psychedelic experiences a dialogue like
the Phaedo just makes a lot more sense
and some of the things that they talk
about in terms of a recollection or
anamnesis and things like that may just
make a lot more sense and so I I I have
a hard time I think you could probably
you probably can get into those spaces
without the psychedelic use but at this
point I would be extremely surprised to
learn that this the psychedelic use
wasn't a part of Socrates initiation
into these ideas and perspectives they
certainly have been for me and I bet
they were for him too
thanks that's
very much money my thoughts as well cool
key you had a question if you can unmute
yourself yeah hello can you hear me
yep Thank You Adam for speaking about
your both your experience and the
different types of practices that can be
done to understand a bit better the
process of death and dying in how
Socrates experienced it this is
definitely i'm also very new to stoicism
so hearing from your perspective helped
me understand more about the well the
the texts for sure my question revolves
around when you talked about si knowing
yourself and know thyself and then when
you related it to caring for thyself and
them knowing caring dichotomy I guess
what I wrote is exactly what I wanted to
ask how would you differentiate doing
this practice this caring for thyself is
knowing thyself doing this practice for
preparing for the philosophy of let's
say life and living versus the
philosophy of death and dying and I put
it that way because the only background
that I have in philosophy has been
reading and ran book on objectivism so
which is a different sort of perspective
on caring for thyself being sort of
selfish in that way which I don't I know
that that's a completely different
school from stoicism but I was curious
how you would differentiate the two well
I think yeah so pretty pretty different
schools of philosophy I think it's
actually related your question is
related to the question Peter started us
off with which is like what is what is
practice prepare us for and I think if
you're that what I said at the beginning
of the essay or the little talk was just
just this idea that there's there's a
rethink of epistemology like study of
knowledge what we can know as
exclusively this issue of like concepts
and reasons and arguments and
propositional statements and things like
that but but the older view and I think
the more correct view is that the
epistemological questions are actually
bound up in these in these kinds of
moral and psychological
missions so like you can actually get to
know something better through caring
right so caring gives you a certain kind
of access or a certain kind of
perspective on things that just
knowledge alone doesn't get and I think
that so like caring is a kind of I don't
want to call it a strategy because it
just it sounds too calculated but in a
way caring is it's a kind of epistemic
mode and so if you're trying to
understand things and you're trying to
orient yourself in terms of what to do
say what action to take caring is one of
the ways to understand so I think that's
I mean and that you can think about any
number of situations in your life where
that would be the case so it's not a
hugely complete answer but that's kinda
how I think about it cool all right
let's go with Sam Sam if you can unmute
yourself hi Adam I was pleasant to bump
into you here on the stoah the other day
when Jim rut was giving his talk and so
Jim ruts involved in the whole game B
discourse as you know and I actually
mentioned to you in private chat how
much I've been thinking about your
taking up of this idea of askesis
and how relevant it is to this game B
discourse that's emerging yeah use we
see a lot of forms of it like but what
Benita Roy is doing with collective
insight practices and it's being
articulated with just collective
intelligence in general so initially I
was sort of sitting with with the
question that I wanted to ask which is
you know what role do you think ascesis
has to play in this larger bifurcation
point that game B is looking at between
the like the likely event of
civilization will collapse versus a
transformation that's needed but my
question is actually transformed a
little bit because I'm also
wondering if you share this observation
that all these forms of what can be
called askesis or a discursive ethic
that's rooted in a kind of disposition
that's open to these forms of death it
seems to be emerged showing up as an
emergent phenomenon of these conditions
as something that's necessary to
facilitate the kind of transformation
that we need and so I'm wondering do you
share that observation do you agree and
if so why do you think that that would
be showing up as an emergent phenomenon
yeah a lot of good questions there if
folks don't know what Sam's talking
about game B is this term that folks
like Jim Rhett benita Roy and others
have started to use to distinguish
distinguish there kind of civilization
building exercise from what they call
game a which is basically what we live
in right now game a is competitive
instrumental reason war of all against
all game B is non rival risks sort of
non zero some kind of community oriented
living I don't know too much about game
B I know even less about economics and
I'm honestly kind of happy that I don't
know anything about economics because it
seems like a real mess to try and figure
out but yeah I think Bonita and I have
had conversations along these lines that
this this whole idea of moving moving
back to practice seems like a kind of a
game B move because well if you just
look at what we've been talking about
we're moving back to practice but we're
also moving away from using intellect
and reason not in the mode of
instrumental calculative manipulation
and exploitation so we're moving the
Faculty of reason in a different
direction through practice and I think
if Jesus has anything to do with game B
it's something like that because you
can't have a sort of a game be world
without without a different sensibility
and without a different sense of what
what reason is and what it's for so
that's a short answer to something we
could talk about for much longer
cool Travis would you like to read your
question sure Thank You Adam you
mentioned at the beginning health
faito notes that he feels a strange
mixture of pain and pleasure when he
thinks about Socrates dying sad from his
friend but he's happy at the fortitude
and preparation of Socrates presents in
the face of death and a little bit later
in the dialogue Socrates uses that very
same phrasing a strange mixture pain and
pleasure and he's talking about how his
legs feel and they take the shackles off
of his legs as the pain leaves he feels
he feels the pleasure as a kind of
contrast and I think this this
definitely connects to the argument from
opposites that somebody mentioned and a
question above that's a little bit like
Freud saying you're sticking you stick
your leg out from under the the
bedsheets and it's cold you pull it back
in and you know this is kind of what
constitutes our pleasure
and so just struck right now and how
every day life's preciousness is really
coming to the forefront of all our
consciousnesses and we're feeling
feeling everything very differently and
yeah or of an endemic and desk and so
I'm just wondering how we could engage
our practices in this moment to truly
internalize this and to carry it forward
and perhaps even on the other side of
this if things are much better we can
maintain that that sense of preciousness
yeah I've been I've been thinking a lot
about I get this relates also to the
question of what what uses philosophy in
a moment like this or what uses even
worst what use are philosophers in a
moment like this and you know I think
about what what can we do you know me
the most important thing it seems like
for me to do to help the situation right
now is to stay indoors and to stay stay
away from other people you know but for
other people for nurses and doctors and
delivery people and trash collectors and
you know I was just reading about
there's a there's a group of the people
running the energy grid in New York who
are now completely isolated so that they
can stay healthy so they can keep the
grid running you know so I think about
all of these people that really matter
you know like really matter and who we
owe who we owe a debt to right now and
who we will owe a debt to after this and
what can we do and I think one thing we
can do is is is make better sense of the
situation put put some kind of pressure
into the discourse out like in this
direction of care we've seen just just
insane headlines about you know like
hospitals who won't let their nursing
staff wear protective gear because it'll
scare it'll it'll scare the customers
coming in you know it's just like what
is this attitude you know I'm not a
nurse I'm not an electrician I can't do
those things but I can I can push I can
push conversations and directions I can
push put pressure in ways and so I think
just just in that sense of like what can
we do I think about those things and
that's so that's like if if we have any
if philosophers really do have any of
this kind of lucidity about us we should
we should be able to to kind of push in
directions that that help and so that's
that's kind of how I think about it it's
sort of a I don't know in a
assistant to the process thanks Adam
someone just wrote steal the culture
Todd would you like to read your
question you still have the desire to
ask it yeah yeah Travis just mentioned
part of it so uh yeah Adam it's good to
see you again yeah yes I'm smiling when
I saw you there I said oh there's only
four people on this thing and then I saw
there's like thirty thirty some of my
people so the in the Phaedo Socrates he
says well what are we gonna do with the
rest of the day before they give me the
poison let's just think if we can chase
away this fear of death and he came up
with the three arguments opposites come
from opposites just Travis mentioned so
death comes from life therefore life
must come after death and the second one
was knowledge as recollection yeah
because he said for example when you see
two things that are almost perfectly
equal how is it that you knew they were
almost perfectly equal because you've
never perceived it with your physical
bodily sense organs anything that's two
things that are perfectly the same so
you must have been born with that
knowledge because you could not have
learned it after you were born and if
you were born with that knowledge you
must have had it before you were born
these archetypal ideas yeah and he said
and I guess quoted in there because it's
a strong statement or he says basically
if you don't have the one use eternal
absolute ideas then there is no such
thing as a soul and if there's no soul
then there's no such thing as these
absolute eternal standards by which we
judge the relative and imperfect
physical things so what do you think
about that argument the arc tipple ideas
and the soul either they both exist or
neither one exists I this kind of gets
back to the the question Rick was asking
I I think these these argue
have to be supplemented with experiences
and the experiences I think are very
convincing and the arguments are
convincing after you've had the
experiences and I'm not sure if I would
find them so convincing without the
experiences you know it sounds i I just
don't know but I found I find the
perspective convincing on the basis of
experience but that's I don't I don't
know what those arguments would read
like if I didn't have those experiences
if that makes sense
yeah yeah that totally makes sense kind
of like philosophy seemed boring and not
pertinent then you have a few major
psychedelic experiences and then you say
oh that's what they were talking about
that yeah or the other way around you
know I think that's how it works for me
kind of yeah yeah or mutually anyway I
was just wondering that argument if it
seemed convincing because it kind of I
think even sovereignty says neither none
of these arguments are really convincing
but you have to do the best we can like
strapping a raft together and some I
think it's in this and then we'll hold
on to it you know and make the best of
it and here's my here's the best I've
got right that's all I've got
cool all right so we might have this
might be the last question we'll see how
it goes
Nate if you can unmute yourself and ask
Adam your question hi hi Adam honey
Phoebe has been helping me to see the
ways in which I thought I was ready to
die but was to some extent fooling
myself maybe to a large extent as a
result I've been meditating on how close
death is to life even if I usually
pretend that it's far away and how the
way I orient myself towards death isn't
separate from how I orient myself
towards life does that bring anything up
for you how would Socrates Plato or the
stoic speak to that yeah it does I I
relate to this question in the same way
that
the Socratic tradition sort of relates
to the question of knowledge and wisdom
you know I know I know that I don't know
or I'm I I don't know what I don't know
but I'm at least aware of my ignorance
and I feel similarly about this kind of
readiness for death even if you kind of
engage in these practices and and
meditate and and focus on sort of
non-attachment and dissolution of the
ego and things like that it's it's
aspirational certainly for me I it's
it's a practice and that sense something
that you have to keep doing over and
over again and that's not something that
I don't think that it happens and you
have it and it's there forever I think
you have to continually engage in the
practice and so in that sense it's it's
it's ongoing it's a process thank you
all right so this would be the last
question
Alexander winter I it was just more of a
comment rather than a question but I
think to add to what was said about what
come philosophers do I think there's
this sense of we can we are so empowered
by technology right now that we can tap
into networks and I think one of the big
problems that people are dealing with
right now beyond the question of death
is what is truth you know everyone's
scrambling for finding out what's going
on with the virus how can people stay
safe
how can people be protected how do we
make sure that what's gonna happen in
the near to far future is you know the
best course of action that we can take
collectively and I think that's the
strength of philosophers is to analyze
in conjunction with you know science I
mean which is really the child of
philosophy to find out what what is how
do we make more light of the world how
do we understand that of what's
happening and then use that knowledge
and make it
snowball by building systems like I've
seen many people you know put together
spreadsheets put together mechanisms of
sharing knowledge that really do help
and one example would be something I
just saw today it's a group from the
Czech Republic or Chucky called masks
for all org where this course has now
shifted toward recommendation as
everyone should be wearing masks because
that has kept the spread very very low
in the Czech Republic compared to other
countries
yep yeah yeah I'm with you on all of
that and I think that's why you need the
knowledge knowledge truth and reason
side is still there you just need to
supplement with the the caring the
caring intuitive side as well all right
but yeah I'm with you
and I think that's that's one of the
things that philosophers should be able
to do is is evaluate truth claims the
epistemic conditions of those claims how
those claims function in the discourse
how those you know all that sort of
stuff that you know you you're trained
and to do in a university that's that's
all extremely extremely relevant right
now to and in and with that I think also
the providing of visions you know yeah
sort of constructing future futures in
our heads conceptually that other people
can latch onto yeah I think that's I
think that's that's the sense I get from
like the game be crowd that we were
talking about earlier is that they're
they're kind of speculative philosophers
speculative not meaning like you know
just anything goes just kind of fantasy
imagination but seeing into a possible
future you know just kind of like
through the imagination creating a
possible world that we could aim towards
so yeah definitely
all right so we're gonna end it here and
in a moment I'll do some kind of closing
announcements but Adam do you have any
closing thoughts for the group I know
this was this was just a great
experience and I'm happy and thankful to
share this space with all of you and
yeah
stay stay healthy stay well cool cool
all right thanks my friend for coming in
today that was a treat we'll post this
on youtube too so you can send it out to
you know Twitter and whatnot so next
event
yeah isn't isn't a half hour in this
room it's an existential dance party
Adam was the warm-up back talking about
that so just imagine a bunch of people
in there zoom channels is dancing and
then Colin Morris from the Zion 2.0
podcast can do some body movements so
it's the same link of ours 50-piece
clothes registrations clothes the same
link if you want to jump on in a half
hour
that being said I do the stoah as a gift
for anyone to freely use in this time of
need if you're inspired to provide a
gift to the stoah I just go to the stoah
dot CA and I will put that the Chad and
then at the bottom of the page there's
information about the gift economy there
I also do sign up to the mailing list
for more events in the future
all right thanks Adam thanks everyone
thanks Peter take care everyone