so welcome everyone to another waking
from the meaning crisis discord QA this
is Brett pleasured out and we have with
us today Jordan Hall who has been
eagerly anticipated by by our audience
here and so I think a lot of people know
Jordan but uh but Jordans basically he's
built a career building disruptive
technology companies he studied
contemporary philosophy artificial
intelligence and complex system science
followed by a attending Harvard Law
School or examined the coevolution of
human civilization and technology he
then participated in in in putting his
skills to combining disruptive
technology movement building and going
up against obsolete oligopolies he he
joined mp3.com then interview and then
he was he led the online digital video
revolution as a founder and CEO of DivX
you left the helmet DivX
and participated in a number of think
tanks and institute institutes such as
the Aspen Institute and the Santa Fe
Institute where he served in the board
of trustees for some five years he then
has moved on to starting co-founding the
neural active the neuro hacker
collective and so thank you for being
here Jordan welcomed it notice that it's
the first time I've had to endure a
biography and quite some time apologies
for the I never know how much detail to
go into so so Jordan you have in some
ways a pretty dismal prediction for the
future of humanity but but you also see
a potential for an optimistic outcome
can you tell us a bit about that which
part well why don't we start about the
dismal prediction well so I guess since
this we're talking to this particular
group in the particular way it seems I
think right to begin with the
proposition of being non-attachment well
I have a I have a sense of what are the
most likely future states on the
various trajectories that were on and it
does seem to be the case that if you
were to take a most people would not
like oysters and we're liking fractions
maybe that's a good way of putting it
the vast majority of people alive today
I suspect would be what we would prefer
most of the most likely or trajectories
not be the ones that occur though then
this one question is why why would I say
that's the case was the the basis of
that proposition then as you say it is
the other thing which is say okay well
what's the what's the spread of
scenarios that I livre are why couldn't
happen and what's the the likelihood of
them happening and then finally agency
what kinds of things might we do to be
able to steer the new so that it's
ending up on the places we would like it
to be the answer to the question of why
it is that I come to these particular
conclusions unfortunate it's not simple
it's a it's the large body of work
including a lot of people many of whom
were quite obscure when I was working
with them and they're not obscurity
longer which is an interesting sign that
they probably but there are these timely
people if not also timely and capable so
we can go into that if you'd like but
the the bigger picture is sort of lots
of people earnestly endeavoring to
engage with what it's real and thereby
recognizing that there are perhaps ways
of modeling the ways that things like
cultures and civilizations and as well
as energetic systems and living systems
evolve and leading to the conclusion
that under most circumstances the ones
that were in right now are headed for a
bad a bad end and then and by the way
that same theory indicates that all hope
is not lost and that in fact there's a
decent chance of not just a kind of okay
and put a really good one right so I
guess the key the key message that I'd
like to put out there is that it's that
we do actually have a bit of a fork in
the road
and that most of the ability is based
upon our choices not upon the contact
the causal structure we find ourselves
it does that make sense that last part
yeah what you were speaking in a recent
in your recent voices with Verve ecchi
you spoke with John about the importance
of looking at the shape of a network
rather than the content of it and you
call this an important insight and I
think that's that sounds like what
you're getting getting to hear maybe you
can break it down for us a little more
mmm okay sure let me do something that's
very timely although I know you guys you
mentioned that this particular group is
more focused on they were the more
spiritual side than the political side
we can use the political side to give us
perspective on certain things so for
example just as just as a for example
it's obviously a vast topic a thing
that's happening right now in the United
States in terms of the breakdown of the
rupture of the ink called policing on my
point of view is of a sort instead of a
of a kind that is similar to the
breakdowns of lots of other kinds of
things and therefore in sometimes it's
quite predictable but that this
particular thing would break down at
this time at this local intensity is not
quite as easy to predict we've said okay
here's a box of 50 things one of them
foreshore is gonna break that and that
breakdown will look like this and by the
way it will be followed by these kinds
of things that's much more doable so for
example the kind of network design that
is associated with policing has a oh
it's funny like Foucault was actually
the guy who regionally began to and to
analyze this which had to do with the
for example in the notion that the role
of policeman is a formal concept and
that there is a governance mechanism
which lives outside of the role of
policeman lives in a different domain
that governance mechanism defines and
designs what is the content of the
former world policeman separately
there's a governance mechanism that
collects individual actual human beings
and
puts them into that particular category
in particular way it's wise you've got
this the system dynamic that has certain
kinds of characteristics of how it
fundamentally operates and by the by the
way has been different characteristics
of how actually is traversing how it's
the abstraction or its form formality is
actually instantiating in reality but
you can take a look at the formality and
say okay this formal system has for
example it has a certain amount of
complexity that it can manage and
therefore is going to have a built-in
error rate and it's going to have a
built-in adaptivity to change so the
environment is changing faster than some
number some add some quantitative change
this particular control system won't be
able to keep up and it'll actually go
into a breakdown in control for example
if it's a whole giant piece of kind of
adapting cybernetic control theory and
network theory to take a look at that
particular concrete event so running in
a very intellectual level policeman
spiritual we could say that the kind of
network design that we have as a certain
fate to it at the certain other things
that are a what it's can do and what it
be what it can't do and then the sort of
things which are going to be its natural
tendencies and its natural tendencies in
certain contexts but then we can do is
take a look at what are the context that
you're putting a network design in you
have a much richer sense of what are the
likely ways of that larger systems going
to evolve that felt too theoretical and
abstract which may be a better way of
grounding it well well what if we
grounded in in a community community
like ours you know we're this is a new
community where we've just formed in
really the last two months we're almost
at our two-month anniversary you know
how would how would you recommend for
example we what what should we be
thinking of in in setting up you know
our network we're in the middle you know
of crafting roles and responsibilities
and you know different roles
people are are taking within the
community of some some will be
organizing events other people will be
you know you know maybe leading
meditations or or other type of sessions
others will be working on structure you
know what what what can we take from
your work to help direct us ok so
there's actually a whole lot of stuff
well let's begin with I'm gonna put in
form of recommendations as opposed in
the form of options because the option
space is quite large in terms of
recommendations some things that I would
point out are a network design one of
the variables you can look at is the
degree to which a particular node and
domain which is to say a cluster of
nodes is specialized or generalized and
so a for example in the military you
tend to have high levels of
specialization in in for example
decision making and so the major
function in Army has a very specific
domain and scope of decision making and
it's very very important that that
particular node know when a decision
with is in its scope if it's too big it
has to go up and cuz too little has to
go down like that kind of structure and
notice what happens there is that once
you've made a couple of commitments to
hire designing your network a bunch of
other stuff comes with it right so if
you design a network that is of the sort
of the post-world War two military then
if you want to be effective at all a lot
of energy a lot of attention a lot of
the capacity of even individuals
actually has to be focused on questions
like is this particular area of inquiry
something that is right for my level of
authority or should I push it down or
should I send it up so you mean I've
been planning on that as being part of
what the time you're spending people's
time on but ultimately it's part of the
you have to and so it gets smuggled in
and that's a I think exceeding that
people miss a lot is that the there is
actually some natural network design
clusters that once you've made a few
choices a lot of other things follow now
in the context of what you guys are
doing what my sense is that there's kind
of or three things that are happening
simultaneously there may be a little bit
of tension that may be a healthy tension
so on the one hand I've mentioned I've
heard you mention the word community and
it feels to me like in the tone of your
voice when you say it that you actually
mean that in the sense of community like
a group of people who sense of
togetherness or wholeness and being
together yes maybe in the monastic sense
more than in the village sense but you
all in in directional in that way
equally there seems to be a sense of a
horizon-- despot some sort of mission or
objective or purpose more than just
shared values but interestingly that's
oriented towards something which is how
would I say this singular in the in the
domain of purpose which to say that the
religion that's not a religion for
example in that document it feels like
that maybe a particular area of interest
and as you said the ax meaning crisis
right through is a not just a calling
that there's a gap people or gathered
into this community as a as a
consequence of the bail that John is
rung but also there seems to be an
awareness or intent to focus in the
direction of that column so it's not
like hey we all gather for the meaning
crisis but now that it's just can become
a barbeque but actually a sense of
there's something about this column that
has meaningfulness to it no pun intended
and therefore should have a sensitivity
or so again that kind of that pulls more
in the direction of a monastic community
in less than the direction of a sort of
general purpose where people live if you
know if you look at the topology of
monastic communities it's actually
interesting because there is it there's
a real distinction you know villages
have a different actual topology and my
necessity than
monastic communities and the nasty
community has to have more formal
structure it actually has to have levels
of
certain roles that people play and a lot
of rituals that keep discipline and
attention while still maintaining the
real integrity of community I think many
monks who I know you like the level of
live human relationship and community
and monasteries is much stronger than in
any other place they've ever been but
this would imply orienting towards like
ritual being thoughtful about having
certain kinds of ritual practices that
create a and easy and ease through the
discipline is necessary to maintain
integrity in relationship to the purpose
while well and holding like making
relatively easel that that level of
rooker so that it can then also happen
in the context of community you would
also want to because you're doing
something in the domain of community
that is virtual why we don't really know
it's not easy human beings naturally do
communal stuff in physical space
particular around things like food and
conviviality it's harder to do that in a
virtual space because we don't have the
right context and signals oh I would
recommend playfully and experimental it
but nonetheless thoughtfully making that
an object of intent no wonder what kinds
of things might we do who support a
deeper felt sense of humaneness like and
do we want to have if you're playing
Dungeons and Dragons role-playing game
like how our identities have our
identities have a certain level of
richness and playfulness to them so that
when people encounter each other they're
already drawn into something like how do
you render the texture and feel of
relationality that's necessary for
community toss in a virtual environment
and certain you know aesthetics is one
possible way and playfulness is another
possible way so that's another chunk so
I'm kind of putting in there the toolkit
includes things like ritual
intentionally thinking about creating
rituals largely to increase rigor while
also increasing ease fulness the second
one would be to be intentional around
things like playfulness and the felt
sense of expression of self into a
shared space a third and this is now you
know I'm not starting to get a little
bit more fluid is how I said this
there's there's a distinction what I
would say is between two kinds of design
there's a what I might call a preferred
for slander in a mission design or a
propositional design the blueprint kind
and a transcendent design or a that's
oriented design has more of a feeling of
intuitive or felt sense actually never
than two of those missions felt sense
and so I might recommend practices that
orient groups of people who build their
capacity in gathering a shared felt
sense in themselves enhancing their own
capacity of their own felt sense and
then using the individual collective
capacity to just serve rightness through
felt sense as a primary mode of
collective design and decision making in
how the environment progresses and and
and devolves that's more Oh
keep on keep on going up okay no no I do
not want you to stop keep on going so
that so the tumour that come up I'm
actually seeing John in my mind's eye
now and hearing his voice which I care
for her name she's an influence of both
John's and of Dave Snowden's and what is
the sort of primary thinkers in like how
complex systems actually emerge or how
you can design for emergence as to do is
sort of enabling constraints and
disabling constraints and so thinking in
that way sort of thinking about this is
having a certain necessary octopus's to
it is to think about how do you actually
identify what are the appropriate
enabling constraints
and disabling constraints to give
structure while simultaneously
engendering the the surprise the insight
and creativity it actually makes it be a
felt organic space
oh that's those are some things sorry if
they're not there well thought-through
world no that's that's that's amazing I
wish it's part of me what should we just
spend the whole rest of the time talking
about this but but it but it but it is a
Q&A and I want to get to to member
question but thank you so much for that
I'm gonna listen to that several times I
think and after and I was happy to know
that that some of the things you said I
think are things that we have been been
doing and we've been spending some a lot
of time recently on unwritten Callie's
here in in the Q&A right now and she's
really been instrumental in helping
build build rituals and and we're really
experimenting on different different
methods and and also the felt sense of
community of things like lectio Divina
and and you know authentic relating type
practices so so a ritual a particular
ritual domain that I think doesn't get
enough attention particularly in the
West like indigenous communities do this
extraordinarily well and the West tends
to do this quite poorly have to do with
rituals associated with membership and
the recognition it's so funny because
when I say this in a Western context as
a I feel like there's a sense of
contraction but when it's said in an
indigenous context are just sort of a
nationalist like oh yes obviously in a
month in monastic environments by the
way are much more indigenous environment
so there's a a hey guess what there
really is a distinction between a novice
and an acolyte and a master and we
should be mindful of the reality of that
and that a big part of participation in
the community is the the deep the
suffering which is to say the undergoing
developmental change in self that is
associated with the movement through a
series of rituals each one of which is
actually a gate
a portal that really that simultaneously
generates changes in self that increase
your capacity and signifies that that
does changes have in fact actually
occurred which then gives rise to your
ability to participate in aspects of the
community that may not have been
available to you before it was before
the particular state rituals have been
entered undergone though so that that
that might actually be a very important
was hard to do by the way are doing the
event from scratch this is a the kinds
of things that tend to have been the
subject of hundreds or thousands and
sometimes tens of thousands of years of
trial and error in or indigenous or
traditional environments yeah we're
trying to to draw on on traditions on a
wide variety of traditions as well as
maybe but feeling not you know feeling
that we we have some room to sort of
make them our own in some ways as well
what idea we're playing with is creating
the role of aspirant which is sort of
you know that that that you know when
people come into the forum they're
automatically named members but you know
some people come they come for a day and
they leave other people you know stick
around but the aspirant would be sort of
a declaration of intention that you know
we're stepping forward where this is
what we want to do we want to transform
we want to engage in this community and
in this process of waking from the
meaning crisis and work together and you
know participate and so we're sort of
working that out now and maybe there
would be a ceremony you know where where
you would sort of state some sort of
intention and then you would get the
role aspirant and I would recommend
something that has real skin in the game
and maybe even a level of intensity to
be perfectly frank because then you can
load more on that structure and one of
the characteristics that is a real
problem that nobody knows how to deal
with is the problem of scaling so in
virtual environments in particular can
scale rapidly right in principle
everybody on the planet can join your
discord tomorrow probably not that many
but close like within a couple of days
but of course in practice it would do
that it would destroy your community and
so one of the things that is necessary
is to actually have a I guess an company
to call onboarding but some some process
this
autocatalytic so that as an aspirin if
an aspirin has strength meaning that
there they have a capacity of carrying a
certain load because they've gone
through something again that going
through this required enough from them
that they have skin in the game they
care they actually care like they
actually have some blood in this thing
so they may wanted to continue to endure
and again when skillfully designed the
the thing they went through also left
its mark on them by just giving them an
insight change them in a way that
actually wove them into the fabric of it
but they are a natural expression
natural exponent of the thing and so
therefore as they show up in the
environment the essence of the thing
percolates more easily and you can just
kind of think about the ratio between
how many members and you actually have
per unit or per aspirin before you
actually start to see decoherence
because there's too much too little
signal for the amount of noise in the
environment right by the way yeah that's
a fundamentally hard problem and as I
mentioned nobody actually knows how to
do it well so anybody who is like what
you guys are focusing on makes it like
almost part of your purpose and and it's
like any original religion that's not a
religion under its design requirement is
that it must be able to scale without
flipping into reciprocal Maryland good
luck problem itself thank you and and
this has been amazing thank you so much
for this now just before we get the
question so I did send a Jordan the are
draft document from on these from the
structure forum channel with our with
the communities draft structure I think
Jordan didn't have time to really look
at it before before we started but but I
you took a quick glance
I think you said you would you would
have to spend hours just on each line
but uh but maybe we'll have a chance to
talk about that uh that another time I'm
reading the question you put in game
theory what would be the progression
after distributed organization in
equilibrium a quantum leap in assisted
artificial evolution want me to answer
that
uh oh sure is that the first gonna I was
going to go to the questions yeah
I'll read ya out but that's that's great
huh I I'll read it out and and then then
I would love to have your your answers
so yes from gesture gesture be good
would you hey Jordan thanks for your
time and all the hard work I understand
that in theory a self-organizing
collective system of ideas beliefs and
practices like written are Sevilla could
be prevented from being overtaken by an
authority as long as it was maintained
at the purrito
efficiency frontier what I and maybe you
could explain what that is what I do not
get yet is how does one a shirt ensure
that a super cult remains in equilibrium
at the frontier and also would one then
not be able to call it a super cult
because at the frontier there's no
epistemically and therefore a super cult
ceases to exist in relation in
realization because of this lack of
conflict in game theory what would be
the progression after distributed
organization in equilibrium a quantum
leap and assisted artificial evolution
one my sense is that just to be good
either is or has some familiarity with
Pat Ryan
it was very initial terms of them
language to I hope that everybody enjoys
the question because it's a question
itself has a feeling of who would be
it's not Miles Davis maybe it's a bit of
Coltrane and okay so is this something
that you would like me to just spend
some time on sure yes but I'd love that
Wow okay that's cool these Louie's are
I'd see who what I think would be at
great is if if if actually Bester could
it actually ends the question of or do a
little bit more on the prevented from
being overtaken by an authority as long
as it was maintained at the Pareto
efficiency frontier maybe two sentences
on that too or at me on specifically
what the what the context is there and
then then we can then we can run all
right so why don't we go into the next
question and well while we're doing that
maybe gesture if you could just expand
on that a little bit or or I mean you
can always I don't know if your mics
working you can always come on and and
speak but so let's move on to the next
one and then then we'll come back come
back to that
so from david student movement he's
curious as to what your own ecology of
practices look like with regard or or
your influences with regard to
spirituality it's much easier when i I
came into this notion of spirituality
largely unwillingly and at a relatively
late age with one big exception that all
I'll be out in a moment
oh I don't know if you guys know Jim rut
but I had I was very much more like Jim
rut with regard to this kind of question
up until my early 40s which by the way
was veneer at the end of the game be and
actually to be perfectly frank it was it
was the sensing on my part the awareness
not even mean where it is the
calculation the rigorous logical
calculation that the object based nana
spirituality actually had to be part of
any viable future state therefore I had
to experience it directly was what left
me into in that into that space
therefore I had kind of a a hodgepodge
pressed exploration so I worked through
individuals like Benito Roy and Yoshi
eco camera for example who themselves
exposed me to certain things my my wife
Vanessa explored rather broadly a wide
variety of different domains so you pick
your poison I've looked it I've spent
time in with people who have themselves
have deep practice in huge chunks of
stuff ranging from Western esoteric
magic and Jewish Kabbalah to tide
embodied specific Tai Chi practices and
you know many different variations on
Buddhism and the the net of it what I
noticed in myself was that my own
orientation was always an orientation of
I was close you might say metabolism oh
maybe it's my punk-rock that's abilities
but I never really had any interest
capacity or desire to copy and emulate
with high degrees of Precision's of
existing lineage or practice but I
always felt a high degree of attraction
to being in relationship with that
practice until I could the tablets for
myself my own set of practices that
worked and I'm struggling when I say
work because obviously the question of
working is fluid you're always engaging
in life and you discovered to your
chagrin did that wish work Jenny I
didn't work here anything you learn oh I
have a of an odd Rico lodge and what I'd
say it's the centerpiece that my
spiritual practice is parenting that the
continuing orientation of the act of
being in relationship with children in
my case my own children but not strictly
necessarily your own children if from
the point of view of choosing to take
that role as being one of auntie really
giving your time and energy and
attention at a very high level the
stewardship of a appear as they are
becoming more embodied and to take the
position of acting as the representative
of their highest self or their soul as
they are becoming capable of taking
responsibility for that themselves and
my point of view
manage of this particular practice is
that the world gives you an unending
opportunity to fail and learn and all
the different tools you might put in
place are always called people things
like saying awareness practice -
mindfulness practices breath work
different kinds of yoga techniques
toning techniques are kind of like table
stakes to be able to simply maintain
your presence and integrity in the
context of a three-year-old who is
hell-bent on figuring how to break your
concentration which is beautiful right
that's so that that's that that was what
I would say is my core of my my
practices with the with the notion that
it's a way of making all the other stuff
meaningfully necessary and always having
to hone and build more capacity and
skillfulness and deploying the
techniques and then whenever I encounter
somebody who has a new ideas or new
capacities from any kind of domain I can
actually and it's received them
gratefully as things that I can
integrate that upgrade my own capacity
to continue in that net job do you think
if organizations like say police
departments you know enforced had
mandatory Ecology's of practice a
mandatory meditation tai chi yoga that
type of thing that that events like like
we've seen recently might be fewer
temporarily but not in the midterm the
events that we've seen recently are up
illogical variance in structure system
or system designs of this sort so long
as there is a lot of fracturing of
selective sovereignty is that there is a
formal assignment of particular kinds of
responsibility individuals as a
consequence of their occupation of a
formal position you will always end up
with the system of evolving to this
point it's actually it can kind of use
the previous language it's it's very
similar the problem what happens
in an apparent ching relationship where
apparent X on the role the formal role
parent with the sort of authorities and
responsibilities they were incumbent
upon that role rather than you know
living as a human being in relationship
with another human being where there's
this hugely complex reality what's
happening and everybody kind of has
responsibility for the relationship even
though that responsibility is
differentially allocated though so this
is one of the interesting challenges
that we have is we tend to try to use
certain kinds of tools like say for
example AXA called sensitivity training
to plug the holes in the dike instead of
actually getting rid of the dike
altogether and learning how to go
through an ecology where rivers flow and
and that but that's kind of that notion
that set of distinctions is very much
the essence of what I'm I think I'm
trying to bring to the conversation is
that the mindset that tries to operate
in that fashion oh gosh I was actually
just reading a book by a gym rat
recommended called I think it's called
sand Stoppers it's a gentleman who
speaks very much from an indigenous
perspective points out that I said this
right ah he's is a slightly different
language in this but it's it's it's very
much the same he's talked about the
second law of thermodynamics and why do
we use this language in the second law
of thermodynamics since we don't
actually live the closed system and he
said it maybe it's because there's this
continuous sort of assumption of an
intent or desire that is mandatory and
we try to build complicated closed
systems that we have found ourselves in
Western science have been the second law
of thermodynamics be like the second law
if we were to shift our mind and say oh
actually what we're actually trying to
do is to be the stewards of complex
systems of which we are expressions and
in which we are replicas fully enmeshed
we'd actually have a very different set
of challenges in front of us and
therefore we use our tools very
differently which is actually too funny
to put it to say the same thing as I
just said it in a very different way if
you actually did a really good job in
locating these kinds of practices and
people whose role formal role was police
they would probably bit and not
violently like they wouldn't walk out
but they would actually just say hey I
have to let you know that I have now
become it's become clear to me but I
cannot do the thing to which I am
committed in the context in which I am
permitted to do so we either have to
change its rather thoroughly or I will
have to withdraw so that I am not
creating more harm in the world than
good hmm
all right thank you
gesture be good as a follow-up so he
says so he clarifies that there exists
in allocation such that at least one
person is better off and nobody is worse
off so how can that be maintained and
practice in a distributed collective at
scale I love all right you just turn
this off feel bad it's my dad but I
never write you never caught okay this
is a pretty don't don't forget Sunday's
Father's Day yes unfortunately being a
being a father I am to me trinsic Lee
reminded my people substantially more
diligent than me got it okay okay this
is cool it's a great question
let me see if I can answer this it's
gonna take a little bit of time I
apologize I have to up to think about
this or contemplated
ah okay though the the key inside has to
do with the recognition that game theory
doesn't actually operate in a complex
environment aim theory can only operate
under any environment where there is a
possibility of calculation by definition
this means that it's an environment that
is both discrete and finite or at least
where there's a way of achieving a
arbitrarily high degree of probability
that the next we'll have a diminishing
implication on the structure you can do
any kind of a long tail sort and say
okay at this point I can truncate and
assume that it's finite so I can
digitize the analog environment but as
we find out in the reality the human
beings happen to live in that is simply
not the case right it is for example
replete with black swans and and
causation has so much ambiguity to it
it's actually formally incalculable
meaning that the causal structure isn't
actually able to be rendered into a
linear fashion in any fashion what this
means is the game theory actually simply
isn't applicable you can't use it as a
tool to make choices in the context of
an actual complex environment and so
Sevilla is using that reference are
written R which I like the Hebrew
implications I would just get rid of the
a all together and just have it be RT
and R and tell people that have to draw
a line through it and then refer to it
as such is actually properly understood
as being oriented towards management but
the cultivation of living this in this
complex environment okay now what does
that mean it means is on the one hand
there is a closure of loops is more
important and Pareto efficiency what
does that mean hold on
the the biggest challenge has to do with
the degree to which an individual either
yields in themselves that they cannot
make effective choices that actually
result in effective change so either
because their own agency is so diluted
in the environment that their choices
are meaningless or that there is well
either because the environment lacks the
ability to perceive the signals and
propagate and return value or return
truth back and or because there is but a
niche or maintaining the failure of the
environment to do that people who are
actually intentionally gaming the system
so the answer comes in something like
for example there's a whole portfolio of
things that the answer comes in
something like a intense and significant
extinguishing of defection misha's that
put it outside the threshold of
perceived advantage combined with a
significant fraction of a wealth is has
to be held in Commons and that Commons
has to be multi-dimensional there's a
whole multi-modality to this that's
important if you try to collapse the
modality of value into some narrow a
modality it may be that you do it at all
like how money it's the adversity of
values and collapses into a single
object this is the kind of thing that
makes it both easy to game and difficult
to actually achieve your own values but
if it's managed in a highly modal value
context which means by the way very
peer-to-peer and very moment to moment
and actually requires a certain slowness
this has a capacity of perception of
what is actually happening
of reality it allows the defection to be
extinguished vigorously this shows up as
things like killing defectors in like
rapidly or more often by the way it's
actually somewhat kind of some harsh
salient visceral punishment followed by
a joyful ritual of reengagement with the
community looking like that if you
actually extinguish the meta behavior
not the subsidiary beam you change them
mindset that plays game theory at all
and orient choice-making towards the
mindset that can perceive high modal or
high modal's and they will describe it
values and grasps frankly grasps
intrinsically the fact that for example
all values are cumulative that you and I
can both optimize our values in a way
that is actually intrinsically
synergistic well for example purposes
can be a trillion conflict there's a
distinction between values and purposes
and that we can find out that we are not
able to align on purpose and then my
purpose and your purpose may be in
conflict and that would put us in a game
theoretic conflict but we can also
understand that can synergize on our
values and therefore actually identify
different purposes that we both will
feel from the value sense or maybe even
more in alignment with that our
individual and now shared values and
that it allows us to actually be
intrinsically outside of a game through
a I said that was a melange not a clear
answer so I apologize and was able to
pull that together particularly well and
finding that the like this audio way of
the way that it feels like right now I
don't even know that I'm talking to
anybody is it difficult for me to hold
on to the threat but oh that was a
better than absolute waste of time
no not not a waste at all yeah sorry we
do need to do this audio otherwise
people can't get into the room but
hopefully though they'll allow
expansions here on discourse at some
point and it would be great to do this
with with video aunt Elijah who who
wasn't played a big part in that
document that I sent you
asks Oh actually did did you oh I think
he wants me to say it I'm not sure she
did you want to ask yourself oh i was--
is there a way collectively objectively
to appraise wisdom and others would it
be possible for us for a society to set
wisdom requirements on positions that
bestow great power my instincts say no
and now i have to figure out why that
would be the case which is funny right
because it's almost like
self-referential so so one
characteristic would have to do with the
same conversation about the this that
which can be enumerated in some kind of
metro sized like integer structure say
objectively in some sense means to be
able to enumerate to measure in some
kind of discreet and and at least in
that context the answer has to be no
because wisdom by definition has to do
with they act like a pasty that is
applied in a given context and so the
context matters context matters reduce
ibly so for example you could imagine
you can you could measure you could
create a test that could I say T for
wisdom it would be able to measure the
depth quality of approach at that is
doable and I've actually seen some that
exist but this is really the depth or
quality of approach that is taken to a
given context and this can give you a
qualitative sense like I and to some
extent a measurable sense that you can
differentiate between gross a degrees or
levels and there's certainly utility to
that and an exact exact Stein I would
point to as being a primary person
vastly more capable had informed
but it has it's just more capable of
saying things than me in this domain so
that's actually where they're
interesting so it's in there's something
about even the mindset of the intention
that is desire I mean those physics
linked to this initiative technology to
do so right to find some way of hey
Keaton can we scale wisdom by being able
to automate even the measurement of it
or if not automated needs to be able to
have an interest objective scoring
mechanism and therefore be able to have
it kind of attached to an identity as a
reputation score and my sense is it by
the way god I've thought about that a
lot in it part of me definitely hopes
that the answer is yes so I have to say
that I'm of devided intent whether or
not I've divided the opinion and so
there's a there's kind of a rough yes
it's kind of like have you guys ever
done with processes that go through a
human to machine to human AI so instead
of a AI the strictly machine ik it
actually has a multiple loops humans
will input the machine while output
humans will then process that and then
the machine will do something like you
actually loop through it there may be a
way of doing that for you for example
you have a multi-layered context that
has kind of a machine ik layer that has
the capacity to do certain levels of
orientation and pruning or it does it
then hands that off to a human layer
there's just kind of transferring it
back into the subjective and the
interest objective and as long as you
maintain this this notion of flowing
back and forth and you have to keep
symmetry which the Machine layer can
overwhelm the human layer in velocity
and the the choice making it the end
state is always happening to human layer
then you start getting something that
thing could actually be very functional
or both dealing with the question of
wisdom and empowering wisdom in a more
scalable way and in the role of
Technology in scaling these systems so
related to wisdom you spoke with John
about the critical importance of being
able to rightly attune one's attention
how do you think the average person
should learn how to do this so in other
words how do we become Special Forces as
you talked about with John wait say that
again so you talked about the importance
of being able to write Lee a tune once
attention to to decide what one should
allocate our our attention to in our
limited time on earth I think he called
it one of the most precious commodities
for the average for an average person
just the people in this group how how
would how would you recommend I feel
maybe this is just super good news I
think this is actually the most average
of capacities it certainly is present in
infant so I'll give you an example
literally a brand new born and certainly
within the first three days if you you
know a mom is holding the child and
another person let's say dad reaches out
the hands to create a felt sense of you
know transition like what would you be
interested in being held and this is by
the way but at the point where the child
can't actually visually perceive faces
particularly well nonetheless the
capacity to sense the presence of a
state change and to feel in the body and
attraction with pulse in proportion to
the opportunity of that state change is
there and and then by the way to express
a preference is also there requires
presence and the part of the adults
involved to aware of it it's that level
of basic and so this no I'm just gonna
call that skill discernment because why
not
we're banding words about someone
abusively the question I think is a
question of how do we cultivate in
ourselves this most ambient in the most
basic of human capabilities and how do
we recover the degree to which we've
lost it I think most of its in that last
category or most of the problem that I
think most people face is that
particularly through education our our
our basic toolkit has been some
combination of blunted
roken in taken away but the fortunate
thing is that starting over at the
basics is very simple so for example
practice rediscovering what kinds of
foods you actually like if your self
permission to not have a preconceived
notion of what foods you ought to eat
and that your body appreciates and then
just buy something slowly thoughtfully
intentionally and then notice like what
does it actually feel like very
basically they're just a gross sense of
like yes this or notice for example you
can kind of do that with anything it's
it's like being a Tai Chi you can slow
things down and make the movement
infinitesimally and that actually is the
way that you get the highest felt sense
of what right movement is like all right
that's another example you can do it in
Tai Chi by just simply moving your body
one centimeter but what I would
recommend is actually doing this across
a wide portfolio to the degree to which
you have skillfulness a particular
domain you can also hone it at a higher
level I can't say you happen to be a
graphic designer
notice the the felt sense in you that
Orient's towards what yes this or
rightness or yeah that's it and no not
quite there feels like and then just be
conscious with the fact that that same
thing works everywhere now you may have
you haven't may not have built the right
kinds of inputs and outputs and be able
to deploy it in all domains but it's the
same basic skill I think as John
mentioned it may actually be oriented
towards like the part of the cortex
that's associated with the same like
physical balance I can maybe actually be
neurological correlates at the same
skill and so what you can do is you can
both hone it vertically in domain so you
actually had developed some level
skillfulness and of course just say an
average person's to say everybody's
developed that it may be you have
skillfulness and appreciating a
particularly high quality football
playing college football doesn't matter
right just okay to become conscious of
how you appreciate the wholeness and how
you appreciate the distinction between
rightness and wrongness in any domain
then work on basic ones who touch well
breathing pace like speed slows things
down and speed things up and notice like
which pace it's actually more writing is
more wrongness and then just close the
gap and neck the space between the is we
have high skillfulness and the
capacity and you'll begin to see these
things vectoring towards a higher basis
yeah chocolates good excess is good
excise no rate X is one of the best X in
chocolate for me are great closely kin
it Thanks that was great coffee you have
a question yes it is Kathy says I think
he actually 100 did he say stepping away
okay so we'll come back come back to him
let him we'll let him ask Mike Mike G
you have a question and sorry did you
want me to ask it or did you want to ask
oh man I'm reading my cheese question
people people are shy today further
alert I'm reading ahead now I'll just
read it for for the audience and for
YouTube the vastness of the conversation
about the written are as well as notions
around the meaning crisis and
sense-making arenas appear to be
touching upon if not wholly revolve
around the sacred or divine a concept in
and of itself that I feel is fully
defined but constantly alluded to or in
other instances willfully utilizing
suggestive words associated toward but
intentionally holding back from
committing to outright real presence or
intentional communion with this for lack
of a better term sacred or divine I've
been struggling with how a written R
could actually work and oftentimes
sounds or feels a fear that this
conception is challenged because of an
outgrowth of historical anticipate to
religion but this in mind what would you
consider the opposition or challenge to
creating a religion or calling it for
what it is that is a religion and just
for the YouTube audience written R
stands for the religion that's not a
religion okay good I'm actually really
glad to have this question because
there's come up a few times in certain
comments and I think it's it's I'm late
to address it earlier I referenced a
particular tribe
made the point not writing down the name
of the divine and being quite careful
about that circumspect
I think that's there's a good reason for
that and I think that's that's that's
the answer to the question to define who
who endeavor to define who endeavor to
it so fully pierce the veil of mystery
as to render it no longer mystery is
defilement is in fact the is the essence
and the intuition of the profane so to
hold the sacred sacred has a certain
requirement and part of that is to
actually recognize that there is a way
of feeling and being in relationship
which is to say to know knowing deeply
and without this least bit of question
that the divine is that must by
necessity avoid at all costs any effort
to put the divine on the rack of
definition and to render it merely
propositional oh this I think is the
thing that is trying to be held with the
NA and the written our construct and I
get it I get the fact that there has
been for at least the past 150 or 200
years and increasingly over the past
over decades a building default state
and tippity to the jens a-- and to
religion in general and and i get it i
get both the the thing that gave rise to
them participate and to the degree to
which that is a problem a lot a lot of
error behind it but what i'd like to
propose is that the right answers in
some sense neither that the reason why
and the the thing that causes the thing
that has been called a religion to go
off the rails is precisely the the
profaning of the sacred went beyond
either just forgetting a necessity of
recognizing that the transcendent is
transcendent and that as we endeavor to
name it we can be helpful but also can
create enormous amounts of confusion and
harm because almost everybody takes the
finger from the moon
and everybody everybody else takes the
moon to the moon that's a real problem
though endeavouring to actually
deconstruct that in the center it narf
to say hey we're gonna be doing this
thing that if we call it the second we
call it a religion we've already broken
faith if that which is most sacred if we
are living it without calling it and
that's the distinction that I just like
to put out there a whole point of
religion that makes it a real thing that
is viable in the world is not the naming
of it or the calling of it or Surry not
the thinking about it but it is the
living nativity with the bringing people
into being in the world in a certain way
in cultivating and in certain
relationships with each other themselves
the world that is simultaneously the
name of the divine is most fully
realized form and the meaningfulness of
religion that we can then protect by
calling it not a religion being very
careful not to fall into that trap of
trying to name God thank you I think
coffee coffees back go ahead coffee
Oh awesome thanks Jordan thanks for this
again giving your experience in
technology product strategy and
management and that that's kind of where
I played today it would seem that
there's a role of Technology and scaling
these types of systems and practices and
I'm just wondering if you can share you
know how you think about building
solutions that can facilitate things
like this you know there there were some
examples given of decentralized
platforms like blockchain and perhaps
when society adopts that at a broader
scale that might be viable but I'm just
thinking about other ways that
technology can can help contribute to so
appreciate your thoughts oh gosh you're
welcome I wish they were better what I
can say is that I have struggled with
trying to get a good answer this
question for about two decades now and I
can say that my intuitions as somebody
who came up through technology have
proven to be largely wrong and so one of
the things that I've noticed is that
it's very important
me to be be careful not to go too fast
through what I would consider kind of
like the ordinary techniques of
availability and even systems design to
be very very mindful of where I guess my
instincts were maybe the instincts of
technological civilization often time
leads us awry so I'll give you an
example a nature typically doesn't scale
and so if you design something that does
scale one of the things that's going to
happen is you'll be up regulating some
subset of reality to a much higher level
than is available in all the rest of
aspects of reality that are not being
thus scale and so therefore it can be
quite trivial to accidentally break
homeostatic systems apart problems of
accumulation extraction is a always
mentioned in Danish macton where as
mentioned in different contexts so the
answer I've actually found is that that
we those who are our systems designers
and technologists actually have to up
our game quite substantially before I
think we're actually going to be truly
effective well well no no in some sense
that's okay because it's not it's
actually a relatively new discipline
even computer science by itself is only
what five decades old I'll stop and you
know look about how much havoc economics
is wrought I trying to wield power in
its adolescence so a bit of humility to
say hey we have a fundamental not even a
meaningful but a fundamental role to
play is to say technologists and also
we're not yet capable to play that role
fully so let's go into it let's take it
seriously and really take a look at and
what are the key problems of how we can
think about how do you scale homeostatic
lee how do you actually think about
whole systems design and how do you make
sure that you're actually up regulating
the intrinsics of integral systems
they're able to grow without breaking
symmetry relationships that then cause
whole chunks of complexity to shatter
you know the kinds of questions they
were asked in terms of database theory
in the 70s we should be asking those
questions
terms of the relationship and complexity
and complicated is now well and years
ago unfortunately that would then give
us a lot more power and let me throw out
so that's one angle that it's called the
angle of humility and taking our
humility pills seriously and then and
then recognize that we can do it we just
have to be more diligent and focused two
more pieces actually so the next piece
we are the are ever since and I'm just
gonna sana Phi it ever since Alan Turing
we technologists have been the I think
in many ways some combination of
unwitting unwilling and perhaps however
I said this resentful or an ethical
handmaidens destruction in every
dimension not just weapons of mass
destruction in the military context but
in any context the obviously since the
nineteen forties the way to win was to
get the best technology on your side and
the implications for example in AI
research says that you know the the
place that has the highest degree of
likelihood of exponential technology
being exponential because the
competition be the one technology that
achieves decisive strategic advantage is
the hottest x rivalries competition
leading to extinction
that's part two are tubes and we
actually have to be mindful that if we
among all else literally every other
kind of human being on the planet play
into rivalries game theory we are the
exponent of exponential tech it's that's
how it happens and either we have to be
the and the the the guy from Cyberdyne
systems in Terminator 2 and collectively
kill ourselves to prevent a bad future
from happening or we have to really
figure out how to hold our hand in the
game of competition against each other
either directly or as someone else's
pawns it was to not tip that scale but
then you have the third right and the
third piece has to do with the fact that
it's domain the anti rival wrist which
is the location of abundance the
location of the possibility of a
generativity that completely changes the
nature of what it means to be invited
beings in the world is also our
playground right that's what
technologists are in so as we increase
our skillfulness we can also increase
our artfulness and and it's only through
and it is through the the generativity
of the ante arrival is that we can
actually liberate people really nilly
and I don't mean that just theoretically
I mean theoretically I can state it
categorically actively speaking for
example if we imagine a context where an
ethical community begins the process of
empowering technologists to ethically
and thoughtfully design most powerful
herbal empowering and ethical platforms
the advantages of recombine n't anti
rival resinous begins to become a
massive engine and because the you know
every time that platform becomes richer
the value is shared across everybody
who's on the platform financially and we
started getting except our agent so as
much as I say that we hold a lot of the
burdens I would say that we also hold in
many ways the e to the the possibility
of actually liberation Oh
the answer is weird like the answer
doesn't as far as I can tell doesn't
come through using the stuff we're
really good at analytical reasoning that
stuff like that it comes through two
things one is is actually finding ways
to form the right kinds of relationships
with right kinds of skill sets that
support us well you know there's this
again this book I mentioned the gym
recommended the indigenous gentleman
from Australia he has a technique he
calls yarn and why AR and you'd like to
spin a yarn to tell a tale that's a
really cool relationship like change
from the notion of requirements
gathering like Co creative weaving and
actually playing a role in the
co-creative leaping and recognizing
exactly two roles to play and thinking
about how you move it sorry I definitely
entered there but I think there was some
pretty good stuff there in the beginning
I definitely appreciate it we just have
a few minutes left for a little bit more
than an hour did you do you do you have
time for just a few more I think two
more would be good okay well first one
very short one but I think very
important from Tyler chocolate is the
best flow state yes or no no no that the
thing about chocolate that you can mix
chocolate other things and correct
your gistic yeah it's a it's a topping
let's say okay so no I let me squeeze in
a real question if I can't have
interrupted in two already anyways um
your work and coming into contact with
this stuff that even doing is kind of
catapulted me into quite an adventure of
the past few years and one of the I
think one of the first pieces that I
smashed headlong into is let's say
notion of humility and systems design
and doing any kind of engineering work
and trying to get complex systems to
coordinate well and and so that it's
partially that which has led me to the
spot that I'm in now and attempts to
understand the scalability issue and and
somewhat also something like a
measurement issue where the influence in
the system when you're taking a look at
it has a profound impact but I'm curious
about this notion right is is it is this
a place is something like this digital
landscape a place where we can iterate
in the same way that evolution solved
the hard problem of the open-ended
question of suitability or adaptability
by just iterative design can we do that
here in this space where we've where we
do eventually solve this this
fundamental relational problem that
seems to be cropping up so persistently
in human evolution I get the sense that
this is kind of a key piece in order for
the rest of it to fall together and and
that maybe it's intuitive iam and all of
that right so yes alright we lob that in
there and
yeah that's a really that's a really
deep question the language actually has
to do with the proposition
epistemological that there is a
distinction between what you might call
an evolutionary process and what you
might call design process and I should
say I've been in a lot of arguments
about this and I've been on both sides
of the argument so one might argue for
example the design process is just
rapidly iterated evolutionary process
but the hypothesis tonight and I now
agree the hypothesis that's not the case
is it and maybe a way of looking into it
I hate to do this because it feels like
it's abusing the concepts but you know
the way the distinction between
traditional computing and quantum
computing that there's a way to approach
a particular problem domain that is it
operates in terms of an intrinsic
wholeness and either holds together a
dozen but it doesn't get there through
an iterative process we're gonna
interview of analytic process and it
cannot be formally modeled as such so
which is to say that it's not that you
move towards wholeness and then you
don't get there so you try a different
analytic variation because it's not it's
not a summing of discrete states it's
something else it's in that Ellis is the
whole point by the way for those of us
who were talking with you everything
that Ellison is my precisely to that
thing that shouldn't be spoken up but
they a way of being in relationship with
that else Ness actually using a very
different modality of sense making
different modality of perception that
has that operates in terms of integrated
wholeness and allows us to be able to
perceive utterly and then begin to move
from subtlety into increasing on cretan
us with something that sort of just
comes together I think given this is
just you know now we're kind of in the
middle of it I think is a very right and
powerful question that's my current
opposition a current proposition is that
the primary capacity that needs to be
built and those who are doing that kind
of work
is that kind of capacity and and as that
skillfulness gets to be too bill built
awkwardness at the language I'm using
right now become a lot less awkward and
we'll be able to have like a whole
awesome okay I'm with a for describing
these kinds of things and it will turn
out to be compatible with an adjunct to
be a kind of iterative process that we
can for sure run in a digital space but
that will not actually hold the desert
its far as I can tell distinct and it's
crucial to actually be held distinct and
that a set of questions that are
appropriate for one is not actually
endeavoured to be accomplished or the
other yeah yeah yeah I mean it's really
interesting especially that relationship
between evolution and design right
because you think about the way that
like in the genotype and the the the
fundamental transmission of the
information that's encoded in me it's a
very distinct discrete state right it's
a propositional state of genetic code
which is an expressed through you know
some series of magical transformations
into a layer which is no longer
essentially propositional right it's now
this embodied perspectival musical
quality that's the coordination of this
vast sea of kind of orchestrated cycles
and and that that is in fact the place
where the testing of that propositional
code embedded in the DNA occurs my
individual life right the somatic
expression of that drawing right is the
testing point and that's yes that's
right right exactly I've actually hold
on to that like the chart that's
beautiful to transition from the what is
effectively the phenomenal touches the
new mineral by going through that
transition and if it doesn't go through
that transition it doesn't actually get
a checksum which is the thing that makes
it possible to go through this thing
fitness and the other one that came to
mind as we're talking is the experience
of the transition for quantity to
quality that is actually very all in
place which is what happens when you
take rhythm EPM and you accelerate BPM
into the ghost
transition where our ear goes from
hearing it as a linear quantity number
of uniform beats that are happening in
time through a quality a tone a note
occurs and I'm actually listening to
middle C which of course is expressed in
terms of Hertz right it actually can be
thought of as being nothing more than a
unity of quantity but there's almost as
verticality where the horizontal
dimension actually does become a
vertical dimension and that fact the
reality of the transition that you just
talked about from the genetic code to
the units that's exactly what I'm
talking about if we can hold that and
find it would actually play within that
space and DeLand started doing that with
more thoughtfulness and intentionality
then we're onto something
agree all right so last question so from
David how do you personally and I'd like
to brought it out to broaden it to how
would you recommend it for us to how
would you figure out how to manage
information and prioritize what to read
learn with so much out there and not
 to fall to information overwhelm I
use magic but fortunately for me it
turns out I that comes quite naturally I
I think probably my sophomore year of
college that I had an experienced it
wasn't in place at that folks in
particular physical books actually have
a certain aesthetic quality to them so
when I look at a title of a book it'll
have like a color or a taste and I what
I noticed is that I had a certain if I
if I attended to that I've actually
allowed that to guide me in my
allocation of attention it kind of
worked and so you know I gotta say like
jij alloys on welded Londa tastes very
much like Judah Lewis and so it was easy
for me to know that within sentences of
reading war in the age of intelligent
machines that was going to be a
delicious meal and you know and
floured it and by contrast
example it was it was simply intrinsic
with the case that as I was reading
Hegel's phenomenology of spirit I was
like yeah it has a lot of it feels heavy
it feels very Germanic it feels
like there's a lot of cream I'm an upset
stomach by the end of this and so I you
know I read it but I could tell already
that I was actually feeling myself just
kind of sorting through it and scanning
and looking for the little tiny pieces
that did have a glow to them now you
know what the hell is that mean that's a
good question to be perfectly honest I
do not know but what I I can hypothesize
that there's a again back to that felt
sense of rightness because reality it's
as broad capacities vast evolutionary
capacity to like not get eaten by lions
and to you know eat plants that don't
poison you that if you sort of put all
of that to bear just allow the whole
sensorium totality of all of your
processing capacity that has been hone
to protect you and to support you and to
help you and then you allow yourself to
use that to guide you that's the best
you're gonna do like just analytically
for sure that's the best you're gonna do
and so the challenge is kind of to say
okay let me work backwards to me let me
how can I most effectively use that and
my guess is that in reality everybody
actually has that just who or the most
part we haven't trained ourselves and
have not been trained certainly we have
not been trained we haven't trained
ourselves to those two resources to use
but I would practice for example what's
that called ash alright improvisation or
her a particularly collaborative
proposition because that felt sense of
being able to get the flow of what's
being offered in the possibility of the
conversation like that's the skill
that's the technique right you're
finding it where's this sweet spot and
you can just like oh yeah okay I'm
seeing this particular conversation I'm
reading this text I'm feeling the quiz
this sweet's about role in some gigantic
improvisational play and I think of it
as one huge field it's not a series of
discrete opportunities to allocate your
attention it's a single moment and your
job is to actually find this sweet spot
in that single moment and so anything
that is unique we have the
characteristic that develops and hunter
skillfulness and finding that sweet spot
do that you good at it by the sideways
to a very different domain until you're
able to generalize and boom you're
aren't you running is there a place
where you go into this much deeper on
mother podcaster probably thing I have
to confess which is I actually haven't
particularly when I'm saying something
that's actually proven in the patent
that's like other people say oh that was
good that was useful I don't know what
I'm talking yeah I don't recall that I
said anything I actually don't even
called the time passing unfortunately of
a fugue state so and I I I can't really
stand the sound of my own voice and I
don't like listening to things that I've
done so I don't really have any idea be
perfectly frank what I've said or what
I've done except from the degree which
other people have kind of reflecting it
back to me so I guess I'm betting at
least once or twice this topic has come
up and perhaps in a context where it has
been given some the more color maybe
with the future thinkers that's actually
all I can say other people might know
there are some people who have actually
listened to a shockingly large amount of
crap that I've said and and may actually
have a better sense of what might be the
the best or better stuff okay thank you
yeah I I know the future thinkers of
series you did on the learning how to
learn the deep code I think and you did
one with David G and he's kind of kind
of question you on the synesthesia part
but those are the points that I know yes
okay yeah so sorry I can't be if will
help
well no you you've been of plenty help
today this has been a completely
engaging session and I really appreciate
you coming by and giving us your time
and your wisdom and this I I know I'm
gonna have to go back and listen to a
lot of this a few times and thank you
for all especially that advice on
setting up
this discord so thank you so much for
being here today Jordan you're welcome
my pleasure I hope they had a good time
I hope there was more than five voices
in the car like him every time yeah
people were people were more shy tonight
but I do encourage people to ask their
own questions but that's a but I'm
perfectly happy to read them out and and
you're welcome back any time maybe maybe
we can invite you back after you speak
with John again it'd be we'd love to
have you thank you that's really nice to
hear
I feel very intrigued steai this
particular it evolves I'm delighted to
know that it exists and if there's a
like a real number of people here and I
also love the notion that there is this
brett weinstein this cordons eric
weinstein discordant obviously it's not
strictly discord this group say also
everywhere but something about that
feels really right about the discovery
and the emergence of people choosing to
enter into deliberate and intentional in
some cases hard one community that are
distinct and yet able to then
interrelate with each other like that
feels like a very useful thing to do
these dead yeah definitely and and tyler
for example is very focused on sort of
bringing these communities together and
sort of you know bridging bridging
between them and a lot of our members
you know we have overlap with with eric
weinstein server with paul van der clays
server with a lot of these with this
with some stoah server so there's a lot
of lot of over overlap and we're
definitely trying to to encourage this
time I apologize I just had it I just
had something coming to my mind I'd like
to add is that okay yeah of course it
has to do with this question of
information over well so this is this is
actually very practical one of the
things that I have built as a technique
when answering the problem of
information overwhelm is
do you go up or to go in
oh well then in particular event is
occurring I mean we could just pick
anything but school it's like I don't
know coronavirus Cove it I and there's a
large amount of information particularly
lot of information that's at the same
kind of pissed on a logical level you
know epidemiology information for
example what I find is that there's a
way of noticing when you've reached a
point where you almost get like
diminishing returns continuing to
operate at that level and and then the
right answer and by the way you can say
it I'm beginning to feel information
overwhelm like that's maybe a good way
of noticing it and then there's a way of
a that she's gonna go up or in so up
would be like and if you think about
like geometry you could you think about
it from the point view of a higher level
geometry like are there is there a
topological way of thinking about this
entire thing I don't have to worry about
the lot of information I can actually
collapse all of that down to a single
point this is something that Eric
Weinstein is comprehensively good at and
then there's in let's just say let me
just actually move entirely from the
informational domain and just
contemplate you just sort of multiple
shoe on this thing and not even trying
to be in a relationship with it at all
in the informational domain then notice
if anything comes up that has that
that's kind of a felt sense of ha or
some shift has occurred or an insight
and generally speaking if I find myself
in a place where information everyone
what's happening I have enough practice
these days to be Oh conscious with that
and then to do one of these two or both
moves and I have to say it's always the
right booth I've never once had that
happen and not had been very happy that
I chose to go in that direction oh
that's that great thank you thank you
for the Encore
so thanks thanks again Jordan for being
here thank you everyone for listening
Tyler for for recording just heads up so
at 9:30 Eastern tonight we're trying out
a new ritual speaking of rituals
the sacrifice of sentiment and you can
you can take a look in the if you look
in our Google Calendar there's a there's
a full description and we'll put it up
in the announcements tomorrow we're
trying to get another another ritual the
prayer of presence air and these are
both come up by Kali who's who's here
now so we're gonna we're we're
experimenting and seeing seeing seeing
seeing what works what we resonate with
and as well as Saturday at 2 p.m.
Eastern Christopher master Pietro will
be here for a Q&A so he he's John's
long-term partner research partner and I
think that'll be a be a great a great
discussion as awesome guys thank you
I got here thanks Jordan take care
thanks everyone have a great night