[Music]
welcome to the State of Mind podcast my
name is Chris in this episode I'm joined
by a guy sing stock from Berkeley
California guy is the owner and founder
of the circling Institute based in
Berkeley and focuses on personal
development leadership training for
individuals and groups through a
philosophy based approach to self-help
and psychotherapy although we do discuss
circling and is wrong in its foundation
to some extent in this podcast the bulk
of the discussion actually centers
around the German philosopher Martin
Heidegger who was active in the early
and mid 20th century and transformed
Western philosophy completely hider is
known for influencing modernism and
post-modernism but his own philosophy is
starkly different from those
intellectual movements this discussion
wasn't aimed to become too technical and
I deliberately tried to keep the
conversation general enough for an
introduction into his ideas and his
ontology so there's no requirement on
the listeners part feel familiarity with
heidegger's work per se God was a
fascinating speaker and I got a lot out
of our discussion which could have gone
on much longer and often became
extremely challenging to conceptualize
but this is common when discussing any
of heidegger's ideas I hope you enjoy
this episode if you have any comments or
feedback just send them via the Facebook
page State of Mind podcast or through
Twitter at state of mind
c.j this episode will also be available
for download on itunes and now i give
you guys sang stop
[Music]
I'm here with guy Singh stock I'm saying
that right guy thanks for joining us
it's kind of exciting to be talking to
someone from California in Australia so
that's great and obviously we're gonna
be talking about
Heidegger in in this particular episode
not just him you know associated issues
and topics but I just wanted to kind of
start by getting a bit of background
from you and and where your interests
are it's interesting
my my my journey with Heidegger has been
so it's it's so compelling to me how I
got into Heidegger and like the impact
I'm continually finding the impact that
he's had on me as a person in its way
that's this way that I keep finding out
about which is just I think so telling
who he is
as a thinker the thing I'm most known
for is founding being one of the main
founders of something called circling
yeah which is something that a friend of
mine and I came across spontaneously in
the way that we were relating to each
other at Burning Man in 1998
do you want to quickly just explain what
Burning Man is I know I'll do my best
the Burning Man Burning Man you could
say is like it's it's interesting it's
probably the most religious living
religious experience in probably that's
that's maybe it's ever happened right
but it's definitely is happening right
now
and what's so interesting about Hydra
about Burning Man is you is it's not
explicitly religious it's I don't know
at this point a hundred thousand people
or something like that show up in the
middle of the desert right like flat
salt flats in in Nevada
yeah and build a city with the man right
know three or four story you know man
that they burn at the end of it mm-hm
the man doesn't symbolize anything and
no one's meeting for any reason and it's
filled with you know I think it's
originally started as a bunch of modern
artists postmodern artists basically
like in people they basically come and
they can and they make these art cars
and these
wild you know wild camps and obstacle
courses and it's a it's an amazing
experience so diesel started the
circling concept come out of that or was
a taken to like as a attitude towards
that kind of event I think it's more
like I think it's more like the context
or the space that Burning Man opens up
it makes sense to me that the six of us
six or seven of us that discovered
circling discovered it there but it
wasn't something that like was put on by
Burning Man or something like that it
was something that just happened because
there's you could say that another thing
about Burning Man is you could say that
it's a place where profound
conversations get started and like
Twitter got started there apparently if
you're high up in Google there they
require you to go to Burning Man every
year and so yeah it's a very it's a
space where mind just become something
extraordinary mm-hmm and at the end of
it I mean the to the the other person I
was with Jerry Candelaria him and I
became kind of you could say the two
people that were ended up just naturally
guiding the experience ourselves guiding
the experience and afterwards we got
done and Jerry came up to me he's like
that he went like this was his finger
that thing that just happened I'm like
yeah that the thing that was something
right it was like yeah that was
something extraordinary like yeah that
mm-hmm and so we just shook hands on it
in that moment and we just committed to
bring it out into the world and we had
no idea what that was or what that meant
out of that handshake hmm became
something that then later became called
circling that started all kinds of
communities in the Bay Area that started
a whole lot like like emerged a whole
vocabulary that is now emerging all over
the world it's in Europe it's you know
it's in Australia yeah all the time so
what's the I've got two points to make
but I want to quickly go to this one
because the first thought
what's the applicability of this kind of
system of thought in terms of real
relation relating
to the other which i think is what it
boils down to but in a very kind of
ontological sense not so much
psychological little character
personality clashes or something it goes
deeper than that how do you apply that
broadly you know in the in the sense
that you're doing that circling now
becoming a worldwide phenomenon happen
what it looks like is that people start
communities that they gather together
and they and they do circling right so
it's a way that a group that people work
in a group it's also a lot of coaches
and psychotherapists and this what's
interesting is like there's a lot of
things that kind of look like that but
it does something very distinct about
circling in that most group work you
could say are psychological and base
rate which is that you can say the kind
of ontological understanding or premise
underneath psychology isn't is is
medical right or it's about healing
which has a whole ontology so when
somebody puts the attention like in a
classical like Gestalt group or
something like that the reason why
everyone's attention is on them is for
some kind of growth or change to happen
with circling that's not the point
in fact that's like actually like that's
deviating away from the practice of
circling the whole the whole point of
circling is is is that we're all engaged
in in the practice of being with what is
right or what I like to say more
poetically put how profoundly can we be
with what is and and to me this is where
we start to get into Heidegger in the
sense of that to me we start to engage
in how you get at that right how do you
get at is right um Society would say the
the event of truth or the event of
philosophy yeah right that happens right
so it's like um so instead of good like
you know asking Quentin is person
questions in order to fix or change them
we're more asking questions in relating
and listening and speaking and
dialoguing to find out what is for that
person what is for the person who's
leading the circle and participating and
what's being
concealed between us right in and out
what would I think Martin Buber would
say the I've a sense of the word
right like not relating because because
you know if I'm trying to fix you right
you know I'm relating to you as a means
to an end of growth right whereas
whereas I thou that's more like it I eat
relationship where I thou relationship
is more more that that when I relate to
is it Dow you're not a means to an end
you're an end in yourself it's
interesting because it's like right when
I start to relate to you as an end in
yourself as before to save there's an I
because I though is spoken as one word
yeah hi that arises in that that
relating to you as a Dow becomes a very
different eye than the one that like you
know arises when you know I'm doing
laundry or exact chrono I know exactly
what you're saying in a Haida garyun
sense if that makes any sense at all and
I'll explain that I think that I there
dichotomy that the subject object
dichotomy is a step towards what you're
saying getting to that essence of is you
know being profoundly connected to it's
a stepped closer to it than being a
subject object so if you're seeing
someone as say a friend in order to get
a job or just someone who you'll call on
to get favors from that's a classic
subject object worldview and that's what
most human beings operate like I think
when you start you know becoming a bit
more primal and looking at it as I'm
just seeing the other person for them
their own sake like you said you're
getting a bit closer to something that
you have in common so that there's more
there's your tuning yourself to opening
up commonality you're still thinking
about yourself as you know I'm Chris new
guy but it's that's it there's no
there's nothing outside of that
relationship it's not like your guy in
order to do this podcast you know that's
stopped that's the relation
ship that you're kind of attuning
yourself for I think idea calls a
comporting comportment so you can call
yourself towards that kind of
relationship unlike a micro-level like
just with the person you're relating to
and you get far more out of it than you
would as treating them like a you know
object under a microscope or using them
as a tool anything like that they are
all layers of meaning and they're all
valid aspects of humanity but I think
what you're going into this circling
seems to be because you keep saying I'm
still learning what it is
I think that's inevitable when you get
down to these levels or up you can
imagine it down or up I'd imagine it as
a ground to allow all of these other
artificialities to occur that's a highly
good view but you can imagine it as an
abstract like up there you're getting
towards this kind of transcendent
relationship with someone and that's I
think what best friends have best
friends are like I'm not hanging out
with my best friend just so I could get
a date well you know get free beers
although that's a nice you know side
effect it's not how I relate to him or
you know what I mean so I don't know if
that clarifies it a bit that would you
see circling as some similar something
kind of an approach that approximates
that it's interesting because it's like
if you bring in height over here you
know one of the things that Heidegger's
you know main thing you could say that
you know most big philosophers have one
thought right they have one thought that
they think in various ways or disclosed
this thought their whole life and for
Heidegger heidegger's basic thought was
what is the meaning of being and it's
really difficult to start to get at that
right because if you think about it you
know we constantly comport the world as
beings right I'm a being the tables of
being the Lambs to being and Heidegger
says like 12 in order to comprehend or
even relate to or understand any being I
must already have an understanding of
beating with the capital B I'm already
and he's like hick nice is like that
that
you know what do we mean when we say is
or we say it is right like what's the it
what's the is and that that background
understanding right for the meaning of
what of the word is or what that points
to is you can say the category of all
categories that make categories possible
but here's the thing is that is how you
would say the tricky part is that what
philosophy and always trying to dump try
to try to understand being by making it
a being which conceals being made that's
the tricky part right that's the tricky
part is you can't in order to understand
the background context of all context
--is if you turn it into a foreground
phenomenon you conceal it right okay and
she's problem with Immanuel Kant I don't
know if you ever got into can't because
he's very dry but he came up with that
transcendental idealism as in there's a
category of all categories like you said
the a priori you know the bridge that
allows us to have knowledge you know
that order to define what a plant is or
what a friend is or what a stranger is
you know it's already there behind us
the problem with cancer approaches it it
objectified knowledge of the world and
of being as that is so you're pointing
to someone saying that is my friend in
saying we are or I their or you know a
primary doesn't quite explain that yes
it's you know it's it's very scientific
and it's compelling in that idealist
kind of platonic sense of well we know
what a friend is because we know what
the concept of a friend is we don't just
know a friend we know what friend
capital F means it allows us to miss
make that mistake right and not notice
that we're making that mistake is based
on what we mean when we say B and that
historically you can if you look back in
history is one of the things I Heidegger
did after being in time is he he he
looked back at history in terms of what
was the pre thematic right the the
already always understanding of being at
different epochs in history right and
you could say
like the Industrial Revolution was and
this is what cogs and the car and you
know all these different people kind of
set up which it was subject object to
being like disclose itself as subject
objects and where this effect is trying
to overcome the dominance of the object
or overcome nature and all those kinds
of things you could say that like that
presupposes an understanding of being
right that's different than say like the
Greeks the early Greeks which was more
like you can see it in their art is like
being was more like a APIs or a flow or
bringing forth right more like a river
or something like exactly well date
dicots a good you brought up Descartes
he's famous cookie dough some I think
therefore I am
it's the classic kind of like I think
modern philosophical concept of what it
means to exist yeah built on like you
said those classical and pretty
classical concepts of being so you never
had Greek saying I think therefore I am
but really they said I know I'm not
nothing I know I'm not nothing it's a
double negative so therefore you know
and then Greeks love double negatives
and they loved all this wordplay and
Heidegger did too so it's like that's
how they thought because they couldn't
quite say I am because yeah but they
said I know I'm not nothing so and then
they were thinking much more that that
was the heart he was like no they were
on to something it's just we you know
notice like as you're going okay what
they know they're not nothing so notice
notice how you had to enter into that
thought grappling with it right now
I mean that's that that's that's what
we're talking about that's what we're
getting at is that it's important for us
as human beings because we're the being
that is concerned about our being and
can be concerned about being as a whole
yeah right we take our you know our
being is a is how you would say our
being is an issue for us there's a
certain kind of like I would say I've
really come to come to realize and this
is kind of what brings back a little bit
to circling to is that there's a kind of
ethic right to that that in in that we
in a certain sense are a
you know we are kind of we are a
clearing for we are clearing for a world
to occur yeah and that we aren't the
thing this was tricky about being human
right is like it's like where we
disclose a world of things yet we're not
one of the things it's disclosed like
other things we have a different kind of
being right that makes possible
something like a thing to be disclosed
or uncovered if you will yeah exactly
so like a Sam Harris or a Richard
Dawkins would be saying no we're animals
literally descendants of apes with a
highly developed brain and
neurophysiology it's like yes but we're
also a hundred other things one of which
is like you say this opening up of a
much more transcendental kind of
existence that say apes don't have or
can't have you know animals generally
can't have that human beings are
different because they allow for say the
concepts of calculus and mathematics to
open up on top of what we normally do as
a biological species and this leads to
conceptions of black holes and you know
creations of atomic bombs and you know
it's just you can't just limit it to
this fact achill being in the world as
Hollywood term it it starts getting much
more complicated deeper you kind of go
down so but what is human being capital
B we know a human being small beer we
know what each one of us we can look up
in a medical textbook what we are that's
fine but we don't know what the
collective being is and there has to be
a collective being if we are all of the
same you know we have the same biology
we have the same infrastructure in our
heads so the thoughts we come up with
the ideas we put out into the world the
languages we use you know everything
like that has the sum total and breaking
through how we view the world
scientifically and fact eclis so to
speak so just like that there is kind of
mentality was just
just highlighted when i tried to say we
aren't nothing which still confuses me
when i say it because conceptualizing
that in my head actually forces me to
suspend language yeah which is like that
suspension i think that's really
important right like we're thinking
worth the movement of thinking starts to
look at cat catches a glimpse of its own
movements and it realizes that it can't
it can't get underneath or behind itself
but in that realization realizing some
things thinking some kind of movements
happening all of a sudden it stops right
and there's this clearing or this
opening say that concealment of that
opening right is the kinds of things
that happen in something like circling
right where it's like i'm relating to
tom not as a thing amongst other things
but we start to disclose tom as it was
starts to get unconcealed is beat is the
being of toms being and we can't make
that a being but there's this disclosure
that happens that there's this ungood
like the the unconcealed this right gets
filled and there's this quality of deep
respect and deep beauty in deep
profoundness that can be just utterly
change someone's life forever i've i've
watched
i've watched people get circled and they
walked in one way and they walked out
another way in a way that they can't
describe but the world the world occurs
to them differently and of course all of
our actions as i think
gregory bateson really points out that
that all all behavior is a function of
perception so if if how you perceive
radically changes how you act will
change as well i've seen over and over
and over and over again through this
like just sitting with somebody or a
group of people sitting with somebody
and just being with what is right and if
you follow is all the way down you end
up in these places of some of the
deepest mysteries in the whole universe
oh yeah definitely and i'd like the best
example i could think of
psychology and behavior being a function
of perception is just look at religious
zealots you know people who go and join
Isis or something like that it's like we
can't comprehend doing that but we
obviously don't have their perception
about the world their perception informs
the fact that they can take a plane
right over to Syria or wherever and
become these horrible you know
mercenaries and that walls people like
us can't understand the steps we can
understand the rudimentary kind of
radicalization framework but getting
into someone's head and saying what
comes first you know chicken or the egg
do they is it just they acting like that
and they convince themselves that it's
right or they isn't really coming from
somewhere deeper like what you said like
getting in someone's head getting in
someone's head there's that quality of
like that's a different way of
attempting to understand to stand over
right never to over stand versus
understand there's a humility there and
there's this quality of them entering
into something and there's this there's
this way or this background sense of
like okay in entering into it in order
to really know to get in your head I
must in some way be changed by that
right in in the process of understanding
the way I understand
ie what I call myself can possibly be
really altered I will be I will be
different in some way once I that right
I'm just thinking applicability wise how
important something like circling B to
say I'm a policy when you're dealing
with people things like radicalization
or you know race hate groups and people
whose views are just so outside the
mainstream we're coming goes we
understand the resentments and problems
but we have to tackle it with force and
crackdown using the law and all that
it's like you're not really using
understand in its correct meaning there
you're like you said you're over
standing you're objectifying studying
the problem categorizing it and then
making a policy about it you're not
really understanding it like government
is an understanding at all whatever
organization is an understanding at
police aren't understanding it there's a
applicability here that I think would be
vital to solving some of these cultural
and racial tensions that happen
discussion America but like anywhere in
the world if you had approaches like
this to policy I think just from my own
kind of perspective that would be really
interesting and I would wonder and that
could lead you know like you get a bit
more of a deeper understanding of the
psychology and the behavior of people by
going to this kind of comportment of not
there is but all right now let me just
understand what's in your head coming
from what your perceptions are and how
they're similar to like where's our
commonality because there has to become
an ala D with humans you know what I
mean all this stuff I think is just you
know Heidegger sounds very theoretical
but when you actually start looking at
things like this there's huge scope
totally it's interesting I it's it's
yeah it's more like I think Heidegger I
would say has a method a method right
you know he he invites people not to
like he invites people you could say to
go on the way of thought now if I know
that if I know where I'm going if I know
where I'm gonna end up ahead of time
which is what most people call thinking
or made it right that's he would say
that that's not real thinking right
exactly like as you said that when did
he say that being there right that did
being done was something totally like on
some level I've already got something
wrapped up and whatever when I look at
whatever phenomena I'm looking at all
I'm doing is to gather evidence for what
I already know rise I would say that
perhaps it would be a good idea that we
begin to hear something other than we
already think yeah it's like I am saying
I'm coming exploring right and I follow
a map to the end of the the jogging
route or the hiking route it's like
you're not exploring I mean you're
walking through a route and you're
seeing things on the way that are
interesting and so on and you're
objectifying them and stuff and studying
them in your own
I got really exploring exploring would
be throwing away a map and walking down
a path and seeing where it goes
obviously not well advised but I mean
that's what Jordan peterson was saying
the people who have remembered the
people to gather the most knowledge in
the past were the ones who stepped out
into the chaos she challenged themselves
mentally and physically and you know how
relating that to Heidegger is really
important I think because that's what
he's trying to do that's why he
struggles to get the language to work
like he puts so much strain on language
I've noticed like it's strange German
which is what he spoke but then when
it's translated in English it gets even
near breaking point to the point we have
to invent new words just to get at the
exact kind of idea and it's important to
be precise when talking about these
things because otherwise it gets very
blurry and kind of all over the place
you don't know what you're telling that
but going back to that point exploring
this just walking along a path that's
really bent read that is really the
problem with like thinking nowadays like
in the modern era when you listen to
people argue or have a debate you know
to get the idea out of it it's like not
really it's they're not really thinking
they're not really debating they're just
kind of going down familiar routes and
they've tried a thousand times before
and repeating it and I don't think
that's conducive to progress to new
knowledge to new understanding of you
know human being capital B it's like
that is not the way to it that's that's
like the path in the opposite direction
that we've been going since you know
since Greece fell under you know we've
completely compartmentalised knowledge
and I always kind of I don't know what
podcast was but might have been joining
Peterson and Steven Molyneux I can't
remember but they were talking about how
universities no matter in sam harris but
they were to me at how universities
basically compartmentalized knowledge if
you go to a college campus you'll see
signs that go biology department history
humanities and all that and it's like
well there is some
to that just for resourcing and you know
administrative reasons but the human
mind doesn't work that way thinking
doesn't work that way the world doesn't
work that way so why are we teaching
people that way then I always find that
interesting it's not to say everyone has
to be a polymath or someone who's an
expert in everything but it's like you
said this into subjectivity this
interconnectedness of thought and being
if you don't understand then you're
really just gonna I'm gonna be lost if
you think about it that the
interconnected vests okay we if we ask
ourselves okay how do we see how do we
begin to hear the interconnectedness of
things and how do we lose how do we not
hear it how do we not see it and I think
it's like I think it comes part of the
second half is the hottest how do we not
see it because by definition we don't
know what we don't know right here's the
thing that I really enjoy about Peterson
now Peter said actually later you didn't
really know about Heidegger until well
after his work and then realized that
they were kind of starting to get it the
same thing hmm that's really interesting
and I think it comes down to what Peter
like a Peters kind of understanding or
respect about the grappling what it is
to grapple with thought which is on some
levels with what brings us to something
like reality it's like one of the things
the way he puts it he's like okay so you
know there's there's all the things that
we know is the category of what we know
and then there's the category of that we
don't like we know that we don't know
and then this thing then we all know
that there so there's a whole category
of everything that we don't know and we
don't know that we don't know but we
know that how do we represent that which
we don't know that we don't know right
the fact that I can say it right like
means that I must be able to comprehend
it in some way but how the hell do I
represent something that I don't know
and I don't know that I don't know it
but I know it hmm right that to me
that's a really great way of disclose
we're starting to feel back in to write
something like what Heidegger was
pointing to when he said the being of
beings right and and I think that like
what you could say is that I think one
of the things that you pointed to is
that people really don't think much
anymore that's more like they kind of
like they kind of they point their faces
at each other and then shoot cannons
right and if my thought is bigger than
your thought right and you get it easily
especially the internet is just filled
with this like it festers with that kind
of stuff right it's just it's so much
like bringing my kind of ancient history
interests it's like we have worldwide
sophistry we've enabled Sophos you know
the types who were paid to just make
arguments in ancient Greece they were
like philosophers like Plato and
Socrates hated them because they were
paid professional trolls essentially
like they would go out and just be
devil's advocate and say well no
actually you know I think the world is
made out of water and that's the
fundamental element and here's why and
that actually be smart people like
lawyers essentially and they just be
able to create fancy arguments and never
ever change their mind they'll just be
like paid to say the same thing like
propaganda pieces and it's I think now
we have that on a global scale like we
have people whether it's right wing left
wing or whether it's Hillary Clinton
Donald Trump or something like that
there is no coming together to kind of
in the conflict come to a deeper truth
about say what is politics or what does
it mean to be a good leader it's
actually don't kiss about that and I'm
not saying we're post fact I'm not doing
at that I'm actually talking about with
post thinking like there's no time to
think anymore in this hiding a sense in
this ancient Greek sense in this
philosophical sense it's more how can I
think in this route like I need a map to
tell me how to get from A to B whether
it's in a debate or an online
conversation or on a TV show and I just
all I have to do is tread the road get
the main points ad and then get to B and
that's it and so why don't you just sit
there and go with the flow
let's see what happens did you think
it's like I really like that and I would
say that there is this real I think some
of this is real
based on a misconception of what of
something that we one of the ways that
we don't see the interconnectedness of
things for the fuzzy would say the flow
that would go if we saw it right is
actually not seeing but what is is such
is the silence in which all discourse
and speaking presupposes which is
listening right because if you look at
it like ontological II speaking right a
speaking is always a speaking and
presupposes the listening that calls
forth speech right if there wasn't if
there was no listening there would be no
speech to be called forth and that
ontologically is prior in presupposed to
language mmm
when but we usually think about when we
think about like dialogue we think about
talking right pointing our faces each
other and making noise right but we
don't think about like what's calling
forth the conversation and what's
calling forth the conversation is
something already already a relation is
there any tap into the relation through
kind of listening and listening now
listening in a very different sense like
I think that like the common sense
understanding of listening is to be a
good listener or something like this
it's like I have an empty head right and
I kind of like a I pull my head up and
as you talk you fill it with words and
advice if I shut up long enough right
and you and the words fill up and they
close it and you're like okay you get me
basically that's not that's not
listening listening listening is
synonymous with interpretation right and
as high-degree would say that human
being is the being that's interpretation
all the way down in other words we're
meaning all the way down right and so
listening right is it is it just being
quiet right hearing what you say no
listening is where I'm opening up right
the very structures of the way I make
sense right it's another way of saying
as Heidegger said I open up my authentic
care my concern fulness or the way I
make sense of making sense and in
understanding you in listen
to you that the way I make sense and
even like in profound listening the deep
structures in which that make anything
at all comprehensible to me in
understanding you I begin to change
those things and in that change that I
then maybe speak or maybe do in silence
when I disclose that change to you and
it's happening probably right now on
some level right as I disclose that
change to you is the process of you
feeling understood or you feeling hurt
right quiet right or being convinced
it's being willing to be altered or
changed by a dialogue right putting
yourself in a comportment that is
extremely open to change
yeah I'm like a level and I love
Peterson's example okay I think he took
it from PJ or someone who keeps
mentioning but like psychology in the
sense of you have a conversation and
when you listen and you're listening
properly the only way you can listen
properties if you care about what's
being said if you're listening for
listening stats sake and a smaller
listening like yeah I hear what you're
saying but it's like now you know
everybody says that you've never really
this and you're just waiting to say a
point that you can tell that in
conversation even if you observe you and
people on TV it's like that guy didn't
even listen to what he said but if you
actually care you shut up you will be
quiet and things will die and be reborn
inside your own soul like in a
ontological or spiritual sense whatever
you want to call it you will literally
have ideas that'll just be resurrected
and so I never thought of it like that
way I did know about it but not in that
sense or I thought of it this way he's
made its point I'm convinced that's the
wrong way and that's dead so it's like
there's existence non-existence
happening in turn all the time and that
for me is i if you're actually listening
that will be like a I don't know that'll
be like an actual feeling that you
experience inside and yeah I am I mean
I'm not in the sense of I'm not being
challenged to think a different way so
much as I'm getting more ideas that I've
narration
articulated yeah probably because I've
wanted to but no one cares about hiding
its food on one level we could say that
like you could say you're speaking right
now right is being disclosed in our
mutual care but specifically in this
dialectic in this moment spray is being
disclosed or being in the I'm I'm my
listening is a is a space of unconcealed
meant of new thought coming into being
exactly yeah gonna and then you have to
be willing and open to that change to
that yes you want new ideas to actually
come into the clearing so you can see
them and it's like there they are I have
actually I recognize it but I haven't
seen it in that light you know that
seems to be what's happened now all I'm
saying something for the first time that
I've been thinking for years make sense
will not make sense you know in my head
and like this when I said that thing
about not being nothing I've always
thought it and written it that I've
never articulated and it hits you in a
very different way and it's like okay
now I'm sorry yeah that right there it's
like that right there right there I
think
things you know we're you know our
original like where we met was was
through our interest in Peterson and
Peterson does right and he explicitly
talks about this he says when he tries
to model for his students is it's not
like in his classes if you watch him but
I think this is why people I don't I
don't think people understand why they
find him so compelling I think they
tried they think that they find him so
compelling because of the content that's
delivered but I actually think what
makes him so compelling is that what
it's what he's doing right is that he's
not presenting information he's not
informing people he's getting up and
he's engaging in a dialogue and he's
working out his thinking in a living way
right so when you when you listen he's
actually dialoguing with you and it's
what's a news is the interesting thing i
like i really like about and what's so
infectious about listening to him for me
is it I feel like he's I'm always being
address
I always feels like there's a sense in
which she's addressing me directly and
enough into understanding in order to
understand what he's saying right I
actually have to get over right at the
edge of the there I am right now like if
I just bring my said like that I'm just
right it's right on the tip of my tongue
right we're starting to we're starting
to enter into the unknown right and it's
certain senses it's kind of chaotic but
we're allowing thought to move towards
what it doesn't know and it doesn't know
that it doesn't know exactly know that
I've been trying to think about this the
whole time but like as I'm talking about
it like I'm becoming to like realize
like oh I've been thinking about this
and I'm just bringing it into language
yeah and it's like hesitating you're not
confident in it it could evaporate at
any minute because it's on the tip of
your tongue but you've got this whole
structure of thought that you want to
kind of get out there and it's like well
crap you know languages and keeping up
with the brain it's like yeah obviously
because one is more original than the
other you know not so much the brain the
mind which con me it's like we have
speech in the brain and you know one is
a product the other but the mind in fact
graham's what you're speaking you know
why you care why you care about bringing
speech into the boat in the first place
totally I think I want to put a book
marker on care because that's a real big
thing with with ID or what do we mean
what like what is scare break and if you
think about this thing about like yeah I
don't quite have that it's frustrating
or it can be daunting more insecure
because I don't yet have like like like
thought is ahead of language at that
point mmm and you could say that like
and this is what what's interesting
about Heidegger is that he had to
practically invent a whole new language
things and I think what that what that
is what what that shows is not that he
was trying to be super smart or
something is that he was he'd followed
the movement of thought that like
thought goes it goes ahead of language
and then that the thought itself becomes
like a listening
right that draws forth a new kind of
speech and you could say that language
trail right right is that language trail
that it leaves behind is a new
vocabulary it comes into being right
yeah yeah and as also because the tools
were given to speak have been given to
us through past experience which is
defined fact eclis you know school
University family their education
everything like that has a past and the
tools were given to express this just
very primal kind of understanding of
human being what it is to live with
other human beings and share things in
common and think things in common or get
to truths that we otherwise when the
thought of we've suddenly find all those
tools are very much limited or at least
hamstrung by circumstance and bringing
so ya know I've bookmarked the care
think that's another thing I want too I
still don't I can't get my head around
but I think I'm approaching it from this
kind of perspective of that you can't
get your head around it tells me that
you're actually starting to approach it
right yeah
is that why you chose because I know
harder uses like hermeneutics or the
SIRT it kind of is like an approach to
interpretation that we used by say
church fathers and rabbis for the Talmud
and it's like a we don't exactly want to
say what it is because saying that would
make it false or it would run away from
us if we actually pointed the light at
it we actually just want to go around it
look at it from different angles and
then we'll get a better picture before
going straight in you know that the
circling kind of concept that's how soon
as you said it Arnie that's how I
thought yeah I would say that I would
say that and it's interesting it's like
through after circling after the fact I
realized that what we were doing was
something like hermetic hermetic
phenomenology mm-hmm but it was from
wandering around and us getting together
and looking and then standing back and
looking at it that then I started to get
into Heidegger and
all of a sudden they started to bring oh
that's what we're doing and then I
realized that that in understanding what
we didn't know that we understood back
on itself creating a hole like a new
hole if you will of understanding that
the medic phenomenology okay so I guess
like what I forgot that earlier was in
terms of your contact with Heidegger did
you did you come across him I don't want
to say the word organically but kind of
like maybe accidentally or or incidental
to something you're interested in or was
it like a formal kind of I want to read
one of his books and see what answer
your question but I just hit me that is
you're saying that when you forgot to
ask me about that I think that's so cool
right in that it tells me that what
we're following right is not some
pre-scripted thing like the topic that
we're talking about we're actually doing
we were enacting the topic right yeah
was circling like here so that because
we weren't following the script we were
following a movement right is his idea
maybe would say following the movement
to the showing yep yes but to answer
your question I didn't so I graduate I'm
a graduate of the San Francisco Art
Institute yeah and where I went to
college and you know it was this
avant-garde like really obscure you know
one of the most avant-garde art schools
in the world young and so I just
remember with the week we had like art
school math was just this guy coming in
and talking about theoretical physics we
didn't even look at a number so it was
so not academic and in the traditional
sense right now yeah but somewhere along
the way I can't exactly tell you how or
why oh yeah I remember yeah my friend
one of the early it you know back in the
day when we first started circling David
kneebauer he had taken on this right he
had taken the Landmark Forum and
apparently the Landmark Forum through
the influence of Fernando Flores Flores
was a Haida garyun
and so a lot of the language in the
Landmark Forum which is okay you could
say is like a like a a ontological
education or a kind of a personal growth
program that comes which like from
Warner Earhart and asks you know back in
the late 60s early 70s it's kind of like
some companies used it didn't they
for team building and stuff like that is
that right yeah influence on the culture
in a way that it doesn't get really get
accredited for yeah and there's a lot of
controversy about it we can go to that
if you want but he had just taken it and
he had he had gotten out of his
curiosity had just gotten to the basic
works of Heidegger and I saw it on this
table I'm like what's that and like we
started talking about a little bit of
Mike this is interesting and I just
again just kind of get kind of
understand where I'm coming from here is
I I'm not like smart in the in any
traditional sense of the word right like
like I had reading disabilities I
couldn't learn how to read until I was
like 11 or 12 mmm I you know I did
dyslexia and I you know I came from a
really really like kind of troubled
background you know with my parents and
supply kit so I had like a lot of like
trauma I know all kinds it's not right
and so when I was mrs. Bruch's you know
the my parent I got shipped from school
to school to school my educational
background because no one couldn't teach
me how to read yeah and then I got this
amazing special ed teacher that would
take me out of like a mainstream class
for a couple of hours and I think
looking back on it I think what she did
is she somehow tricked me into using my
right brain jury right yeah I'm not sure
that's actually accurate but it's
there's something about it that she
somehow kind of like got how i cognized
and and had me approach reading from
that from that way what's interesting
about it is like I started to learn I
started to learn how to read um and I
didn't notice it right right thank I
didn't know
until I just remember one day you know
it's a Friday or something and you get
this big stack of graded papers right
and I brought it home like every Friday
I put it on the table and my mom I
remember going oh my god right like yeah
I've gotten something above a D and no
papers and I just remember that I was
like oh wow and I think that that that I
think that was telling um when I looked
at Heidegger what may have been one of
the things that made me permeable to it
mm-hmm
and so basically I I started to you know
I started looking at Heidegger and
reading Heidegger and I had no idea what
he was trying to talk about juin
but my but I have to say though that I
but it was but it was like I didn't
understand okay what he was saying but
it was the kind of not understanding
that actually drew me deeper into it for
some reason
right okay pause here for a second just
to make an observation I reckon you
would have been in a better position to
absorb and understand Heidegger and say
a philosophy professor would be and the
reason I say that is because the
philosophy professor already has a
thousand preconceptions of say what
being means and how you come to it that
it's just clouding his view of how to
read Heidegger and Reagan was really a
paradigm shift in the history of Western
philosophy no one really disputes that
even if they hate him right so someone
like you coming to that fresh I think is
actually at an advantage ironically I
think so a theory I think so yeah I
think so and and this is where it starts
to get into the interesting thing about
concealment and unconcealed MIT because
that was concealed to me right like the
categories and cuz I know if I was in
school and they gave me Heidegger like I
thought have read the same thing and I
would have not read it I would have put
it off and like my test or whatever you
know yeah but Betty was alive for me and
it was interesting because right at that
time it was right at the beginnings of
circling to at the same time now I
didn't draw I didn't draw the connection
between the two until two or three years
later that's
was also compelling to me too but yeah
and then I would just start to read it
and I remember because I lived in North
Beach in a North Beach
we had a Barnes and Nobles like a block
and a block away and I was a poor
students right so so I get off school or
enough work and I'd go to Barnes & Noble
and of course no one would ever buy the
Heidegger book so it was like my own
personal little like my degree I just
take it off the shelf and I would just
read it I didn't need it
I read it and what was interesting is it
wasn't until about three years later
that all of a sudden I saw I saw one
that I hadn't seen right but I
understood in some way but not and not
in the over against way but in the
bottom-up sense of the word that
circling reading Heidegger and then
circling reading Heidegger and then
circling that motion um Heidegger
transformed my mind and because it
transformed my mind it transformed what
I saw and how I listened and so when I
would look at a person I noticed that I
had noticed that where my attention
would go was not necessarily just on
what the person was saying but what was
so near to them what had to already be
true in them in order to say what they
were saying right now that motion is I
like that I was that I realized that I
was like whoa wait a minute
like that's what Heidegger's doing right
like I'm going it's beyond analyzing
motive side and saying well what's his
agenda when he's saying that it's
actually like no forget
you get the layer of argument and the
where that's coming from like the
feelings of body language the I was
composing himself or herself the world
word here is is the horizons the rises
that like are necessarily concealed from
the person's view that they said that
gives them the ground that they then
stand on to
not just say the things that they're
saying but saying them in the way that
they're saying including presupposing
the listening that they're speaking into
mmm all of that started to get the
unconcealed from to me and I could say
talk about that like when you look like
it's like for example when people would
would start to start to talk I said you
notice like that they would be
explaining themselves as if as if
they're as if they for example like as
if somebody was interrogating them but
nobody would be interrogating them and
I'd be like and I would notice that
right I'd be like who you're talking to
mm-hmm I would do this thing where it'd
be like this in this look right this is
that look and I've seen that look a
couple of times in since we've been
talking like yeah right whoa
that moment of suspension yeah
background becomes foreground who was I
talking to mmm and that would then lead
to a completely different relational
event right no like oh wow like who was
I talking to it would be something like
you know it would be something like oh
my god my dad just interrogated me my
whole life and so on some level I have
been comporting the world as something
like my dad and then trying to work that
thing out and trying to finally which of
course gives him a particular quality of
eye mmm
we'd go when we say like who was I
talking to in that moment that's
stepping back their horizon you said you
now have a new horizon he's a what was
horizon right becomes foreground and
then we have a dialogue about that and
but then that starts to then I would
start to notice things like what is that
what you're speaking from now yeah yeah
yeah and that mirror is something that
Keegan who is a who's based in Piaget
right would say that how psychological
or moral development happens which is I
see with the level of development right
I see I don't see it right so the
meaning that I'm talking about
is given by the like the psychological
development that I'm that I'm in and
then developing to the next frame is
where I pop out to a higher level of
organization and then I see the level
subject goes object and then the process
of evolving to the next level is this
where then I look at this new level of
meaning that I used to see with and then
I begin to I begin to comport it or
translate it into this higher level of
complexity and at a certain culminating
point I then I pop out and that
psychological development right that
abstract thing out and in applying those
abstractions back to the level of
extract it out mmm creates more
complexity and the thing is in that
process you'd see all those horizons you
each still see them don't get evaporated
once you'll have become objectified you
actually now have them at your disposal
to make meaning and therefore develop
which right act appears and kind of
citing Dostoyevsky you know sort
yourself out you know work out what's in
your soul and and the conflict in your
soul and the things you're not seeing
that are motivating influencing
effecting holding you back and then once
you go like I like your analogy about
your you're in front of the horizon or
whatever and then it suddenly becomes
you're above it or whatever and you can
see it for the first time as something
that's part of your being that say
whether it's a parent influencing how
you speak so it seems like kind of
immaterial or it seems a bit miniscule
in terms of someone's whole life but
it's like no that is that's there with
you forever until you notice it until
you can objectify and say okay right
well so what am I going to do about it
and how do I change my component of my
by attunement to the rest of the world
based on what I know now which is I
think kind of critical to
self-development and it's like something
so rare nowadays because people don't
think in that that mode of being you
know like what is part of my being how
can I
sort them out and order them so it's not
so I'm not kind of like just in this
muck of you know your tunnel vision is
the best way to put it yeah totally and
it's interesting because this is this
gets that uncle I'll go back to like
kind of my grappling way really
grappling with Heidegger so interesting
I'm feeling like I feel lit up right
like this I feel kind of goosebumps or
something and I think part of why I feel
the goosebumps is because all of a
sudden were impacted by what I said he
went like this and it was almost like I
felt like something a new meaning was
emerging in your listening right you
ready to get something and in this
certain way I started to listen right -
you're starting to grapple with what I
said and in some way I was watching I
was registering some kind of change
happening in you and it registered over
here is goosebumps well you're kind of
high daguerreian explanation of
psychological and personally
developmental you know studies that PJ
Peters and Keegan and all that you
presiding
I understood that in the census there is
that theory and then the analogy you
brought up with hiding it was actually I
now visually see the truth of it like
there's just in my mind that when I saw
what you were doing I was like there's
no real disputing in my mind that that
is truth to some extent doesn't matter
how you explain it you could have
explained a different way but it is
still true that's what it was it wasn't
that is it's like it just can was
concealed before it unconsumed itself
through talking and visual imagery and
for me you know I don't know whether
I'll use it or not but it's definitely a
tool that would help me anyway
personally down the road if I ever have
a problem like that it's like why am i
doing this particular thing in my life
and you can kind of step back and view
it as like a series of horizons that
don't necessarily dissolve once you've
once once you hit on them but
actually there for you to manipulate and
and kind of work out sort out whatever
you want to call it and that for me is
like that's why the to kind of meld at
that point where you just said I thought
okay now it was like that all the time I
just don't really have that perspective
it kind of like is it kind of like you
knew you knew about that
paj and he knew about that you use the
word that right and in understanding or
in eliciting is it fair to say that that
became this you knew about this we was
much closer yeah yeah yeah I I don't
know what I don't know why I've just
been compelled by that that experience
of what I say that is right versus this
is a very different experience right and
I think I think what what I say when I
say that that that is a lamp when versus
when I say this is a lamp the the is in
that is kind of already worked out it's
over there but when I say this that
points to is it's already worked out at
advanced right when I say this I think
what I'm pointing to is the relationship
between the two and I think this has
more of a care element as opposing about
it
if someone says a command to you like
did guy I'd like you to talk to someone
so if you could do that for me as soon
as possible would be great right that's
very formal through that for me if
you're talking to someone usually what
you say is it'd be really great if you
do this for me because it means a lot or
you know it's just so much closer
whether it's you know in terms of
relations with someone else then that is
a it has a specific way you place
yourself to an object you know what I
mean like when you when you say I want
you to do that it's somehow further away
you know from what you actually care
about it
it's better if you could do this for me
you like naturally the rhythm of
language you expect to hear I would
really appreciate it all that would be
really great well that would be really
like this it means more on enough that's
kind of like I can use the word care
again yeah yeah about it right so
there's this quality of like that and I
think that starts to point to and I want
to start to see if we can kind of start
to uncover that a bit of when I when you
use the word care and this is the
existential question right we're now
gonna say what is care but when you say
care what do you mean right then would
you that's a very different question I
say what is care versus what do you mean
when you say care then we said that
starts to we start to move into the
background right great mister to like
start to unconcealed what was concealed
or as I think Peterson points out so
well like all the way through biology
all the way up into consciousness in
that he would say that when in the
mythological enactment of the stories in
a ritual it wasn't like it was like an
embodied cognition right it was embodied
they lived the knowledge right they
didn't know about it they had not
extracted out something like mythology
they lived in myth and they couldn't
explain to you the rules of the games
that they were doing a higher level of
development when they were able to
abstract it out and go that ready that
that abstracting out right and then
applying that abstraction back to it
right starts to create new categories of
understanding and that's very much was
my experience of realizing that so much
of how I learned what circling and
continued learner circling is was how
and how much it had to do with Heidegger
yeah so what what I realized years later
is what I look back I was like oh my god
like the terminology that
like dating someone world right um elite
the word ilithyia we would use that word
a lot unconcealed it right
unveiling horizon all those kinds of
things I was like wait a minute
wait in it like this is all this is like
I was like oh my god it was this reading
Heidegger and then and then relating to
something in the world reading Heidegger
and relating to the world needed
transform my mind and I think what and
this is the point divider it's is he's
not he's not trying to get you to - not
trying to get he's not trying to inform
you of anything right he's basically
saying walk along the path of thinking
and let's see if we can discover that
which is worthy of thought which is two
things it's like that which is worthy of
thought is that we have yet begun
thinking and that which is worthy of
thought is is is that thinking is in
fact happening right what is thinking
right as we're thinking right that we're
covering it's a disclosure it's like
going into the chaos or you know like
knitting into the like I didn't know
that I didn't know and and grappling
with and this is what what Petersen
talks about like we have one foot in
chaos we have one in one foot in order
and we find that like sweet spot and in
those moments is living meaning and
those are the moments in those kinds of
flow states right where where we it's
not a doubt at all whether or not all
the pain and suffering that is life was
worth it
like right in those moments yeah exactly
and it's like when it's a cliche but
when you say time flies when you're
having fun
think about that in the in the sense of
standing in that chaos and meaning
interface and just like being in the
moment time doesn't exist yeah that's
reality right begins that you lived
right yeah and that's another color if
you will the time aspect of this is
something we haven't gone into because
Holly is fast
work is being in time we've been talking
about being for most of this but time is
something that is very
much just like language a limiting
factor to understanding these truths I
think anyway and like I'd be interesting
at your thoughts but just going back to
this care kind of thing it strikes me is
also from being in time when Heidegger
talks like the similarities between when
hiding it talks about most human beings
that they as in the mass of people that
we consider human beings in society and
all these abstract nouns those people in
their everyday lives
turn away from questions like what does
it mean to have being what does it mean
to live in the world what is existence
how does this change or modify my
behavior in my life to make the most out
of you know being and be in touch with
other people in a more primordial way
all these kind of outcomes we turn away
from them because you'd rather go and do
a job and get money or watch TV or you
know we prefer to stay in the order area
of that yin and yang then cross that
interface and go into stuff we don't
know or worried about knowing you know
things that we are scared might actually
change how we act or how we live if we
find out about them and I think that's
so true that Heidegger that's not even
like when I read that I thought that's
more kind of like what I'd expect to
hear a novelist right yes someone who's
running a formal philosophical book
about you know concepts on being in
existence I thought that he just hit the
nail on the head there and we always
know it because we act like that like I
act like that mother just gets stuck in
the office and do my work and head down
and you know do that if there's a
problem on the horizon about my future
or questioning how I've been acting
ethics moral all that it's easier to
turn my back to it and then yeah at the
same time is the turning back right
you'd say that
that thing about just get this thing
done you know high degree would say is
that's the motive and authenticity right
yeah let's run yeah
those deeper that deeper horizon right
you'll say the ethical conversation
right um rather than dealing with that
I'm like doing this I'm still given by
that it's still given by my existence
it's still given by that on some level I
am care mm-hmm that's what's interesting
about like when you get any deeper
questions it's like for example if we
ask ourselves like you know what do I
mean when I say care or even if I ask
the question of what is care the thing
it's interesting what I'm doing in
asking that question is I'm caring right
it presupposes that I'm in care I live
it in care it's not a sitz I'm not an
like a subject that is subjective I'm
not a being about stuff
I am a being that cares right and care
is like this whole that you're either in
or you're not in like it's if you're in
care your ink it's not like so much a
spectrum where I kind of care but you
know it's like you are it's something or
the other you can't be weak Heidegger's
who would say is that like care isn't an
attribute that you express it's a moment
of being something your being is a care
cause you know like this is here's a
good way of kind of getting at it you
could say that the earth birds nature
nature birds people people bird worlds
hmm yeah like the earth Birds nature
nature birth people people birth worlds
yeah right if we say well what is it to
world right you know I think Dawkins and
those kinds of people when they say that
yeah I'm an ape that thinks right we
have an environment no we don't live in
environments right like we have a world
right you could say is Cory Anton would
say that that we decompress Earth in the
world right that there's something about
the way that we care
that airing notices some things and
doesn't notice other things and in in
the horizon or the limitation of my
caring like when I bring the limits of
that horizon it creates a ground that's
a world of concern right in my whole
life is I can't make a single motion
that isn't given by care yeah that's why
it's is that like our world like you
know as I like to say it's like
Instagram holo stuff like like gating
your world what does that mean really
mmm your world it's like all of a sudden
in order to get your world I have to
start to care about what you care about
that then articulate what it is that
you're already standing inside of that
then has you has your attention notice
what it notices and not notice what it
doesn't notice executive these deeper
levels of the being of your being right
which is synonymous with care and just
to add to that I think that kind of
again the very lucid image you just put
out of earth nature people world that
for me is like when Peterson talks about
Hell right and I remember in the Joe
Rogan podcast he talks about some brings
up the Joe Rogan Briggs a ball the
apocalypse is already around us you know
you just go to Africa or somewhere and
then join Peterson so well yeah like go
to skid row and you can see that it's
not just a physical place in LA or
whatever Skid Row's like hell it's a
it's a psychological environment just as
much as a physical environmental and
kind of area in the world it's actually
also mental like it's human created and
that struck me is very high daguerreian
because it's so true it's like well sure
like a atheist scientific kind of
materialist would say oh no no it's just
we defined by environment and poverty
and then it's like well no poverty can
be a state of mind it can be a an
environment in and of itself if that
makes sense
and the world is amalgam of
all those environments psychological
environment social environments cultural
environments religious environments and
it's built into the earth you know the
the physical geography that limits where
we are right yes so I mean we are
limited geographically but we're not
limited at all today to each other to
exchange ideas and to create truth and
things like that
so human beings have transcended that
order of like you said existence from
nature people and now we've created this
set of horizons where each individual is
free to either overcome them and become
more transcendental which I think
transcendentalism is really just getting
to the ultimate horizon that's for me
what I would define as transcendental is
I don't try to get into this spiritual
god-like kind of conception because that
just confuses it I think what to use
your analogy it's basically just getting
back enough to be able to see the range
and scope and Verizon's that are in the
world and that you can that's wisdom
it's not like scientific wisdom or like
IQ wisdom I think because I'm not
knowing about something right it's time
place wit it's when where who why you
know it's everything it's like that
understand here's wisdom and the act of
understanding right I the being of my
being is transformed that when I know in
such a way that any act of knowing or
understanding that I am different after
that understanding now I'm in acting
Houston right yeah yeah that's why it's
you know Socrates is like he's you know
I think he was the first coach
essentially great because he waiting
with people not he wasn't informing
people people didn't walk away more
inform make to a transformed dancer
he wasn't handing add takes books um but
and that's a great example as well as
gonna bring up Aristotle who was lighter
than Socrates but definitely influenced
by him said that the key form of wisdom
was everything else hangs off of
like Sophia wisdom in the sense you know
you have knowledge there's something
more primal than that which idea talks
about and he called it Fran Asus that's
Aristotle's term which is knowing how to
act when to act why you're acting it's
like it's the crossroads of all those
kind of dimensions of knowledge that is
at the basis of it and I think if we
miraculously try to bring it to this
concept of like world and horizons which
I think you can but um you tell me how
valid this connection is knowledge when
you transcend earth nature people and
then you start looking at the world as a
set of horizons that and you go through
the back you know that's essentially for
an ASUS in the Aristotelian sense of the
more horizons you know the more
knowledge of time timing when to say
something when to speak the truth when
not to you know when to you know be seen
and we're not to when to why and why
you're doing that you know it's this
combination that really gives people we
can't read that in a textbook I mean if
we say a textbook to explain that like a
concept but if we say a textbook in the
way that harberger like would write
which is we're gonna go down a path and
in the path great of essentially
speaking and then noticing what gave the
movement of that thought going to the
background bringing you in the
foreground in a new level of a
background that that when and that
timing ray is is this is where
temporalities in care right or you can't
separate them apart and here's the thing
I would say about temporality and and to
make it cuz it man by getting into time
Jesus you're going to talk about
something that's like so at the edge of
our it's like it's it's like be right
it's like being in time I mean because
you're trying to grapple that one out
right being in time was a grappling or
trying to work that out it was it was
like your duck dusk EST right it wasn't
like he just basically took these these
core presuppositions and he wrote a
novel to see what would happen
yeah right and you could you could
imagine that the in writing those novels
that that the it was a different author
by the end of that novel than the one
that started it mmm but that's a deep
understanding of that's a deep like to
go to think about what it takes to write
a novel like that right like and and
also Dostoevsky he's going into the mind
that when tried to grope being in time
it was a very ambitious title that's I
keep not even he could finish that book
there's a huge amounts of the time
section that he just never got around to
Ronix he thought I don't even
understand it dry it so if he's going
I'm in over my head I need I have to
write poetry to get at this one exactly
yeah and that's Tony Lipsky I think
Ernie realized that and he'd go down
this very narrow passes you know crime
punishment morality justice God well how
do these intertwine in my society like
in the sense of Russian history City and
where he was in history he said I'm just
gonna go down this very narrow path but
still let appear all these things that
Heidi was worried a minute here saying
I'm gonna let appear yeah it's a very
different way of thinking right go back
to that thing what doesn't happen in the
traditional sense of debating or arguing
or proving a point right like in a
certain sense were any even right now
we're in a certain sense in this
conversation we're letting a peer like
we're letting up here is it that letting
right starts to really kind of get at a
way of authentic care right in the mode
and to care is my understanding what
Heidegger was really talking about need
the thing where I started to really get
I started to get what temporality is a
bit or or or let it like let it appear
to me it's here's temper ality
okay so you're sitting at a coffee shop
so I'm gonna give two analogies and you
can kind of get the difference
so I'm sitting at the car I'm sitting at
a coffee shop let's say you know I go to
my favorite coffee shop and I'm gonna go
and I'm gonna read and I order you know
a mocha or whatever and I sit and I read
or I study or whatever I do and it's a
Tuesday at 10:00 a.m. tend to do okay
imagine that experience imagine like
that the moment is happening and a
particular characteristic of that
moments and the mood and all that stuff
okay now imagine that same Tuesday at
the same time 10:00 to 12:00 same mocha
same chair reading the same book yeah
after I'm done um my mother's gonna come
in and meet me that's a different moment
think about that like if my mother in
the future right if I know my mother is
gonna come and meet me in two hours
right well no if you bring yourself back
to like if my mother's not gonna come
meet me is the way that that book occurs
to me there's the feel of the moment
right there's the there's what I notice
and I don't notice there's my heart rate
there's everything right and then if I
know that my mother is gonna come meet
me it's in this way that you can't make
an object out of it describe it it's a
different moment you know I just kind of
hit me that it's not just biases from
your past that affect your future it's
your future that bias your present in a
sense that it changes time and how you
how you exist based on what you perceive
to be is coming next
exactly and that's where conversation
can be transformative right is that we
can engage in a conversation and that
see our sense of the future and what's
possible can shift and we are then in a
different moments right then right
exactly because they're actually going
you're putting yourself in control a
little bit more but also letting just at
the moment happen yeah yes and that's
what like if you could say like what a
coach does you know if halftime at the
Super Bowl the two teams down 30 to
nothing they go and the coach has a
conversation with that well what is that
conversation gonna do right well it's
gonna
some level when they walk like the game
that they left through this conversation
the game that they go back out to is
different that sense of the future of
what they're getting ready to do is
through conversation through dialogue
right and that's right
well a lot of good right you were how do
you terms the event of being capital B
being it's where future present and past
are all jammed into one spikes up spring
was just realization like that could be
micro tiny realizations that I've had
about twenty in this conversation or
massive ones we really just change your
entire life because something happens
and you're not aware of the dimensions
of time in that moment they're because
they're all the same thing
and and I think the most reality this is
time yes the most poetic kind of
representation of this is just quickly
than nature story thus Spoke Zarathustra
where's our third story goes up the
mountain carrying that dwarf on its back
and he carries the dwarf on his back
until he gets to a gate and he goes what
was this gate where does the path lead
and he turns to the dwarf and the dwarf
sitting on the side of the gate off the
path on a rock and he's looking at it
looking at Sara through and look at the
gain is saying are well all-time as a
flat circle long time go straight in a
circle circular in shape or something
like that
he says it in a very middle way right
and xerath history goes no that's not
right it's everything that was and is is
right here and I just have to face it
I'm just like and I don't have to
understand it necessarily I just have to
be in this mode of being to understand
the truth of this moment and where it
could lead
where the possibilities are which with
Zarathustra like doesn't presuppose
anything which is the power of the point
of that that story where it's like he
becomes basically a man of infinite
possibilities and when he turns back the
dwarf disappears in that story nature
obviously matter but it's based on
very important to him the idea of the
moment and the eternal recurrence the
same and everything like that
the dwarfs like objectifying time and
saying there is future past present
circle you know you're just gonna go
round around who cares and he's sitting
on a side and it's like this metaphor
works on so many levels because we do
that all the time like we are the dwarf
whether you're scientist or a theologian
or just going day to day it's like now
well yeah there's we talk in cliches
about living in the moment and the few
who knows what the future holds and all
that it's like well do you really know
what those mean and if you really
thought about it in with respect to your
life how would that change you yes yes
and so I would say not thinking about it
but I'm like in that moment like I was
like you're like woah in that moment
I don't think you thought about time no
I thought it right you thought time
thanks a lot guy and hopefully we'll get
you back on sometime because this is a
topic you talk about I think we just we
just got started this is really really
really really fun and hopefully anyone
listening you know they get something
out of this even if they're not familiar
with idea because I think this
conversation was broad enough to kind of
get a good intro into it so thanks a lot
for your time and yeah have a great rest
of the day great thank you so much so
great thanks
[Music]