howdy this is Jim rut and this is the
Jim rut show listeners have asked us to
provide pointers some of the resources
we talked about on the show we now have
links to books and articles referenced
in recent podcasts that are available on
our website
we also offer full transcripts go to Jim
rut show.com that's Jim ruts show com
today's guest is author and thinker
Hansie Frye net it's a pleasure to meet
you Jim horn ah it's a pleasure to meet
you too I've had so much fun reading
your books they were really good Hansie
is a political philosopher historian
sociologist author of the books The
Listening society and the Nordic
ideology much of his time is spent alone
in the Swiss Alps I got connected that
Hans II by starting to read his books at
least the first one Nordic ideology and
it went on to read the listing society
and I really was taken with them and
I've been communicating with some my
friends about this and one friend very
smart person asked me what did I really
think and I I told them about these
books that this might be the best stuff
I've ever read on social change or it
also might be a handbook for nineteen
eighty-four plus plus haven't decided
yet so as you will see as we dig into
this the answer might just be both so
here we go my first question for you is
meta modernism which is your
philosophical base for both these books
as the next step but including
post-modernism and I gotta tell you
personally I've found post-modernism and
post modernist to be essentially crazy
 yeah by view is the person that
actually took it seriously wouldn't even
be able to actually exist in the world
or do anything productive you know of
the thousand people I know well enough
to make a guess about it I'd say maybe
three are actually post modernists
actually believe it actually try to live
it many others especially in academia or
what I've come to call as if pomos they
utter the words they make the sounds
they may have some superficial behavior
but I don't believe they actually
believe it so my first question for you
is do you think post-modernism is really
a widespread thing in this world I do I
think it's very widespread it events of
course on what we mean with
post-modernism we can describe it as a
kind of sensibility pertaining to the
times after the 1968 revolution let's
say and particularly breaking through in
academia and the 70s and 80s and in
popular culture in the 90s and the 2000s
however the way I mostly use it and we I
think it's most Mieville to use it as a
developmental stage so it's a
developmental stage either of a person
and his or her ideas and sensibilities
about the world or of a certain society
and a certain morality and certain form
of reasoning a certain means and values
means being like genes in organisms in
biology
but in cultures instead so different
forms or ideas or patterns that
reproduce themselves and when a society
has been modern for a long enough time
and it hasn't crashed under its own
weight
then unmistakeably there will be a
sub-element of postmodern values so
starting with modernity early on there
was a protest against the callous cold
empirical hand of the Enlightenment and
the the striving towards universality
there was also a kind of dream of
something particular a world that that
can be different given that we have all
of these modern possibilities even that
we have applied science couldn't the
world be fairer couldn't it be a
sustainable couldn't be less alienating
and in different ways and forms
postmodern ideas and value stand have
followed modern society around for 200
years and that they have grown from a
trickle to serious attempts to
redefine modernity and for instance
through socialist revolutions and
recreate society and created at a new
and higher stage today as I would argue
or there are good reasons to believe
that about 20 to 25 percent of the adult
population in rich countries or Western
countries are post modernists and
experience the world through a
postmodern lens and that they express in
their lives and works and relationships
postmodern values the postmodern values
then they try to create something better
than the mainstream capitalist society
and they believe that modernity and this
story of progress isn't necessarily true
and that you can critique it by shifting
perspectives by including the excluded
voices or so on and porom playing with
new perspectives in the arts or whatever
and that there is some kind of
emancipation or liberation or
redefinition of everyday life that is
possible so it's a kind of religion a
critic of the religion of critique or
the religion of criticism that has grown
through intellectual practice of modern
society in a way it's like the
priesthood of traditional society and in
that sense I believe it is very real I
just don't think it has the answers for
the next stage of society which is why
perpetually it puts us in and killed the
socks in dead ends and this produces
reactionary neo reactions that we are
today seeing on a wide massive scale
taking over pretty much all of the major
governments in the world that's
interesting you know obviously the
200-year parts interesting because what
I would describe what you were talking
about is not necessarily post-modernism
but what are the branches of modernism
and I call it the Rousseau branch when I
look back at the Enlightenment I
basically divided the world into the
Voltaire branch and the Rousseau branch
and there were so branch then led to
romanticism which then led to
totalitarianism which
then led to post-modernism and they're
essentially part post-modernism I would
describe as a heresy of modernism in the
same way that communism is a heresy of
modernism and I think it's so strange
and weird dead-end and you know
particularly in its academic status
where essentially rejects science as a
different kind of value than all the
kinds of values that came before etc and
so you know I'm one of them people who
put a big bad flag on post-modernism and
it's interesting as I read your book I
didn't smell post-modernism quite the
opposite right for instance in Nordic
ideology you talked about an empirical
politics simply policies regulations and
practices Canon should be based upon the
best available information and
empirically tested knowledge I think
that would cause most post modernists I
know to have a heart attack right and
then later in the book you talked about
something that's very near and dear to
my heart which is a reformed
enlightenment enlightenment 2.0 and
again the pomos I know if you said you
wanted to create enlightenment 2.0
they'd want to put you in pomo prison so
maybe it's the fact that you have
transcended post-modernism in a major
way but I didn't get a sense at all that
where you were coming from was post
modernist yes so if you look around in
with everyday people most are going to
be more modern minded most people don't
have humanities degrees from one of the
college campuses and they didn't spend
five years and uh English literature
department and so on seeing in media and
in academia these strands are however
quite dominant so it's 20% of the
population or 25% of the adult
population but not just any 25%
postmodern ideas are generally a little
bit more difficult to download they take
a little bit more time and so on to
learn and to apply so they have a lot of
influence in our society and for this
reason a lot of people and I I sense
that in you as well and I felt certainly
said that in my own life
including losing jobs for this etc is
that if you go against the post modern
sensibilities which are deeply a gala
Terrien multi-perspective 'l in a sense
relativistic relativist not necessarily
being in the most stupid the caricature
sense relativism that all things are
equal but there is a relativists
underlying sensibility that is tied to
the sega latarian ISM that postmodern
people will feel deeply insulted if you
for instance talk about growth
hierarchies which are nevertheless
empirically observable and and logically
definable so if you look at that at the
influence of these postmodern values
they are huge and there's a great wall
or a kind of the gravity of these
postmodern ideas and values that will
prevent people from trying to go beyond
them and from the postmodern mindset it
appears as though a lot like to the what
I call the false tales and the post
postions the modernity and postmodernity
isn't the first iteration of this
dynamic in a earlier times we've had
false thien religions such as oh I don't
know the the Viking religions or the or
the Babylonian religions or the the the
old Greek gods or whatever which are a
lot about power gods about a lot about a
multiplicity of gods and it's I suppose
the basic ideas that form in
agricultural societies within these
societies starting 2,500 years ago with
the axial age you had a critique a moral
critique of the power relations within
the agricultural societies they said
well wait a minute the power of the King
shouldn't be arbitrary it has to be
universally verifiable there has to be a
higher truth that God beyond all gods so
there's the brahman or there is the
buddha nature or there is well the God
of Abraham or Java who is
initially was the war god and then after
a while job actually killed off all the
other gods or his disciples didn't and
it ended up as a monotheistic religion
with one highest principle and people
said okay this one highest principle has
to be moral and not based on power it
has to be universally true and for
instance then slavery was not permitted
in post Faustian religion but in
practice slavery persisted throughout
the period up until modernity and there
was always a priesthood a minority who
looked at other people as heathens that
could be enlightened by this religion by
this moral purity by this refinement and
today this and this is the point I want
to make today we don't have the
priesthood anymore I mean we have them
they're just not very relevant in the
lives of their many modern people
instead we have the intellectuals we
have academia we have the guilty
conscience of let's say the intellectual
left of the critique of society which
has real methods and real methodologies
which are internally consistent and
produce very real results which cannot
be produced by any other mode of thought
than the postmodern thought for instance
discourse analysis for instance ripping
apart power structures shown us how
carnally material they are and how much
they affect our lives and how injustice
is harm human beings by structures that
are so far beyond them and so difficult
to grasp in our everyday lives all of
these things come with the postmodern
frame or mindset so what we have today
is a kind of priesthood which views
modernity as the heathens all the normal
modern people they still have to learn
they still have to study they still have
to read their Foucault or understand the
gender gaps and so on but when they do
encounter people like us or people like
myself at least I don't know what if you
would identify as meta modernist when
they come across somebody who speaks
there
language I have a PhD in sociology I can
quote Foucault all day long if you want
and I am intuitively understand what
Derrida is talking about and I
understand
Chomsky's critique of us hegemony and so
on and I know these methods as a craft I
know the postmodern methods as a craft
and I know the postmodern irony and I
know the culture and I understand the
arts and the aesthetics and I'm a
hipster I suppose you could say and I
still talk about hierarchies
I don't appear as a heathen no I appear
as a heretic and then ah I like that so
it says in the in the beginning of
listening society academic heresy yes
this is what it is because if we try to
play by their rules we will be stuck for
years and years and we'll never get to
the actual change that needs to take
place and that change is built upon the
idea of growth hierarchies for us to
have any idea about where the world is
going or should be going we have to
logically see where it would make sense
for it to go and to do that we have to
see the world more hierarchically and
that is forbidden within the the
postmodern sensibility and for this
reason we have to revolt against
modernity yes because modern life isn't
good enough as the postmoderns
perpetually point out and it's not
sustainable either way but we also have
to revolt against the revolt we have to
revolt against post modernity and this
creates a horrible horrible lapse in I
mean the jump to meta modernist if you
don't make the whole analytical jump to
meta modernist you can land in a neo
reactionary conclusion meaning you read
up on Julius II vola
and you put your hopes to Steven Bannen
and you will start conspiring against
the modern world because you want the
world basically to become some version
of a Nazi Horror Show and that's not a
good solution indeed good stuff you know
I'm gonna push back a little bit on your
25% number at least in the United States
I've been to Sweden I've been to Dan
mark like both but don't have deep
knowledge of what they're like but in
the u.s. about 30% of people are college
graduates no more than 10% of them could
be said to have graduated from an elite
University which would give us three
percent and of those no more than 30
percent these days or humanities majors
so that gives us a ceiling of 0.9
percent so about so about 1% so I'm
gonna argue that at most in the United
States the number of post modernists is
1% and I suspect it's considerably lower
than that cuz I happen to know a lot of
people on Wall Street that have elite
college of humanities backgrounds like
daya they're sure not postmodernist
so I suspect that you are biased by the
people you hang out with and that in the
reality those who are actually post
modernist there's our fraction of 1% but
anyway let's let's move on here we could
we could we could spend our whole 90
minutes up it depends Jim just just to
retort very quickly that it depends if
you mean by the book postmodernist
as in people who can quote their
Foucault yes of course then you're down
to less than 1% if you look at the
general sensibilities and these are
deeply seated values so all the hipsters
all of them are post modernists almost
all of them all of the hippies except
the ones who are regressive enough to
believe in magic are post modernists
because they will have relativist
egalitarian a deeply expressive values
and so on and they will be critics of
modernity and they will believe that
there is a moral purity that needs to
wash over the world and that needs to
critique the world and change it rather
than as the meta modernist stance is a
harsher or an more direct logic or
dynamic or aura
what's the word I'm looking for a kind
of mechanism or sequence that can lead
us to through crude logic lead us
through this developmental phase until
we have a new equilibrium state of the
world of politics of the economy
of our personalities and ways of viewing
the world just what I like to attract me
to meta modernism I continued reading I
don't know a thousand pages or whatever
it is you know to your point that
postmodernists at least I don't see them
with anything constructive you know
they're essentially wishful thinking and
this my first and best business mentor
always told me you can wish in one hand
and you could in the other and I'll
bet you which one will fill up first
that's how anyway let's get into the
substance of your work let's start with
the listening society a foundational
building block in your writing is the
idea the effective value mean mm-hmm
could you tell us about that yeah so
this is actually goes back to to exactly
what we have been speaking about so
let's say we have a time machine and we
can go anywhere in the world with it and
we go to I don't know we go to Rome in
the two hundreds after Christ and we
talk to people in the street and we
asked them about questions about slavery
we ask them questions about death
penalty we ask them questions about men
and women and the relationship between
them we asked them about proper
punishment of prisoners and we would
find a lot of their their ideas and
ideals shocking we'd find okay this is
very crude it's very grim
this wouldn't be bad people though we
could sit down with him and we could
laugh and talk and they would be
friendly and perhaps we could fall in
love with him and they with us but they
would have values that are very alien to
us and that we would find horribly crude
and that just seemed cruel and unjust
and if we take one of them and place
them in let's say a small town in Sweden
so people here are polite and so on and
relatively highly educated in the modern
world and all of that and this person
tries to understand their stances on
slavery on punishment on gender equality
and he
rights and even on animals or the
biosphere they would find all of these
things meaningless abstract wishy-washy
being too complicated that their being
that their suffocatingly politically
correct and so on and that's there's a
fundamental difference than that aha
there is some kind of shift there
between this Roman citizen and this
contemporary Swedish citizens for
instance and what is that difference
well okay they have different norms I
guess you could say or you could say
that they have different that their
personalities were shaped differently by
different societies and-and-and life
conditions and the question then is are
these norms or personalities and
perspectives that people hold are they
arbitrarily ordered or is there a logic
to them and idea value means is that AHA
there our overarching deeper structures
in how values are generated by societies
or through the development of societies
which will generate values that are
similar to one another or a correspond
to one another and for this reason there
is a huge difference between any
agricultural society and any industrial
modern society there will be huge
differences in how these people think
and act over time at least and likewise
you can go to tribal societies and there
will be other sets of values
individually these people will have
perhaps will be nicer and more direct
and and so on then let's say your
average in New Yorker or in many tribes
varies from tribe to tribe of course but
in many tribal settings and you will
have may be kinder people or or people
who have better lives in many ways and
or more competent but their values will
correspond to the size of that society
and they would so will their worldviews
and indeed their personalities and their
ways
that's the idea then that values can
evolve with societies and they can as
different kinds of systemic challenges I
mean different kinds of things that
happen around us in our dynamics as we
interact in society
we'll put different demands on us as
human beings in terms of values so the
meta modern values that I think are
necessary today they haven't yet
developed so we grow up in societies
which have for 200 years or so developed
to modern and postmodern values but we
are facing what can only be termed as
yet more complex challenges climate
change and global governance and the
global migration flows and so on and I
mean existential risks stemming from
technology all sorts of crazy crazy
stuff
I mean consciousness altering substances
psychiatry they're the control of every
citizen through the public system there
are there's so many aspects here that
are incredibly complex and threatening
of life itself and we have populations
who have values and that are adapted to
the modern age meaning to expanding an
industrial welfare state that's it
that's what our values are set out to do
that's what they evolve to do and a
minority then who have values that
critique that same thing we mean
postmodern values so you can work at a
university and write a doctoral
dissertation on injustice is between
different minority groups and so on
but these values are insufficient than
for our populations to self organize
around these bigger and deeper and more
complex and more universal issues and
this is why we need a deliberate
institutional change that would work as
a conveyor belt much as education has
done in modern modern society to get
everybody up to the modern value meme or
most people up to the modern value meme
we have to get people up to the pole
modern value mean a lot more and we have
to get people up to the meta modern
value mean and today none of our
societal systems or institutions are
built to do that they're not constructed
to do that so we have a battle between
these value memes this is a cosmic
battle for the human soul for the
world's salt and is also a battle for
survival if the more complex values win
humanity wins and the - fair winds if
the less complex values win and they
rule us in an increasingly complex
surrounding a society we all lose and we
all die yep that's the dream at least
let's drill into that a little bit
probably the most interesting part for
me in The Listening Society was you then
decompose the effective value meme into
four parts a model of higher our
complexity code or symbol stage
emotional state and emotional depth
let's particularly drill into the first
two of those and they're related in my
mind at least which is the model of
hierarchical complexity and your stages
or code concept could you jump into
those mm-hmm
so the model of hierarchical complexity
is basically a mathematician of which
means just clearly formulated the key
elements of the different stages of
cognitive complexity so we all know that
children think less complex thoughts
than adults they can still think
interesting thoughts or intelligent
thoughts but it just never happened ever
in the history of the world that a
four-year-old came up with a new theory
of physics and there's a reason for that
the brain of the four-year-old does not
perform thoughts of the corresponding
level of complexity it's not that you
can't teach a four-year-old physics you
can this just is going to have to be
simple physics and this goes back to
Piaget was a Swiss classic theorist on
this and an researcher when it goes back
to Kohlberg and my own
mentor than michael commons was a
student of Kohlberg Kohlberg created
adult stages of development above normal
adulthood with his moral reasoning tests
and what Michael
he studied algebra for a while and he
realized that he could use this or apply
this to developmental theory and using
abstract algebra he could then see that
aha there's a mathematical pattern to it
here you can actually formulate what all
of the stages are and this goes even
down to amoeba level and all the way up
to Einstein level and then there are 17
such stages of adult development that
have been discovered and you could argue
that there are higher stages but the
arguments growth in there and you can
argue that there are lower stages but
the model starts to break down there so
it's kind of like even even within
physics of course theories have a
certain reach different scales within
physics use different models and they
actually aren't compatible and this
developmental psychology is like that as
well so you have a strict behavioral
empirical science of studying the
complexity of behaviors and it's just so
happens different adult human beings are
going to have or display behaviors and
thought patterns of different stages of
complexity so we are not all of us at
the same stage of complexity in terms of
our thought processes so as you bring
that down a little bit let's get down
more tangible yeah and talk about what
some of these stages actually are of
hierarchical complexity ok they're not
the easiest in the world to understand
but therefore with four ones that I
bring up in the book that are covering
most adult human beings and the first
one would be abstract so abstract is
when you can formulate an abstract
variable and you can understand that aha
even though I can't see it even though
it's not here there can be more or less
of this and then you can see it they
could start reasoning about things that
aren't there and this is almost all
adult human beings reach this stage
most people reach it in about junior
high but there is a stage above that one
which more than half of adult human
beings reach but not all of us and it's
called formal operations so that's when
you can take several abstract variables
and you can formulate in your head a
linear or even nonlinear a relationship
between them so you can see aha
appears as though if this happened then
that happens and you can test such
formal relationships in your head and
that kind of corresponds to a lot of the
work we do in modern society a lot of it
is maximize the profit of this company
for instance or minimize this input and
maximize this output for instance a lot
of this is formal operations and it's
usually sufficient to to function well
within a modern labor economy or
division of labor to function at this
stage and to think along these processes
but above that you can create whole
systems of formal relations this
simplest ones we we learn in school by
heart the simple equation systems where
you have to use the information from one
equation to engage information about
another equation then you have to see
the system where you can see different
feedback loops or whatever and only
about 20% of an adult population reaches
systemic reasoning which means that most
academics will tend to be systemic stage
thinkers but above that stage at only
about one point eight percent of the
population you have meta systematic
reasoning a menace systematic reasoning
corresponds more to in mathematics
topology for instance that you can see
that aha there are patterns within these
systems there are properties of the
systems themselves so you can compare
these different properties and you can
switch between different systems and you
can understand that the different
systems have different logics so you
tend to be less reductive in your thing
and people who are a meta systemic tend
to get less well along with people who
are let's say it abstract because the
people who are an abstract will think
that people are meta systemic just talk
a lot and that they they aren't very
concrete about what they do etc and
people who are at meta systemic will
think people are abstract are but
shallow that they never really give them
any a house when they speak to them and
so on but this is just one out of four
fundamental ways of growing as human
being that yeah yeah let's talk about
code next I think that was a good
introduction to your levels of
hierarchical complexity but the other
one that I found very interesting caused
me to think a lot about both myself and
sort of the nature of social
construction is your simple stages or
your code mm-hmm if you look at the
previous theories on psychological
development they kind of mix all things
up they say okay so there there are
these people who are more modern and
then there are postmodern people or
their color codes for these things and
one theory that which is popular is
called spiral dynamics or you call
modern people orange people and then
postmodern people to call them green but
the problem is well what if you actually
try to compare this with history so
going back to medieval times and looking
at a genius of medieval times they
wouldn't understand Newton's physics or
indeed even a simple coordination of two
variables on a grid this was invented by
Descartes in the 1600s so even the
smartest person in the world let's say
thomas of aquinas of the late medieval
times wouldn't know things and
understand things and grasp things that
are apparent even to a contemporary
12-year old
so apparently society itself or culture
itself seems to have embedded within it
certain symbols or ideas that are of
different stages of complexity
and because they are of different stages
of complexity they are non arbitrarily
ordered meaning that there's a
difference between people who live in
let's say an agricultural society like
medieval times and people who live in
pre agricultural tribal societies and
people who live in industrial societies
or post-industrial societies like ours
so AHA there appears to be a logic to
how culture itself evolves not meaning
that it always evolves in the same way
but there is a deep pattern or structure
to it that the different modern
societies of today are more comparable
to one another than they are to even
themselves looking 500 years back and
this catches another dimension of
development one that isn't so much
personal but is more sociological
nevertheless the culture itself must be
downloaded into every single human being
for him or her to use it so people who
are more complex thinkers will more
likely to find the code available in
that society that resonates with their
stage of mental complexity
I mean vice versa of course if you come
across a lot of the more complex code
that can also spur more complex thoughts
in your mind and eventually may cause
you to think more complex thoughts
yourself and have more complex
perspectives that's interesting but you
know I'm gonna use myself as an example
here when I went through your books I
had to give myself a an honest analysis
where do I stand on these various
dimensions and I looked carefully and I
concluded that I was a solid stage 14
paradigm attic on the hierarchical
complexity scale so just for the
listeners paradigmatic being the one
after meta systemic yeah and I was
definitely not a stage 15 so I said yeah
solid middle stage 14 but in terms of my
code proudly modernist right in fact you
mentioned spiral dynamics and something
I've been known to say and post on the
internet is when I think of spiral
dynamics I think of it as an arch not a
spiral
the top is orange to the left blue and
red is increasing ignorance to the right
green turquoise all that is increasing
goofiness or hate so I don't see this as
a progression right I see it as gone off
the wrong track goddamn it right and so
in fact I guess I would call myself
modern plus because I think that there's
other ways that modernism can branch but
not through post-modernism so what are
your thoughts about a person who was
stage 14 in hierarchical complexity but
was kind of rejected the other
postmodern and meta moderate I got an
open mind out I might a minor it's
interesting but I definitely reject the
postmodern code kit as actually useful
also before we get your answer that I'm
also going to mention something I've
been involved with for a number of years
is something called game B which is a
radical social change theory and
philosophy and now a more ever more so
practical group which can be found on
facebook at the game B G am EB group and
the equivalent I would say of your
stages or code is what we call deep code
most of it developed by a guy named
Jordan Hall formerly known as Jordan
green Hall and I would say at least in
my mind that it is a fork from modernity
to something at least at the level of
meta modernism and yet actively is
choose post-modernism huh all right so
this is a very interesting question and
roughly speaking the only answer is that
AHA this kind of development once you
understand house for dimensions and we
didn't even get into the second two
which are more subjective dimensions
then we see that it's much more
nonlinear than we think and it tends to
have a lot of unexpected dynamics to it
so let's see modernist
paradigmatic all right so first of all
we might of course always be wrong when
we self evaluate but given your
background and so on it would make sense
that you would be at paradigmatic and I
also talked to you before the show
started and that would make sense yes
that being said the reason that we may
reject post-modernism there may be any
number of reasons that have to do with
the angle through which this is
presented to us it may have to do with
the other two dimensions which are depth
and state things that play on subtleties
that we may not be in tune with might
let's say go over our heads and we we
might not see them and for this reason
people may be saying things that mean in
terms of subtlety and their spiritual
dimensions things that aren't available
to us and looking at these effective
ally memes they are emergent patterns
within all of these four dimensions so
they're a kind of sum but as it some is
the wrong word they're a kind of a dance
between these four developmental
dimensions so our subjective state in
every moment the existential depth that
we have developed in our relationship to
existence and the complexity of our
thought processes and behaviors and
whatever symbols we have available so
you come across a bunch of symbols and
you don't like them there can be any
number of reasons for why these symbols
perhaps or didn't represent let's say
the real post-modernism on the other
hand you come across meta modern ideas
which superficially to people who are
actually modernists to an actual let's
say orange modernist there wouldn't
appear to be a difference between my
writing and all the Foucault stuff out
there I see it radically different but
anyway I continue but if you look at
prisons reactions on the web people who
are modernist
they don't see any difference between
post-modernism a meta modernism to them
well this is also somebody talking about
structures they're also about social
justice they're also about critiquing
modern society they're also about
touchy-feely stuff about inner things
and and they're they're revolting
against everyday life stuff
being normal and invest in your life and
getting a villa and a job than all that
stuff so on a superficial level if you
are actually at the modern value meme
then you wouldn't resonate with what I
write you would find it
indistinguishable from post-modernism so
most likely you simply had like an
allergic reaction and then you couldn't
see any other alternatives around so you
just saw okay I'll just hang out here
for a while because I still believe in
science who doesn't and I can see these
people are getting into culture wars and
and identity politics and I don't like
that and I feel I don't get a sense of
truth and and direction when I see their
critiques of science and so on and
probably you also got not very fair
representation of real postmodern ideas
which actually do hold up against the
modern ones if you go to the core of
them postmodern ideas per definition are
the ones the modern worldview will lead
you towards which is the the argument
that I make in listening society that
that the symbol stage is modern
postmodern meta modern are not
arbitrarily ordered that all of the
modern ideas if you take them to their
utmost conclusion they will collapse
under their own weight and they will
leave you to postmodern conclusions but
the postmodern ideas when you take those
to their ultimate point they collapse
under their weight and they lead you to
meta modern conclusions which seemed
counterintuitive and even heretical to
the postmodern mind and if you already
were a complex thinker and you only had
modern ideas and postmodern ideas in
terms of complexity and so on these
ideas tend to resonate with meta
modernism but it you only had these to
choose from and you could see that the
postmodern ideas and often they're in in
misused forms that they were distasteful
to you then you simply rejected them and
then you were frustrated with them and
I'm very happy you were here talking to
me instead of taking the route
that so many of our good friends have
done these days and it's to say I hate
post-modernism I hate postmoderns I hate
postmark so then they wake up the next
morning and they say I hate post
modernist three times again and it just
goes on for years and after a while they
say I hate it so much I don't even care
about all of those ideas and ideals and
social justice things they're bringing
up so actually I do want to kill the
immigrants and actually I do want men to
rule women and actually I don't like
democracy and actually some smart person
should create some order in this world
and actually the military isn't so bad
and actually we have to stand up for
ourselves against nation and actually
the history is not a progress thing it's
cyclical and periodical and we're in a
downfall and somebody has to rise up and
save this thing and what have you become
you have become a Nazi so a lot of the
high stage people today are becoming
Nazis and a lot of those who are high
stage because of their depth and state
but our low on complexity are becoming
hippies who believe in magic this is
very competent evil people are more
likely to believe crazy things than
average developed people so you have
along the highly developed people highly
highly dangerous groups of new Nazis
coming up or fascists of different
brands and you have magic beliefs
because people have such strong
spiritual and psychedelic experiences
they can incorporate intellectually and
you have beliefs in aliens I mean these
things are growing and if you challenge
the people on their ideas about aliens
and the UFOs they will answer please
take a DMT trip and then you will know
I've heard them say it and I go I have
taken our damn teeth rip goddammit and I
had all kinds of weird thoughts but I
can explain them easily as brain rhythms
plus the confabulate ER right right
interesting
so yeah interesting I guess I'm
continued to push back a little bit and
say that it's not obvious to me yet
maybe if I think about it read more that
one must go through post-modernism to
get to a higher level let's call it game
be deep code
which I would say is surprisingly
similar to meta modernism but explicitly
rejected post-modernism and let me get
back to why I rejected post voters not I
probably didn't get the best exposures
to him though I did read most of the
writers and in commentaries on them etc
when I came out with and again I'm as I
told you before the call I'm actually a
pretty simple guy right I'm not a
natural philosopher and when I hear the
word metaphysics I reach for my pistol
etc but my real rejection against
post-modernism was not its excessive
intricacy but that it did not appear
useful and people who listened to the
show and know me in real life know that
my catechism you know my shining star of
making decisions about systems about
ideologies which I hate in general
philosophies and theories is is it
useful and I never found anything in
post-modernism that would actually let
us build a better world reasonably
expeditiously it just seemed to be a
swamp in which there was no getting out
while meta monetarism does not have that
smell and nor does game be deep code and
so I guess I would say it's at least it
seems to me possible that one can get to
you know how to build a much better
world that is guys much more justice
operates it avoids the self terminating
loop that our current game a is caught
in etc without having to go through
post-modernism but I suspect we'll just
have to agree to disagree about that one
I suppose I mean just saying a few
things that are useful about
post-modernism if you work at a
sociology department like I did you see
the research so for instance the UN
today has all of these development
programs and they are all based on
analysis of structural injustice of
different kinds which is the essence of
postmodern thinking and if you take the
modern of modern person on his or her
sensibilities he or she does not in
their core believe that everyday life is
 up
or she does not in their core feel that
life is not sustainable it is alienating
and harmful to the human soul everyday
life and that people are are being let's
say mutilate it on a subtle level and
they do not believe that society is
fundamentally and just so that impetus
and the methods for working with that
impetus and doing so intelligently and
in a structured manner is the essence of
post-modernism if the modern mind says
is it useful the postmodern mind will
reply useful according to what axioms
useful according to whom and you will
see that within the question what is
useful is hidden some kind of interest
and the postmodern mind will deconstruct
that interest or it will expose it and
it will be able to end to compare it to
other forms of interest and then it will
show you that what you thought was
useful or perhaps not as useful as you
thought or it was perhaps useful to some
but not to others but the postmodern
mind then forbids you to actually rank
these different forms of usefulness and
then choose one and then synthesize all
of them exactly and now the shift
between postmodern and meta modern ok
that's good but that's exactly my
critique that it's not useful leads you
into a swamp of idiocy I had a
discussion recently with some people I
would say or probably post modernist on
how to address climate change right I
know how to address compensate it's
pretty goddamn straightforward right
it's big it's the equivalent of fighting
a couple of World War two s but it's
definitely doable right but then they
got into all this post modernist
horseshit and they got to the point
where as you said they had all these
possible ways of looking at it and no
principled way to pick one if you can't
pick one you can't do anything you know
the first element of management of
anything is the ability to make
decisions and if post-modernism does not
lead to the ability to make decisions
and proceed it's by definition not
useful
most emblematic postmodern thinker
Foucault he was asked explicitly well
what are you for you're just picking
apart everything and he said you know
what there are so many economists and
engineers and lawyers in this world and
they're all busy building stuff I don't
want to I'll let them do it I'll just
pick it apart and that's actually this
the essence of postmodern is that it
always ends in the critique the the
critique is the result and through the
postmodern mind who has that kind of
sensibility being the smart person who
said the question that others couldn't
answer that in itself is the end point
is the result actually a lot like
Christianity like post Faustian ISM as I
call it this stage that criticized the
agriculture of Austrian society it
always just ends in a critique and not a
to-do list and that's where it's
different if you look at these different
value memes every second one is a
critique or is a more passive one which
picks the early ones apart and and
creates a new morality and then next one
is a more agency oriented one but meta
modernism doesn't really add new
morality the postmodern one I mean sure
we can we can rewrite some ethical
theories and so on but our morality is
actually the same one stop climate
change make sure the world isn't crazy
the unequal in terms of resource
distribution make sure it's sustainable
make sure people have meaning in their
lives make sure people are seen and
heard on the inside more on that the
things are a lot more authentic that
they can bloom where the we can bloom
stop torturing the animals I mean all of
these things are already there at the
postmodern value mean the difference is
we can do it much like modernity modern
society you know in the in the 1800s the
British Empire stopped slavery and from
there on was just a waterfall and
slavery seized around the world within a
hundred years
and Christianity had been against
slavery for two thousand years for
crying out loud
and within the British Empire
it wasn't the modernists it wasn't you
know all the scientists or the
businessmen who ended slavery it was the
Christians because Wilberforce right he
was a definitely a Christian public
intellectual yes yes which is
interesting the same rule is there for
the post modernist today we will use the
post modernists populations for a kind
of moral mobilization but it is only
possible within the institutions and
economies created by meta modernism I
like that actually I like that because
then you get away from this swamp of
inability to make any decisions I mean
just how do you pray again and again and
again and nothing happened or go to
another comment or whatever and the
postmodern is just gonna have you go to
the University and writing the critique
of the critique of the critique and
that's it exactly so yeah if we think
about that way it's in general you know
I am and I would say the game be deep
code is you know strongly in favor of
egalitarianism the elimination of
bigotry and Prejudice Equal Opportunity
etcetera etc so I think at the Values
level fairly similar but the methodology
just seems so goofy I have no
interest in going down there so but I
like you're right I like your presenting
it let's let them say that they've
developed a useful set of morals but
let's ignore their methods and let them
play with their methods and let them
write their morals and then we'll take
the morals and we'll go put them to work
goddammit I I wouldn't go as far as
ignore I'd say use them and put them in
their proper place and don't let them
stop you from doing your stuff okay
let's gets good I actually learned
something there good that actually
improved my mental working kit a little
bit I still don't like post-modernism
but I'm gonna think about it a little
bit differently now let's get back to a
couple other more detailed points one
which i think is very important here's a
direct quote from listening the same
goes for meta Modern code which only
less than 2% have the cognitive hardware
that's your word to operate successfully
this might be an insurmountable problem
to meta modernism if Hardware less than
2% can run meta modern code how can you
ever get it to work yeah I don't know
and so I mean just to get back on what
I'm saying there in the book that I mean
the reason a lot of people hate
postmodern is so much is that it's
relatively sophisticated is not about
yelling at men for them making a little
bit more money or or shaming somebody
for writing hi girls instead of hi
vagina bearers or so on
it's actually about structural critiques
which requires systematic staged
thinking to be done properly and you
have to actually see systems you have to
see cultures as objects and you have to
look at them dispassionately and so on
which is difficult to do and not a lot
of adult people can do it where a lot of
people can do it but just about 20% of
the population and then following the
research by Commons if you look at how
many people reason at the meta systemic
stage it's about 1.8 percent and then if
you go down to paradigmatic its we don't
know but if it follows the same normal
distribution it's going to be one in a
thousand or thereabout or a couple in a
thousand and if you then look at this
aha meta modernism what what are we
doing here we're looking at inner
development and the different subsystems
of in your development and then we're
putting together different subsystems
and your development some of them are
sociological II built or constructed
meaning that the inner development
defense on outer development and then we
have to create institutions for that and
then we have to coordinate that with the
people who create those institutions and
so on we're in the space of meta
systemic thought processes
we're in complex thought processes and
if you try to use a kind of code you
kind of run a complex code in a simpler
form and this is having many many many
times in history from religion to
political ideologies to scientific
theories and so on they get simplified
when they're popularized so what happens
if you run
then a modern code on a lower stage of
cognitive complexity well what happens
is you get flattened versions of it so
you get versions are going to look a
surface level a lot like meta modern
politics or or have the same goals or
ideals or norms but they're not actually
going to work they're going to produce
lots of pathologies so for instance
people will say okay listening society
so it's good to always take in the
perspectives of others and then they'll
spend a lifetime just taking in the
perspectives of crazy people and not
being able to coordinate them for
instance or they will think AHA so there
are growth hierarchies between human
beings and I'm of course of the higher
stage and so those of us who are at
higher stages have moral privileges and
we can decide for the others because
we're better than them you can think of
any number of perversions of this code
or you could say wait a minute so this
is a holistic vision of society in which
things are brought together to resonate
as one whole and small groups of people
have to get together and conspire
against society to do this AHA and these
small groups of people have to do a
military coup for instance I whom you
have fascism and then they're going to
start killing people who are deemed to
be lower stage I mean hey you can go a
long way with this into crazy land and
and into frankly war crime land and it's
Wars the end of the second book I write
these are dangerous dream yep I've
respected you for that you are totally
honest you know as I said coming in to
this interview I said once I've gotten
to about the 40th percent on the second
book I said this might be the best stuff
I've ever read on social change but it
also might be a handbook for nineteen
eighty-four plus plus right and the
answer is it's both yeah I mean
unfortunately I believe the existential
predicament here I mean I wish I could
say okay I called God and I will prove
my theory and I made sure that it's
gonna be read in the right way and I
made sure I didn't make any mistakes and
I made sure that my subconscious didn't
have any evil drives
was aware of that that Sofia steered my
hand and typing but I can't do that
absolutely it is what it is yeah I mean
so it is what it is and but on the other
hand what else to do I mean should we
should we stop thinking about theories
about where we want to go as a society
or what the state should look like or
what the market should look like and the
welfare systems and so on I mean because
it's too dangerous and only
megalomaniacs would do that so then
nobody's allowed to ever to ever have an
opinion on it that that's crazy
yeah but nevertheless that's what the
liberal mainstream will tell us they'll
say no we don't want your theory because
it's totalitarian and you're a
megalomaniac for even daring to take it
upon yourself to answer such questions
aha so your plan is nobody answers the
questions and we all die yep exactly
I dent achill to our game B issue that's
amazing how similar that is because you
know we basically say that we are on a
self terminating curve period if we
don't change our ways right and yet when
we propose these radical techniques
people say you're nuts this is you know
communism or this is fashion is emerge
both communism plus fascism and so it
sounds like we all have the same
interesting problem which neither of us
have saw absolutely say game B is not
solve this which is how do we create
what you called the flattened version
that actually resonates with people and
ones you were saying that an image came
to my mind which is my grandmother long
since deceased was Irish and a fervent
Catholic it went to Mass every day all
right celebrated the saint days every
day of the year a very Catholic but her
Catholicism was very shallow nothing
like Thomas Aquinas --is right but
somehow it satisfied her as an ape with
clothes right as a resonating human
living in her body and her mind she
loved her Catholicism more than she
loved her own kids truthfully so there
was an example of a very successful
flattening from let's say Aquinas or the
19th century version of Aquinas to my
mother's Catholicism
so I guess I would throw that out to you
and your collaborators as something you
need to figure out is a flattening of
meta modernism that's is attractive to
people today as a flattened version of
Catholicism was to my grandmother in
1930
I wouldn't over emphasized the need for
popularization with most of all we need
to find the right people and we need to
affect the knowledge generation
trajectories of let's say actually just
a few hundred people around the world at
this point meaning that for us to make
serious change happen we need people who
seriously work over the long time and
commit their lives to some kind of meta
Modern / call it whatever game change
and seriously will consider plans and
take risks with their own lives to play
parts in these plans and who are
prepared to learn a million new things
while doing this and to do it in a
coordinated manner with other people
because without these core groups I mean
we can have all the popular demands for
a listing society we want new forms of
politics or whatever the things
suggested in my books but without some
people who were actually doing the hard
work and carrying the brunt of it and
coordinating and resonating with one
another it's just not going to happen so
that's number one part and you know from
there on the the popularization is a
secondary concern because first of all
we need to actually start to affect
institutions and political games and and
markets out there and knowledge creation
processes I think if we got a flattened
version that was truly attractive it
would actually aid in that tremendously
imagine if there were a flattened
version of meta modernism that was
attractive to 20% of the population as
my grandmother's Catholicism was to her
the your ability to move politics and
markets would go up exponentially like
double exponentially perhaps true as
things look today I mean think about it
though
you asked me before 2% of the population
roughly have meta systematic reasoning
and this appear is to be at least partly
genetically determined probably you can
increase these percentages but we don't
really know and when I see and hear
people reasoning about these things
without complex Minds I see them drawing
not so good conclusions and I actually
prefer to I feel reassured when people
are a little bit more conservative and
don't try on all of these crazy ideas
and just stay with more common-sense
stuff because things get really crazy
really fast even in highly intelligent
people you also need to have all your
tools in the shack so to speak I mean
there are also all of the emotional and
psychological pathologies that you can
have and today we're seeing the
emergence of early meta modernists and a
lot of us are relatively crazy
unfortunately highly dysfunctional
people and a lot of have a lot of
diagnoses and so on and then take a lot
of medications because it's unusual
people and sensitive people so I mean
what I see today is that I'm not overly
optimistic about reaching a lot of
people with a lot of these ideas because
they will be MSF misunderstood and when
they are flattened almost per definition
when they are used politically that's
not good the meta modern perspective an
important part is to respect
developmental stages so for your
grandmother for instance a post Faustian
or traditionalist religion Catholicism
in this case was a sound foundation for
her life and for her life narrative and
meaning making structure and I suppose a
source of stability and so on and that's
the meta modern perspective then that
AHA not everybody can be a meta
modernist all the time rather it doesn't
matter if people buy the idea of meta
modernism or or something like that it
just matters that they're their agency
aligned with our
in a complex weave of relations which
lead to a shared common goal which an
important part of this is changing than
the informational architecture of
Internet Society and today the
informational architecture does not do
its work to coordinate human agency and
perspective in this large weave another
part of it is you know on a political
level and we have no real coordinating
principles beyond the nation-state and
we are not in a world that has anything
to do with the limits of the
nation-states so that's the important
thing not that everybody becomes a meta
modernist doesn't matter really you know
or or everybody believes in one
particular idea or dogma is rather that
these things are graded much like you
know you worked in creating the Internet
you didn't care about talking people
into believing in the internet you just
knew hey this shit's gonna work this is
where the future tractors are pointing
and if you are early on the solutions
you're gonna win and people are gonna
play along
that's an interesting approach that's
sort of a I will be the Wizard of Oz
behind the scenes manipulating things so
that a matter modern perspective occurs
in our society even if meta modernism is
an out front which may actually be a
better idea than what post-modernism has
done I mean we think about the wokes
right and I'm with you I am terrified of
the growth of neo-nazism
everywhere even in Sweden right and I
know frankly I know some Swedes and I
know some working-class Swedes and a
surprising number of them even though
they would probably never say it in
public has some extraordinarily backward
views all of a sudden just in the last
few years and I suspect a lot of this is
reaction to the elitism of the post
modernists right people say those
people like I will tell you my
working-class roots you know on occasion
would say to me those post
modernist I'm gonna vote for Trump just
to be an asshole right I would never
actually do that because I also I'm
capable of simulating the unfolding of
our society and the last thing I want is
for us to go in that direction but I
feel the emotional tug
of rejecting elitism pompous
self-congratulatory
elitism of the woke sort and so perhaps
you're maybe you are onto something here
that maybe this has to be done in a
Wizard of Oz fashion where the world
doesn't even know that it's being done
but anyway that's a interesting topic we
could talk for two hours on it but I
know I know the thing is Jim Wizard of
Oz is a very good analogy and what when
the wizard is confronted by Dorothy is
she says you're a bad man he said I'm
not a bad man I'm just a bad wizard and
it's kind of like that we don't actually
need a conspiracy or yes we do do need a
conspiracy we just needed to be boring
enough for people not to care and then
basically they can't stop us so it's an
open conspiracy because we're not doing
anything unethical and we're not working
to harm anybody we're actually working
to include people's perspectives and to
align their goals with the goals of
others
and we're looking to deepen democracy
and so on and we're not looking to tear
down the world order and create a new
master race or anything crazy we're just
looking to actually deepen the
structures of modern society so that
they can fulfill the promise that they
they set out to fulfill and during the
Enlightenment which they never fully
have and we're looking to fulfill the
longings and critiques and then and
address the critiques of the postmodern
sensibilities so we can answer for
ourselves
we have nothing to hide so we can
conspire against the modern world but we
don't have to do it in secret because if
anybody asks what I'm doing I'll be
happy to tell you that's also our game B
philosophy absolute legality and total
radical transparency right yeah that's a
very interesting strategy seems like
we've converged on some interesting
tactics so this is very enlightening
interesting part of the discussion let's
move on to the next piece in The
Listening Society the word spiritual or
spirituality occurred a hundred and
seventy-six times and as people who
listen to the show know I hate the word
spiritual and spirituality and
they usually call it the S word and so I
want to know what what is spirituality
to you and why is it relevant it's
refreshing to get this question Jim you
know because when I speak to
integralists they always ask me why I'm
so secular on is a critical spirituality
and you you hate me from the opposite
directions I would
why do you included so much why are you
obsessing about it and basically yeah
spirituality is important because in
some sense the religions were right and
when modern society happened we of
course divorced a bunch of beliefs that
had to do with Jesus walking on water or
whatever but we also in the same move
because there were so many so strong as
a powerful things happening around
around this dynamic new development that
was going on with industry and and and
science and capitalism and everything
that we forgot about some things that
the religions actually got right that
AHA if you look deep enough inside there
will be very very very very strong
experiences of some kind of wholeness or
love or or connection and these
experiences are very very very very
important for the rest of your life once
you've had and you can't unsee them I
mean you can but it usually is a
developmental thing once you develop
that depth then it's there and you can
remember it you can know about it and in
that sense you become a believer if you
have strong spiritual experiences and
that's that's in the sense I use the
word spiritual and it's anything that
has anything to do with a higher
subjective States the higher subjective
States when we look within and we snow
'test there's nobody there and things
kind of open up and things are crystal
clear like there's a pristine clarity a
kind of super presence that's just there
and things then there are no words to to
grasp it or describe it we just get a
sense of beauty and meaning and
everything is gonna be alright and in in
the history of philosophy then
in mainstream history writing about
philosophy remain stream textbooks this
impetus of philosophy isn't present I
mean they never take this seriously
enough and discuss it but philosophy is
driven by high complexity people but
also by people experiencing high
subjective states by people being in
modes of the mind or of experience
itself which bring them to completely
new conclusions about the existence of
reality I mean this is described in
Descartes he sits by the fire and he and
he has this great insight it this is a
spiritual experience that he that he
describes in his biography here it just
goes back all the way and it goes back
to Plato it goes back actually yeah a
bit less in science then science seems
to be a little bit less driven by this
spiritual impetus but philosophy and
definitely all of the religions which
have had compelling images and stories
that people have built their meaning
making structures around all come from
these exceptionally high states which
also connect us often some notion of
Terror or hell or or the seriousness of
the matter of existence that suffering
is real and very very very very profound
and very very very grim suffering is
possible suffering beyond our
imagination and then we have to think
take the spiritual struggle to get out
of that suffering very very very
seriously to go to heaven or not to hell
or to well so in some general sense the
religions weren't wrong and that's
that's a big difference then between the
meta modern mind and the modern mind
them the meta modern mind says okay sure
Jesus didn't walk on water and Moses
didn't actually part the sea that's
crazy talk of course and and of course
Galileo was right and of course people
of the Inquisition shouldn't have gone
after him but it doesn't mean that
contemplation isn't a powerful psycho
spiritual technology and it doesn't mean
that the mainstream
ideas that we have about consciousness
etc in a k-12 school which is basically
nothing they just kind of avoid the
question and that the underlying
assumption is some kind of materialist
reduction is that these things may be
wrong and more spiritual views views
that are informed by these higher states
and the in the kinds of reasoning that
flow from these higher states may be
more irrelevant to describing the nature
of reality and thus our place in it and
thus how we can and should act within it
and relate to it and relate to one
another and to ourselves and so on so
because these things are real because
they are present we cannot ignore them
and because meta modernism then is about
growth is psychological growth and an
existential growth and cognitive growth
and sociological growth and so on so the
farther stretches of human development
it also pushes us into the farther
stretches of existential development and
that pushes us beyond the reaches of
everyday life consciousness or states of
awareness into these unusual or altered
states of awareness did you read this
book is by I know you read a lot on
consciousness and I have a favorite very
recent one by a British journalist and I
don't remember the name is the name of
the journalist he's in The Guardian but
he he wrote a book called am I dreaming
and it describes all the latest research
on these altered states of consciousness
and then he takes an ayahuasca trip and
trip and stuff like that and what he
says
is that the red thread or I mean the the
connecting wood connects the dots here
is that when we are in the high states
of awareness or or I mean those blissful
open states of psychedelic States and so
on all the neurons fire I mean there's
like a connections are made in a much
wider sense and then it's like a reset
button for the brain so that this
structures can change radically in these
moments let me cut to push back on this
a little bit just for our audience
I believe the book is am I dreaming by
James Kingsland does that sound right
yes yes it looks very interesting I have
not read it but I will and I'll put
forth that I actually have seemed to be
an amount of experience with these
higher end altered states I've probably
done heavy psychedelics six or seven
times milder psychedelics a hundred
times I've done quite a bit of bio
neurofeedback oriented excursions I can
easily put myself into a mystical state
for five or ten seconds it's kind of fun
I can do it for a longer period of time
it's a lot more work I can put anybody
into a mystical state give me 36 hours
so anyway I know these things are real
and I've had these experiences and I've
even heard the song all right which I
have reached by various of these methods
this song with no words it's but has
words it's very weird however my
takeaway when I combined this lifelong
set of experiences with knowing a fair
amount about cognitive science and
cognitive neuroscience is that these are
less than we think they are they're
enjoyable and they're useful tools and
we should measure them by their
efficaciousness for us to live our life
not as if they are some journey to
greater truth what I think they actually
are and there's an amazing book called
the mind is flat by Nick shader that
came out about a year ago as a UK
linguist actually and his argument which
crystallized this whole view for me is
that the mind is not full of great
depths there's no depths at all actually
what there are are networks of the brain
and the brain and the body and then
there are rhythms on those networks and
then an atypical state is an unusual
network and or atypical rhythms and you
go how can we see specific things or get
these particular sets and that is that
they are those unusual Network and
rhythm
are then processed by the probably only
human has this capability which I call
the confabulate er it's the part of our
brain that invents narratives to try to
provide some sense of cohesion to our
brain states confabulation is a key
finding of an earlier line of research
the split brain experiments of might
Gazzaniga and others where you know you
show something to the side of the before
people have their brains split in half
due to severe epilepsy where the big
heavy bundle the corpus callosum is
severed so we don't get the normal left
right hemispheric high-speed transfers
and so things that are seen by the left
side of the brain aren't seen by the
right and vice versa you get these
amazing stories where you show something
to the left side of the brain which go a
left eye which goes to the right side of
the brain which is not linguistic and
then you ask some questions that are
only tangentially related and even
though the person will say they didn't
see anything their left side brain will
invent some very elaborate almost insane
story but a story that is nonetheless
coherent with respect to the perception
that actually occurred and shaders view
and you know I'm getting there that this
may actually just be true is that all
the things that we experience in these
altered states are essentially the
confabulate ER operating on very a
typical brain body networks and atypical
rhythms this is not change words now my
words it's a fairly similar to those
computer-generated story systems we're
using a you know a bunch of algorithms
that can generate a story that's sort of
okay as a story but it's just generated
randomly and that may be all this stuff
that we're experiencing as depth is
unusual networks plus the confabulate ER
and so that we should enjoy them
I do enjoy them and when you mentioned
something that I find that it's most
useful for me is to break the circuit
you know I found that these kinds of
experiences about once every six weeks
were perfect they used to be back when I
was working real hard I'd roll myself a
big wad of joints and smoke as much
marijuana is like a
tolerate about once every six weeks and
it was a really good reset but on the
other hand I didn't I don't think I ever
found the answer to a problem in the
resultant mental states and so I wish
people would not get so infatuated with
these things and take them for what
they're good for where they're useful
but don't think that they're actually
giving them an insight into fundamental
reality itself so I mean this is really
at the core of a lot of am I thinking
what I do so it's it's difficult for me
to answer briefly but I'm I'm going to
have to try to so basically I would say
there are two positions which are both
sins here at one position is
essentialism it's the ascribing of depth
on to a surface and the fundamental
insight of post-modernism I mean
starting with Andy Warhol but it
actually goes through all of the
postmodern thinkers is exactly what
you're saying it is that there is no
depth there is only again this goes back
even to the depths of post-modernism or
to the to its to its origins its roots
in Dorothy talks to The Wizard of Oz it
actually proto postmodern piece of
literature and she says you're a bad man
what she discovers he's not wizard and
he says I'm not a bad man I'm just a bad
wizard aha there is always just a
surface always just a surface and that
actually goes for all phenomena so right
now I'm looking at the handle of a door
and I mean in a deeper sense you can
explain away the doorknob like there's
no doorknob it's just a piece of metal
with a some plastic on it and you put it
and you you you didn't think there's a
doorknob here well it depends on on
which level of analysis and makes sense
nevertheless in my experience I'm
looking at a doorknob and there is adorn
ominous to the doorknob which is
inescapably there which is the
experience itself
in phenomenology and this brings us to
this other hated word of yours
metaphysics it lands us in the question
of metaphysics that AHA is phenomenology
reducible to the objective third-person
parts that constituted its correlates in
reality and my answer is is a yes and a
no but it's mostly a no that there is
just as you can make the sin of
essentialism saying oh I saw angels so
angels are there that's essentialism
another person sits down and has his or
her a spiritual experience let's say
they're having sex and something
fantastic happens and their their whole
being opens up and they see the Stars
boom and their partner says you didn't
see the Stars your newer us fired and
then you come fabulet at the Stars well
it doesn't take anything away from the
experience and what when I talked about
the importance of spirituality I talked
about the importance of that experience
the that when we have those experiences
there they don't feel I can't be
phenomena and in a sense they aren't any
more than then everything we experience
is that the phenomenon of our
experiencing biological brain so we can
take them seriously in the sense that we
can learn from them not about
metaphysics per se like you said the
wordless song I didn't hear the wordless
song we'd love to do that actually but
if the word wordless song still tells
you something about let's say the
enchantment of existence of being it
doesn't tell you anything about the
composition of atoms or or whether or
not
Miami is in Florida so we cannot
conflate it with that sort of knowledge
and that's kind of the point with my
four dimensional theory of growth I
specifically go after the gurus I say
well here's a car Tala and
he has high states and he sees the stars
and he walks out or around on clouds a
lot of the time and and feels very
loving should we listen to him no why
because the guy's stupid I mean read his
book it's stupid stuff it's basic and
his psychology is bad his psyche a
psychiatric advice is harmful his
analysis of society is people incorrect
he's more divorced from science than any
cat you would have at home I mean it's
it's it's just not somebody you should
listen to on any other topic than on
having a high state and then of course
there is a general insightfulness in his
work and it is unmistakeably there and
this is what I mean just because you can
find the physiological correlates for
something look in the eyes of one of
your psychedelic friends and look in the
eyes of one or your wallstreet friends
assuming they're not the same and the
wallstreet friend and let's say they're
the wall street frame is a friend is a
conventional modernist than the wall
street friend is going to have less
depth in their gaze and it's noticeable
and they're going to be less subtle in
their movements they're going to have
sex in different ways less subtly also
often and notice they're going to be a
little less in tune with reality and if
you ask them what is of ultimate
significance the person with a deep gaze
will say something like well to serve
this beauty I sense in reality in that I
can tune into and I kind of know that
there is a fundamental sense of truth
and this is produced through our human
relationships the closer we'll get to
love and that this love has some kind of
ultimate principle of blah blah blah
they'll say something like that they'll
give you a high depth answer there's a
researcher foul or under the
developmental psychology of this not
very good stuff but at least people have
attempted to do this and I believe it is
possible to see an empirical difference
than between high depth people a load of
people and and the other person the Wall
Street guy or the conventional guy will
say well it just to live life I guess to
be a good person they won't be
able to answer from the same depth of
their being and they won't be able to
relate to you and resonate with you at
the same depth that their being and this
is what spirituality does and if we
ignore this part or say well so so it is
reducible to neural firework and then
confabulations yes it is but it doesn't
take anyway anything from the depth so
there's a yes and here I mean on the one
hand essential is always false
everything is always emergent and
through the relationships with other
things and for this reason it can always
be reduced to those things but
essentialism is the sin of the people
who are high on depth and high estate
below and complexity in code and they
will believe in magic in different kinds
but on the other hand you have
reductionism so people who are high on
complexity and high on code higher than
their stage of depth and state which
means that you can always explain a
little bit more than the sparkles of
reality meaning that you always feel
like rowdies a little bit disenchanted
which means you get a subtle itch to get
back at it that wait a minute this is
just a piece of mechanics well you're
you're not a wizard
bla bla bla you're just a man and and
all of that stuff and magic goes away
and you get a little bit frustrated
whenever you hear anybody else going
about on about the magic you always want
to dispel the magic you almost want to
subtly get get back at the world and the
right place to be is probably I mean I
mean everything just evolves and these
things are going to be a different
dissonance as and different people and
that's part of life but the optimal part
for for any particular person is to have
their inner depths matched by complexity
and back and and the other way around
so that you do feel that this is an
enchanted awesome super cool world and
that you can take issues of spirituality
seriously and and live a life of faith
meaning you believe in something eat for
instance an immoral project that is
beyond a bigger than yourself and you
don't feel you have to pick
depart all the time and you still can be
a critical mind and you can still joke
about your own gods and you can still
piss on your own holy symbols if you
need to and you can still not be a
sucker for the manipulation of others or
the totalitarianism that magical
thinking open up hope is you up to and
that's that's a I mean it's an
incredibly difficult balance and even
you know even in research they have
shown us that these things aren't
friends you know you set somebody up on
thinking analytically for a while on a
hard problem and yeah I don't know you
play Mozart to them or whatever and they
will be less inclined to be subtle
spiritual for a moment and you set it up
a group for mindfulness meditators and
20 minutes later it's easier to they
have higher suggestibility so you can
easily or easily fool them that they
have a fault memory they don't actually
have it can give them false memories so
they're more easily manipulable because
they they went into a more malleable
space within so these things pull in
different directions and our work is to
to move back and forth between them
between crude reductionism heartless
I mean heartless Nietzschean
disenchanted grim cut to the bone
reductionism and trembling spirituality
devotional unapologetic being in love
with the world both of these things must
be coordinated with one another even
though they are opposite principles
that's a bold and interesting statement
I would suggest that I like most of what
you said and I could agree with most of
it and I suppose you know the best
takeaway is you can say from the old
moody blues song question of balance
right and and the balance is gonna be
dynamic we're gonna be at different
parts of the continuum at different
times on my wedding day I hope I'm at
the most spiritual part the S word I
said it oh my god I'm the most spiritual
part of the continuum when I'm you know
day trading stocks I hope I have
not paying any attention to it and in
general I want to be in between but it's
route you give you a good example Wall
Street guy and hippy I might throw
something in the middle which is more of
a question of balance let's call it the
Silicon Valley person right mm-hmm
these people tend to practice spiritual
practices etc and they use that as fuel
to create things in the world to move
the world forward in a in a real way and
I find that that's the tension I
personally am looking for as you've
probably guessed by listening to this I
am an outwardly focused person I know
how to go inside it's useful it's
enjoyable but I'd rather go create
something tell the truth and I will only
use that interior stuff to the degree
that it helps me create exterior things
more efficaciously I think if that is
the Silicon Valley balance between the
two
and they say for myself I swing all the
way from hippy to Wall Street but
probably spend most of my time in this
tuning that I just named syllabic I just
made up of Silicon Valley which is I
liken and find usefully internal states
I don't actually believe them but I use
them as ways to make me a more
efficacious player in the real world
assai mean a in the society I mentioned
a few different important groups to to
meta modernism and and the different
kind of landscape of class that is shown
up and in post-industrial digitized
internet societies and a core group you
we mentioned it briefly before we also
started talking the is the yoga
bourgeoisie they said you're not yoga
per se but is the Silicon Valley types I
guess are of it and it's I suppose the
core population of meta modernists these
days are from the yoga bourgeoisie and
especially perhaps around Burning Man
culture and so on for the simple reason
that okay it's somebody who went through
the whole modernist thing for a while
and maybe they were successful early on
and then they realized they were still
miserable or they that made them
miserable even and then they started
meditating and taking
psychedelics or web whatever or these
things partly overlap a few years back
and forth and some some major life
crisis and then some therapy and usually
they land in a position where they value
spirituality and they want to use their
life for doing something good or greater
and they and they still have a strong
financial capital and so on and and all
of these all of this business know-how
and this is a an important group in the
core cities cities in Europe also and in
London and in Berlin in Stockholm and so
on and Copenhagen so it's important to
understand the yoga Porsches it's not
the only part of the of the meta modern
crowd here
unfortunately the yoga Porsche I see
generally is a bit too limited in its
perspective and what I feel is lacking
is a are two things really I mean it's
it's it says more revolutionary faith
that would make them more interested in
doing things like political meta
modernism or or your game be and the
other thing is actually the code the
meta modern code meaning they need a
more proper map what they're doing they
just have an idea that hey if you reach
it feels really cool to be in this high
stage you can open your hard you can not
be a dumb capitalist and you can you can
transform business you can be a
conscious capitalism well you can use
your business for good that's alright
but it won't take you to the next stage
of society they don't have a real map to
gather around and to be a revolutionary
class to be a class that turns against
modern society and organized us to
consciously change its structures its
informational architecture as we
mentioned the structures of the internet
its political structures and its culture
and that's what needs to be done so I
see within the yoga bourgeoisie that you
mentioned that yes they have both of
these elements but it's not successfully
coordinated so rather you have people
going to
in one direction and then too far in the
other or and not successfully
coordinating that these things into
shared life projects which take real
risks and real Brunt's of the other
problem and they end up always flying
around the world and go to Thailand
another time and going for another
hundredth workshop and so on and then
everybody wants a platform everybody
else and they want to all want to create
the next Facebook for all of these other
people or and/or be the the meeting
place for all of the others what I feel
we need to do is to mobilize this class
and to radicalize it within that class
there is certainly a lot of know-how and
capital and informational capital and
and a financial capital and also I
suppose emotional capital in the sense
that there there's a lot of energy
people are energized but there is not
enough cultural capital they don't quite
see the world and this is actually what
they might lack them from the pomos from
the post modernists a little bit more
critique a little bit more of seeing a
society as society of seeing things
sociological II might be exactly what
this part of the world needs of its
success that's part of it but you also
hit on the other which is they need the
right code and so far they don't have it
so that's interesting we could go on for
two more hours and I'm gonna ask you if
we could schedule another session
sometime in the future this has been I
think the best single episode I have
done yet but we are out we're out of
time and so I think we're gonna wrap it
up right there I think this has been
phenomenal but if we're gonna talk more
about it got to do it on another day
this one is for long runners a go out
you run 15 kilometers or something and
you put on this one indeed
[Music]
production services and audio editing by
jerod Jane's consulting music by Tom
Muller at modern space music