absolutely is the power of the people's
vote and I think the people should use
it to vote for in the last video I
talked about how our adversarial system
creates a situation where it's
impossible for us to approach problems
from the position of you know what basic
assumptions can we all agree on what do
we will want to get out of this and then
develop an idea or a policy or whatever
from there and that the fractious Ness
and other ink creates as pollution is
extremely harmful to society in this one
I want to talk about I think what is the
worst of all of the forms of pollution
that our political system generates
mainly distrust because it is impossible
for people to trust each other if
they're being lied to all the time and
so in this video I want to talk about
the lies that we are told by our
political representatives and not just
some of the time but pretty much all of
the time I mean it is so pervasive that
during political campaigns the promises
that are made none of us take them
seriously we know that half or more of
them whatever are going to be broken
when they're interviewed they evade and
avoid questions part answer questions
because they don't want to tell the
whole and entire truth they lie about
their affairs they lie about their
business interests they lie about
conflicts of interest I mentioned in the
previous video that in order to make
themselves look as though they're doing
a decent job they will manipulate and
cherry-pick data and you know this is so
pervasive it goes on all the time that
we have become accustomed to it is
become normalized for us and so the
extent to which distrust is just there
in the air all the time is extraordinary
so but apart from those going on all of
the time sort of low-level lies if you
want to call them that they've told a
whole bunch of whoppers over the years
as well and so I'm just going to very
quickly remind you of some of the
juicier ones and please understand it's
taken me like five minutes of racking my
brains without having to look anything
up just from memory to come up with
this list and you know there are many
many many more that given a little bit
of thought and a little bit of time I
could I could add to it but as I've said
before I don't want to make these videos
too long so let's take a look at a few
so first of all there was the Pentagon
Papers released by the New York Times
and The Washington Post back in the
early 70s which showed that the Johnson
administration had and I quote lied
extensively not only to the public but
to Congress as well then there was the
Watergate scandal right way and Nixon's
people bugged the Democratic
headquarters and then lied about it
when accused of it then lied about it
and tried to cover it up and there's a
link between these two things as well
because the guy that released the
Pentagon Papers Ellsberg
I think his name was anyway he was
originally charged with espionage and so
on and the charges related dropped when
it was found that the Nixon
administration had tried to run a smear
campaign on him then there was the
Ronald Reagan Oliver North thing where
they were illegally selling weapons to
the Contras in Iran and a similar
situation in Nicaragua where the CIA was
allowing Nicaraguan drugs runners to run
into the u.s. and back again giving them
cover so that the money generated would
be used to finance weapons for the
Nicaraguan Contras in his excellent film
hyper normalization and Adams sorry
Curtis charts the course of the
narrative surrounding Colonel Gaddafi
and how he went from vicious brutal
dictator to friend of the West and Ally
in the region to harbinger of terrorists
was deposed from power chased down by
CIA funded local militia and had a
machete stuck up his ass
my personal favor and in pretty recent
memory is the weapons of mass
destruction nonsense that took us to war
in Iraq I mean I know much more about
what happened in Britain than in the
u.s. I do remember : power going he'd
going and giving his irrefutable
rock-solid case to the UN in order to
get the resolution that the u.s. needed
but in Britain the BBC journalist Andrew
Gilligan actually came out and said
these intelligence dossiers have been
sexed up they've been made to look much
worse than they are in order to take us
to war he made the accusation directly
and not only did the government deny it
but they sent up a hot they set up a
whole jamming
hurry the Hutton report which exonerated
the government and you know damned the
BBC the director-general had to resign
Andrew Gilligan lost his job and Andrew
Gilligan source in this story a chap by
the name with dr. David Kelly once the
public spotlight shone on him then he
ended up killing himself he both
overdosed and slit his wrists and ended
up killing himself and so the government
was responsible for all of this not to
mention the thousands of lies both
British and American soldiers and the
million or more Iraqi lives lost in the
war
and as we all now know it turns out that
Andrew Gilligan's accusations were
absolutely right there was no real
foundation to believe that Saddam had
weapons of mass destruction and this
idea of whistleblowers or reporters
being hounded down for exposing the lies
and the crimes of their governments has
been getting worse and worse and worse
just to give a few examples the I
mentioned before the Nicaragua story the
chat that exposed that was a journalist
by the name of Gary Webb and of course
the government denied it vehemently
accused him of Mis casting the
government as evil and he lost his job
he lost his wife he ended up committing
suicide as a consequence of that but of
course everything that he reported and a
great deal more subsequently with the
release of papers later on turned out to
be absolutely accurate I mean much more
recently we have people like Edward
Snowden we have bradley manning we have
John Kiriakou who exposed the torture
program that the US was undergoing
Snowden of course exposed the
surveillance of us and international
citizens that the NSA is engaged in
secretly denying it what we do not do is
spy on lawfully on Americans or for that
matter spy indiscriminately on the
citizens of any country and then there
was Thomas Drake who also disclosed the
part of the US surveillance program he
successfully managed to defend himself
but Kiryat who went to jail Snowden is
now an exile Chelsea Manning I believe
is back in jail and still back in jail
and so you know it's it's extremely
difficult and extremely courageous for
people to come forward and expose the
lies and the crimes that their
governments are constantly engaging in
you
and if we go back a little bit further
in history the u.s. entered the first
world war based on the sinking of the
Lusitania and the loss of a thousand
American lives in that but I mean that
situation when the Miffy manipulated
Churchill knew perfectly well what's
going to happen if the Lusitania sailed
the German government even posted an ad
in the paper saying if you bought the
Lusitania we're going to try and sink it
so you know that was that was a
manipulation and and an untruth the
Second World War the American entrance
into the Second World War was
precipitated by the attack on Pearl
Harbor which again history now shows us
or documents now show us that the
American government knew perfectly well
that it was going to happen encouraged
it in fact and all of their really good
ships at left Pearl Harbor and gone and
gone and docked elsewhere the Vietnam
War was precipitated by the Gulf of
Tonkin incident and we now know that
that also didn't actually happen and so
you know the three biggest wars in
recent memory all three of those were
precipitated aggravated America's entry
into was caused by lies bold-faced
barefaced straightforward lies
you
and then of course there was the wars on
communism and then drugs and now
terrorism you know how many lies how
many distortions how many manipulations
how much propaganda has been told in the
name of those things and so you know
again I could go on and on and on and on
and on there are dozens hundreds of
these things but the point to think
about is that these are just the ones
that we know about right God knows how
many other horrific things have been
done and lied about and covered up that
have never been exposed and so you know
you got to think so many lies so many
crimes
all of them committed in our name on our
behalf by people that we elected so
think about that next time you go to the
polls thanks for listening the power of
the people's vote and I think the people
should use it to vote for
[Applause]
[Music]
[Applause]