good evening everyone I hope everybody
can hear me is everybody speakers are
working fine everybody can hear listen
thank you very much for being here it's
lovely wonderful to see such a large
audience here in Carlton place tonight
and I want to indeed thank everybody for
being here and I'll just check with the
official timer Bruce did we get it
within five minutes all right
for those who don't know my name is
Randy Hillier I'm the member of
provincial Parliament for Lanark
Frontenac Lennox and Addington and of
course I represent this area at Queen's
Park and I'm Trust and expect in the
hope that everyone will find this
evening very informative very
interesting and very enjoyable
like they just recognized a few other
people who are here this evening for
tonight and I see that we have counselor
Faye Campbell and councillor Brian
Dowdle from Beckwith Township in the
audience this evening
thank you very much we also have the
deputy Reeve and Reeve deputy Reeve
Sharon mu so andrey richard kid from
beckwith township here this evening and
last but not least his worship and mayor
of calm place louis Antonakos is joined
us this evening as well thank you very
much for being here tonight
I hope I didn't miss anybody
did I miss somebody oh pardon me the
mayor of Mississippi Mills Shawn
McLaughlin is here yay snuck in I don't
know how you got in here without me
seeing you Shawn but thanks for being
here as well I should also mention just
a couple items before we begin this
evening there is washrooms outside the
main doors and to the right everybody
looking for the washrooms there's also
trying to keep the flashes and the
recordings to a minimum we do have a
couple photographers here tonight there
this evening's events is being fully
recorded video and audio and will be
published online in its entirety so
don't need to do any other recording it
will all magically appear on the
internet sometime tomorrow I would
imagine so and it will of course will be
free and available to everybody after
tonight's presentations and I guess I
should also state that this is not a
partisan or political event tonight we
will have a question and answer period
after dr. Peterson has made his
presentation and I know many people here
know much about dr. Peterson
he is widely read and knowledgeable and
insightful on a great many subjects but
we would like to see the questions
relevant to tonight's topic so and with
that I think I'll just start a little
bit about myself before being elected
before entering politics I like many
other people was increasingly getting
disappointed with the that the way
government was conducting itself would
be
ever increasing government laws the
rules the regulations that in my view
were unduly infringing on what I
considered my own personal jurisdiction
my own personal responsibility and and
also how these increasing role of
government was shifting in altering
society in ways that I felt
uncomfortable with that I felt were
contrary to my beliefs in my values and
like most people I grumbled about it and
grumbled and spoke with other people who
grumbled about things but we didn't do
very much about it
we just bored green and Bohr and the the
ever-increasing role of government but
back in 2002 very fortunately I came
across a few other fellows who had very
much same attitudes and views as myself
and in 2002 four of us four of us met
around a kitchen table at Merle and
Ruth's
Beau's home owed on the concession for
of Ramsey and we decided that it was
time to act now none of us actually knew
what that meant none of us had actually
ever done anything about government but
we knew that we needed to speak out and
we knew that we needed to make a
difference so we formed formed a group
and we called it the lanark landowners
Association and I was asked to be the
spokesperson and the president of that
new Association of four people
and then of course we said that's right
now what do we do well we decided to
hold a meeting not far from here indeed
a lab over in Beckwith Township was our
first meeting of the lanark land owners
association we went around the area we
put up posters on hydro poles and
telephone poles we put posters up in the
general stores and the stores around the
area and and we also sent a few letters
to the newspapers indicating what our
concerns were and we wanted to see you
know because we really had no idea if
there was anybody else who thought like
we did we knew there was a four of us
but we didn't know if there was any
others so we held this meeting decided
to give it a go and surprisingly the
hall was packed index Township that
night and people came they shared their
stories they shared that they had
similar thoughts similar beliefs similar
values and at the end of that night our
association of four people became an
association of dining people and within
the next five years the lanark land
owners would grow to include chapters
from around the province and a
membership of 15,000 people people found
a vehicle to speak out through that
association they found a vehicle to
become involved and to make a difference
sue me
during those years we helped many town
halls in every corner of the province we
provided testimony at government
committee hearings we argued with
politicians and bureaucrats alike in
many different forms
we had the Senate committee come out
tomorrow's house they wanted to hear
more about our stories many people
politicians and parties asked to meet
with us and we had politicians and
political parties knocking on our doors
seeking our support and seeking our
advice now many of you will know that we
didn't just confine ourselves to the to
the gentlemanly arts of diplomacy in
discussions with the lanark landowners
as well on occasion we did a take
activism in our voice to different
heights week indicting conducted skits
and plays at farmers markets we
shuttered and closed down government
buildings we had a cattle auction on
Parliament Hill
we held tractor rallies and closed down
highways and bridges throughout the
province we were very fortunate that we
had a great many members with the great
many skills and also a lot of creativity
and passion for our subjects in our
demand for greater personal
responsibility and less government
involvement in our property I learned
many valuable lessons through those
years many which were quite
contradictory to the conventional wisdom
the first lesson I learned is that we
have a mistaken belief that political
leaders are leaders it became clear to
me that most politicians are followers
not leaders
and that people must demonstrate and
show government and politicians alike
that in order to change a policy change
an activity or an issue
politicians require a demonstration of
public support political parties often
use polling or focus groups to determine
where it's safe to go and when I'm
speaking about politics and government
I'm leaning more to the provincial and
federal side of politics as well I want
to make that clear municipal politics is
very much of course it's not a party
oriented system at municipal level and
there's a great many differences at the
municipal level but political parties
use that those focus groups and polling
to try to determine where it's safe for
them to go but in doing so it really dig
eighths in diminishes that fundamental
principle of representative democracy
elected people and parties speaking with
and knowing the pulse of their
communities their constituents their
constituency but also in helping to lead
and advocate for change for the better
in short democracy does not mean the
government it does not mean politicians
although they are both necessary
ingredients representative democracy
means you and me it means us
that's what representative democracy
must have for it to function properly it
does not include the words they or them
it is you and I for a representative
democracy to work
another lesson and I often often during
those days with the landowners I would
be approached by people people would
come up to me in many venues and
invariably they would say something like
long this line someone ought to do
something about this always they would
come up to me say someone ought to do
something and that went on for quite a
period of time it took me a little while
to catch on that when they were seeing
someone they meant me or when they said
someone it meant not them right and and
I did learn that you know I'd listen to
their suggestion and their idea and when
they told me then someone ought to do
something I would agree with them and
say someone ought to and I know where
you can find that someone and they would
look at me with a questioning look and
say well who and I would say look in the
mirror and you will find that varying
someone that you're looking for and
until you do look in the mirror you will
never find that someone who ought to do
something and that was a it actually
worked it actually got people it
motivated people to actually think about
what they were saying and think about
what they were doing and what they
wanted to do I could go on and on about
the lessons that I learned the rewarding
actions and activities and the successes
that we enjoyed with the landowners but
tonight I know that it is someone who
has a far broader far deeper
understanding in understanding of the
importance of civic
engagement the understanding and also
the thoughts and knowledge of how to
help find people to find their voice and
to become influential tonight we are
honored to have that individual here
tonight he is a professor of psychology
at the University of Toronto
he is a clinical psychologist he is
bringing knowledge and insight of
humanity to tens of thousands of people
through his online activities and his
free University lectures and I'll tell
you I'm not one to generally watch
university lectures let alone lectures
on psychology but I started watching his
lectures on maps of meaning and I was
astonished you know the first one was
like two and a half hours in length and
I watched the first five of them and I
think it was the first five of them was
a part of it you know these have over 10
hours I'm not going to get into all the
details over ten hours but these
lectures was 10 hours of breaking down
and dissecting and understanding a story
the story of Pinocchio now I found that
amazing that I that I could watch these
lectures first
but you know I I said I know but I know
the story of Pinocchio it wasn't that
interesting to me as a kid Val ah and it
certainly would have taken me 10 hours
to describe this story to anybody else
but anyway yeah so that's just inside if
you want to really watch something I
find interesting but I also first came
across this individual years ago I'm
avid watcher of TVO's agenda with Steve
Paikin gets into a lot of provincial
policy and I'm fighting Steve taking a
very credible journalist and often this
fella would be on Steve Bacon's attend a
show and I would watch with interest
have when he was there so but in my
estimation this gentleman is one of
Canada's foremost thinkers and with a
very significant twist he has a courage
and the conviction to speak out against
some of those falsehoods of conventional
wisdom and political correctness I know
he has much to offer a lot of wisdom and
it is my pleasure to welcome to calm
place in Delano County dr. Jordan B
Peterson to join us tonight
but didn't hear me there we go
Thank You mr. Hill your hunts for the
introduction and also for the invitation
so not everyone will invite me places so
it's nice when an invitation shows up
yeah yeah
and when I'm actually allowed to speak
that's also good so I have a habit of
not preparing my talks until really the
last minute and I mean that's not
exactly true because I've been thinking
about what I'm going to talk to you
about tonight for a very long time but I
I really only got the title for this
talk firmly in place about half an hour
ago and and one of the things I like to
do when I'm speaking to people is to
tell them what I'm thinking about not
what I've already thought about you know
and certainly not what I know but what
I'm thinking about what I'm trying to
figure out and so one of the things
that's happened to me over the last year
somewhat surprisingly is that I've been
invited to speak in front of a lot of
conservative groups and a lot of them
were conservative groups that were
composed of young people and that was
interesting you know because
conservatism isn't something that's
necessarily all that easy to sell to
young people because they tend not to be
that conservative to begin with and
conservatism also tends to have quite a
lot to do with things that you shouldn't
do instead of things that you might be
allowed to do and so there's a
restrictive element of it that's also
perhaps less attractive to young people
than it might be people do tend to get
more conservative as they get older as a
personality shift and so but what I saw
was very interesting because I saw and
this was particularly true of young men
and I haven't quite puzzled that out yet
but you know I would talk about what was
going on in the universities and what I
thought might constitute a reasonable
antidote to that and that was not only
in the universities but also politically
but and that was both the adoption of
responsibility instead of the incredible
and constant stress that's being placed
on rights and also the responsibility of
the citizen to speak for
we're what he or she believed to be true
or at least to not speak what they knew
to be false which is at least a good
place to start and one of the things I
found so remarkable was that this was
actually a saleable message to young
people and that surprised me because you
know you wouldn't necessarily think that
you would turn a lot of lights on in a
young audience by talking to people
about truth and responsibility I think
if you if you went to a marketing agency
and told them that that was going to be
your political message to young people
they would tell you to go back and you
know flesh out another plan sketch out
another plan
but maybe young people have been talked
to enough about rights for maybe about
the next 15 decades that's what I would
think and so maybe there's a hunger
arising among young people for something
that has a little bit more
respectability let's say a little bit
more depth than the constant emphasis on
on doing whatever you want whenever you
want let's let's put it that way the
thing about that in the thing about
rights in general that the idea of
rights is that rights don't really give
you much direction right they they tell
you what you are in principle allowed to
do but they don't really tell you what
you should do and it actually turns out
that you need to know what you should do
because you need to do something right
people are active and our lives don't
have any meaning without something to do
and it's something that you should do it
can't just be something that you want to
do that's too shallow there's no deep
meaning there's no enduring there's no
sustaining meaning in that it's just
impulsiveness and and maybe that's okay
in some sense maybe that's entertaining
and maybe it's maybe it's impulsively
exciting and fun and there's some
there's some utility in that for life
but life is a very difficult journey
let's say it involves a lot of suffering
and it involves a lot of heavy
existential weight and you need to be
able to put something a value up against
that so that you can withstand your life
and you can stand up with some dignity
and you can contribute to your community
and you can feel that you're a
worthwhile person you know in spite of
all the things that are that you're
doing wrong and in spite of all the
problems that you have and so then
people need to know what they should do
and one of the things they should do is
take responsibility and another thing
they should do is try to tell the truth
because those two things hell
them live proper lives and then help
society organize itself properly and
that's that's good that's good for
everyone so and so it turns out that
when you tell young people that they're
pretty damn happy about that and so one
of the things I thought I would do
tonight is talk about what conservatives
might have to offer to young people as a
saleable message you know because my the
other thing I've learned over the last
year this was quite revealing let's put
it that way I'll start with a briefer
story just as a little intro to this in
the last three weeks some of you may
know that there was quite a political
storm that emerged particularly among
journalists over the issue of cultural
appropriation a number of journalists
got in real trouble for transgressing
the politically correct norms in
relationship to cultural appropriation
tremendously ill-defined and let's call
it pathological concept we could start
with that but but the thing that was so
interesting and I think I probably
talked to ten of Canada's top 20
journalists but that would be a
reasonable estimate most of them in
print but not all of them every single
one of them told me that they were
censoring themselves you think about
that man that's no joke in a country
like this and these people you think
well if anyone has power they have power
it's like well they don't really have
power they have competence and influence
and that's not the same thing as power
and they're bloody afraid of being hung
out to dry if they say the wrong thing
you think about where our damn country
is when the 10 most powerful journalists
in the country are afraid to write and
say what they think that's not a good
thing man that's not a good thing I
don't care what it is that they want to
say or think the fact that they're not
only did they tell me that they were
censoring themselves and that they felt
that they would be hung out to dry if
they said the wrong thing but they also
told me that they were being censored by
their editors and so you know in a
country that has a great tradition right
and a tradition that's much longer than
this country has been around of freedom
and free speech and Free Press for us to
be in the situation now where our major
journalists are afraid that if they
misstep inappropriately in this newfound
Politico
landmine that they're going to be done
that is not good right that's a bad
diagnostic sign okay well I said that
story was a little intro to the other
story was going to tell you and then so
I've been fortunate enough over the last
several months to meet not the majority
of the people who ran for the leadership
of the federal Conservative Party but
most of them including the people the
person who Andrew who recently won and
they all told me the same thing which
was also interesting was that the
Conservatives were afraid to be
conservative and for exactly the same
reason they were afraid that if they put
forward valid conservative perspectives
that they would be isolated and mobbed
and taken down and and that made them
censor themselves and not be willing to
speak up and I thought and I told each
of them when we discussed this the same
thing was if you guys are afraid to talk
you've already lost you might as well
just pack up and go home it's done now
you know as a psychologist
[Applause]
so I got to say I'm not making a case
for conservatism I'm not here to make a
political case right I'm here to make a
philosophical and psychological case and
I think that's what I've been doing all
along it has political implications so
I'm not saying that you should be
conservative or that conservative is the
only way to be because I actually don't
believe that for a variety of reasons
one of the reasons is that I know that
political belief is determined in large
part by temperament and personality and
that's very strongly biologically
influenced and so conservatives tend to
be lower in openness which is a trait
associated with creativity and higher in
conscientiousness which is a trait
associated with industriousness and
orderliness they tend to make good
managers and administrators and lawyers
they tend to make good conservative
business types that's that's their forte
that's their niche and that's a valid
place to be in a valid thing to be and
you know conservatives aren't so good at
being entrepreneurial and they're not so
good at being artistic and creative
that's not their niche that's more the
niche of the liberal end of the spectrum
and as far as I'm concerned for the
political system to function properly
you need proper representation for all
the temperamental types and they need to
be engaged in dialogue so but the thing
is is that when the conservatives are
saying well you know especially when
they're perhaps thinking about leading
the damn party let's say that they're
worried about speaking their mind in a
conservative manner that's just not a
good thing that means that something's
gone wrong with our political system and
seriously wrong you know when the other
thing that another thing that I've
noticed it thing you know when this off
some of you may know and some of you may
not know that I made a couple of videos
back September 27th I woke up one night
because I couldn't sleep and I thought
are usually going right if I can't sleep
because I've got something to figure out
and but I've been playing with YouTube
videos I've been putting my lectures
online since 2013 and by last April they
had about a million views and so I
thought wow that's that's really
something man you know like you write a
book you sell a million copies you're
one happy character and I thought I a
million views is a very large number of
views it really tuned me into the fact
that YouTube was something completely
other than what I thought it was but
anyways that night I thought oh I'll get
up and make a video and
that of writing it down and this was a
video about Bill c16 which by the way
the Senate just passed right half the
conservatives voted for it despite the
fact that the Justice Minister was
presented with an amendment that clearly
indicated that bill c16 would not
infringe upon free speech and refused to
consider the amendment so that's where
we are
there's compelled speech is now the law
in Canada isn't yet but it's going to be
very soon and half the Conservatives
voted for that damn bill and I can tell
you two you know people have gone after
me for being you know anti-transgender
and bigoted and phobic and all that
nonsense that the left tends to hurl at
people it's not the case I read that
damn legislation and I read the policies
surrounding it and I know perfectly well
that the way it's formulated right now
it will do more harm to the people it
purports to protect than good that'll
take about 10 years to unfold but it's
so incoherent and that the principles
upon which that legislation and its
surrounding policies are based are so
paradoxical and contradictory that they
will act themselves out because that's
what happens with paradoxical beliefs
and tangle people up like them in that
like tangle people up in them like mad
and we'll see that happen over the next
decade and it's partly because the
people who put bill six c16 forward
especially with regards to its
surrounding policies the ones that are
detailed out on the Ontario Human Rights
Commission website don't give a damn
about transgendered people as far as I'm
concerned there there's another agenda
at work that's driving their entire
political force forward and the
transgender types were just flavor of
the month right they were poster boys
for moving this postmodern agenda
forward and so the fact that the
legislation isn't going to do them any
good do the transgendered people any
good isn't going to stop the people who
put the legislation forward so anyways I
made these videos and I put them on on
YouTube and well to say they caused the
storm which is somewhat of an
understatement I mean it's just been I
just I I don't even know what to think
about it's completely and absolutely
surreal what's happened to me I as a
consequence of that I mean I don't know
how many people have watched those
original videos like 350,000 and I
think now about 50 million people have
watched videos associated with this
sequence of events that I'm describing
which is just three hundred and fifty
thousand people watched the testimony
that I gave before the Senate on Bill
c16 you bloody well know that the
apocalypse is closed when three hundred
and fifty thousand people around the
world watch a Canadian Senate hearing
it's like really bad really what's going
on man so anyways you know so you know I
said well the journalists are nervous
and that and and the Conservatives are
nervous and and well then you know when
I when I put myself out and made these
videos which I really didn't expect to
attract much attention at all I just
assumed that I was going to clarify what
I was thinking a little bit and you know
and see what happened I kind of a
curious person now that'll teach me but
I'm kind of a curious person and so um
but then you know I also experienced
firsthand what happens when you do
something like that now what I got
nailed right I got especially for about
three months things were pretty up in
the air at the University sent me two
letters telling me that it ha it was so
funny because I read made this video and
I said you know under this new
legislation making this video
criticizing this legislation is probably
illegal and so then the independent
people of course reacted to me as if I
was scare mongering which by the way was
the right response when you hear someone
in a stable society stand up and say
excuse me there's a there's something
rotten at the base here and it's
affecting the manner in which the
legislation that our country is
producing is is being rolled forth when
they say that you should think that
person is probably a charlatan and have
something wrong with them we could look
the culture works pretty good the
country's worked really well for a long
period of time and so the logical
initial response should be yeah you
think there's a fundamental problem why
shouldn't we just assume that there's a
fundamental problem with you and one of
the ways that you you determine that is
you throw things out the person
metaphorically and see if any of them
stick right so you know I was a bigot
and a homophobe and a transphobic and a
racist that one I don't know where the
hell that one came from I think it was
because I sized the two what would you
call red
prehensile women who started black lives
the black lives matter movement Toronto
it isn't because they're black it's
because they're reprehensible black or
white man if you're reprehensible you're
reprehensible that's sort of the
definition of not being racist right so
anyways so so so there were a couple of
demonstrations and then the press jumped
on me to some degree they didn't do too
bad a job I didn't think and then the
university thankfully wrote two letters
saying that what I was doing was
probably illegal and that it violated
the the Ontario Human Rights
Commission's policies and probably the
university's policies as well as as far
as they were concerned which really
wasn't the case and the letters also
contained a number of untruths which I
detailed because I read them on YouTube
too which is what actually quite helpful
and handy that you know if someone
writes me a letter that purports to lay
out a set of facts then I can just read
it I don't even have to comment on it I
can read it and let people make up their
own minds which they did so so well and
so my job was in doubt in doubt but the
fact that the university went after me
actually turned out to be extremely
helpful right because I had said look
under the provisions of this new
legislation and legislation like this
that's already in place in Canada what I
am doing criticizing this bill is
probably illegal and everyone said no
you're crazy you know you're there's
something wrong with you you're a you're
a you're a scare monger and a rabble
rouser and all of that and then the
university wrote letters saying what you
did violated you know the university
policy and probably the Ontario Human
Rights Commission's policies and the law
and I thought great you had your lawyers
take a look at it I couldn't ask for a
more stronger statement a stronger
statement in support of what I had said
especially because it certainly wasn't
written in support of what I had said so
and then the journalist started to pay
attention to what I had actually looked
at and they read it and they thought oh
hey look at that that aren't that our
entire human rights commission website
policy mass is actually quite a nest of
spiders just like he said and so it
turns out that there is something rotten
in the state of Denmark and that's just
not so good and so like this is a good
country man that's why people want to
here it's one of the best countries in
the world maybe it's the best country in
the world I mean we don't want to get
too high on our horse about that and God
aren't we fortunate but it's a pretty
good place you know but it's not what it
used to be and the people who are
running it are not who you think they
are so for example provincially let's
take it the title that the people who
follow Kathleen Wynne have is liberal
they are not liberals they are radicals
and they're radicals of a sort I used to
work for the NDP when I was a kid back
in the 70s and the people who are
influential in Kathleen Wynne's
government and who are making the sort
of policies that I regard is
particularly reprehensible are the kind
of radical leftists that the NDP
working-class socialists that I knew in
the 1970s would have regarded as the as
the unacceptable fringe of the Socialist
Party and they are now defied they have
now defined themselves as centrist
liberals they are not and what they're
doing is not centrist and it's not
liberal and so that's another thing for
the conservative party to start thinking
about because you have a whole bunch of
liberals you could go out there and
capture because they've been abandoned
by their own party and that's for sure
and it's something that should be taken
advantage of because well we need some
conservatives and we need some
socialists and maybe we need some
liberals and the Liberals and the
Conservatives are getting damn scarce
among the people who actually make
policy at not only at the provincial and
federal level but also at mid-level
admit at the top end of mid-level
administration's everywhere as well and
that's not accidental it's partly
because unbeknownst to the majority of
society for the last 30 years the damn
universities have been doing nothing but
training and targeted training radical
leftist activists and if you don't
believe that you just go on the web and
look up like ten Women's Studies
programs and read what they say you
don't have to listen to me you don't
have I don't want you to believe me you
just go out there and find it for
yourself
and there the activism is devoted to a
certain key set of ends and one of them
for example here's a word to remember
equity okay
that's replaced equality of opportunity
it's like okay equality of opportunity
that's a tough one to bring about you
know you need a
a bit of government intervention to
bring about equality of opportunity
maybe it's a noble goal it's a tough one
to attain but equity equity means
equality of outcome and you see an
equity everywhere and that's what it
means and so the people who are pushing
this radical agenda are pushing things
that are that are inimitable to our
traditions and and practices of
governance you know the ontario social
justice tribunals because we have social
justice tribunals in ontario they don't
even deign now to hide the damn name the
social justice tribunals are allowed to
suspend standard jurisprudential
practice in the pursuit of their aims it
says that right in their policies well
you think about that really that's
written in your policies you can just
dispense with classic jurisprudential
tradition so what does that mean
it means you can do any damn thing you
want and so those are the sorts of I
would say subversive and fifth column
like organizations that are sprouting up
in our society everywhere it's not a
good thing and so look when someone
stands up and says there's something
wrong the first thing you should ask is
what makes why should I assume that you
know what the hell you're talking about
that's a good question well you
investigate it and you find out whether
or not the person does know what they're
talking about and on the issue that I'm
describing to you tonight as far as I
can tell I know what I'm talking about
now people have been on my case about
this in a very serious way for quite a
long time and so far they haven't made
any inroads into my arguments and most
of the time they're too damn cowardly to
debate me which is also something that's
really interesting because I put out
public calls constantly if you you want
to debate about gender and sex you just
bring it on because that obviously
happens to be an area of expertise for
me and I know the damn literature if you
want to come out and make your case that
all the differences between men and
women are socially constructed
culturally constructed or that there's
just or that they're just a personal
whim which by the way is exactly what's
written into the policies surrounding
Bill c16 then you come out make that
case publicly and see how well it stands
up and
know how well it will stand up because
that kind of thinking was defeated in
the scientific realm back in the 1960s
in the universities and what that meant
was that the radicals who wanted to keep
promoting precisely that kind of view
just circumvented the entire scientific
process and started to implement their
demands for their particular viewpoint
from a practical policy administrative
and legislative perspective knowing full
well that they had lost 100% on the
empirical and the scientific front and
now what they do instead is criticize
the scientific endeavor itself because
it failed to produce the results that
they assumed would be the case so
there's plenty that's rotten in the
state of Denmark and I'm embarrassed to
state that a tremendous amount of that
stems from the universities and they're
in bad shape do not send your children
to the humanities right they're corrupt
they will
they won't learn to think because the
postmodernist don't believe in thinking
they won't learn logic because the
postmodernists believe that logic is one
of the tools that the oppressive
patriarchy uses to sustain its
oppressive patriarchy spell press of
patriarchal nature they won't learn to
write well that's because writing
teaching people to write takes a
tremendous amount of effort and perhaps
they're not so much interested in
teaching people to formulate their own
thoughts precisely and carefully as they
are interested in in producing cult-like
clones to go out and do their activist
work which is precisely what they state
on their website so you know things are
not so pretty and and it's very
embarrassing as a member of the Academy
and to come before a group of of public
citizens and say you've been betrayed by
your institutions of higher learning
it's sad it's sad and it's not good and
you know you think well it's just the
university it's just an ivory tower it's
like think again man what happens in the
Universities happens everywhere five
years later so it's no mere ivory tower
issue so ok so a couple of weeks ago a
couple of months ago I did this lecture
and Vancouver called a left-wing case
for free speech because you can actually
make a left-wing case for free speech
pretty easily right it's like obviously
some people have more influence and
authority than others and just as
obviously it's harder for the people
with less influence and authority to
make their case known so clearly they
need to be able to make their case so
that's the left-wing case for free
speech fairly straightforward I thought
it needed to be made because especially
on the radical left people seem to have
forgotten that free speech was actually
their most what welcome friend and
enabled them to do whatever good things
they did managed to do over the last
hundred years but I made a left wing
case and so that was easy and reasonably
entertaining and you can watch that on
YouTube if you want and so tonight what
I thought I'd do as a counterpart to
that is lay out what I believe might be
some tenets for a viable 21st century
conservatism and these are ideas that
I'm playing with so I'm going to I wrote
down about 12 of them I don't know if
we'll get through all of them but we can
we can start with a few and
this is what the Conservatives could be
selling to the public now what seems to
me to be happening instead at the moment
is as Kathleen Wynne flames out not
nearly fast enough in my opinion the
attitude among conservatives that the
provincial party seems to be something
well let's just go like go let's go
cluster in a corner and not do anything
too stupid because maybe she'll burn
yourself out so badly that we'll just
win the next election and we won't have
to you know do anything that will put us
at risk and I'm not being cynical about
that I can understand the the utility of
that policy although I think it's a bad
policy and I think it's a bad policy
because there are some things that
seriously need to be said about Kathleen
Wynne in her government I could tell you
one noble aim for the provincial
Conservatives for the next election
would be to decimate the provincial
liberals not one should be left what's
what's her popularity at right now under
10% if she had a shred of integrity she
would have already resigned so anyways
there is a goal for the Conservatives no
liberal sitting after the 2018 election
that would send a message to the social
justice warrior types it would also send
a message to the centrists who should
actually be occupying the positions of
power in the Liberal Party that if you
allow yourself to be taken over by a
radical fringe you're going to get
decimated at the polls so you know that
might be an exciting message to sell
young people get out there knock on some
doors see if you can take the social
justice warriors out at the top before
before they do more damage than they've
already done she's got another year to
do plenty of damage and you can be sure
that she's going to do plenty more
damage in that here so okay what else
here's some things you might think about
if you're a conservative these things
have become what would you say people
are afraid to say them here's the first
one the fundamental assumptions of
Western civilization are valid how about
that you know it's not
you think it's an accident
oh here's how you find out okay which
countries do people want to move away
from hey not ours which countries do
people want to move to ours guess what
they work better and it's not because we
went around the world stealing
everything we could get our hands on
it's because we got certain fundamental
assumptions right thank God for that
after thousands and thousands of years
of trying and because of that we've
managed to establish a set of
civilizations that are shining lights in
the world you know now you can be pretty
damn filthy and still be a shining light
in this world right because if you look
around the world that's the state of
governance in most places it's like the
most pathological corrupt and vicious
thugs rule and to stand out as an
illuminated light against that
background is it so difficult but
nonetheless you know we're as good as
it's got and unless we can come up with
something better we should be very
careful about messing around with that
so why don't we start with the
assumption that we're doing something
right one of the things we're doing
right for example is that we actually
value the individual right the
individual has intrinsic value in
Western societies do you know how long
it took people to formulate that as an
idea and how unlikely that idea is that
poor you you know useless powerless you
with all your damn fault you're actually
worth something you're worth something
to the point that the law has to respect
you God we don't want to abandon that
for some half-witted collectivism which
we're doing as rapidly as possible
because one of the things that
characterizes the radical left types is
they don't give a damn about you as an
individual or about individuals at all
you're black or you're white or you're
Latino or you're transsexual you're
homosexual or whatever you're a group
you're a member of a group and the only
thing that matters is the group well I
can tell you if the only thing that
matters is the group you bloody well
don't matter very much and then you got
to ask yourself just exactly what sort
of people are trying to set things up so
it is that the individual doesn't matter
very much well it's the sort of people
to whom the individual doesn't matter
very much and I might suggest that you
don't elect them
and that when they attempt to take power
that you do everything you can to stalk
them okay so that's assumption number
one the assumption number two peaceful
social being is preferable to isolation
and to war in consequence it justly and
rightly demand some sacrifice of
individual impulse an idiosyncrasy okay
so you want to live alone in the bush
you're going to starve to death and be
eaten by black flies it's not a good
solution okay so you have to cooperate
with other people and that means you
can't get to be your whimsical self a
hundred percent of the time it means
that most of you has to be sacrificed so
that you can be approximately like
everyone else now that's a real
sacrifice right it's it's a sacrifice of
it might even be a sacrifice of some of
the unique qualities that everyone needs
from you socialization costs but the
advantage of it is well we get to exist
look we can all sit together in this
hole and no one has their hands around
each other's throats and we're talking
about serious things okay man that's
worth something and what it's worth in
part is you don't get to be whatever
spectacularly colored creature you want
to be all the time you have to do what
you can to be normal and predictable and
it's not like normal and predictable is
the highest virtue because it's not and
then being more than normal and being
and being unique and creative and
contributing in that way is
extraordinarily important but the
fundamental point is is that social
being requires the sacrifice of a
certain amount of individual
idiosyncrasy and that's a fundamentally
conservative claim it's like you should
be you should do what everyone else does
unless you have a really good reason to
vary it's a good rule it's like you do
what people have done throughout time
you grow up you find a partner you
establish a stable relationship you get
a job you make yourself useful you have
some children you do something
productive and interesting with your
spare time and you try to act like a
respectable human being that's what you
do that's a conservative ethos and if
you're if you have something spectacular
about you that needs to be revealed
the world then break some rules man go
right ahead I'm dead serious about that
but most of the time you don't and even
if you happen to be a special person and
you might be 90% of you still isn't
special so most of the time you're still
going to be following the rules and the
rules aren't there to oppress they're
there to keep us at they're there to
keep us away from each other's throats
because human beings are very warlike
and we're very competitive and we're
very aggressive and if we are fortunate
enough to have woven together a social
fabric that basically renders us
peaceful and cooperative we should try
disrupting us at our great peril because
the general rule for human existence
throughout the centuries has been
turmoil and war and we don't have that
here and so thank God for that and it's
worth a bit of a sacrifice
next equality equity equity that's worse
right equity means equality of outcome
it means that every single organization
has 50% women and 50% men doesn't matter
whether the men and women differ in
their intrinsic preferences which by the
way they do the scientific literature on
that is completely clear it was
established by the early 90s it was
established in the Scandinavian
countries where they've done most to
flatten out the socio-economic
differential say between men and women
didn't get rid of the differences
between men and women in fact they
became exaggerated the biggest
personality differences in the world
between men and women are in Scandinavia
just as the biggest difference is an
interest between men and women are in
Scandinavia because when you get rid of
the socio-cultural differences between
men and women the biological differences
don't disappear they maximize how else
could it be and as I said the literature
on that is clear and the way that the
postmodernist radicals react to that is
by criticizing the scientific method
itself on their computers which only
work of course because the scientific
method actually works
so you hear the egalitarian clarion call
everywhere everything should be equal
everything should be equally distributed
we should strive for equity it's like
wrong especially if you're a
conservative wrong what we want are just
hierarchies of competence not everyone's
a neurosurgeon you know if your father
has a brain tumor you probably want a
hierarchy of competence for
neurosurgeons so you can pick the one
that's the best so that he might not die
that's what a hierarchy of competence is
for for the postmodernist there's no
hierarchy that isn't based on power well
because they think the world runs on
power and that's why they're willing to
use power to get what they want because
it's the only thing they believe in but
a valid hierarchy of competence it's God
we need those things man we need the
best plumbers we need the best
contractors we need the best we need we
need the best carpenters we need the
best lectures there has to be a
hierarchy of quality not only so that we
know who the best are and to reward them
properly but so that we can reward them
so they keep being the best
it's like kiddo if if you have a great
educator if you have a great leader if
you have a great thinker you want to
reward them so they keep thinking and
they keep educating so they can tell you
something it's not a reward for their
intrinsic being it's a calculated move
on your part to suck everything out of
them that's valuable as fast as you can
that's what a hierarchy of competence is
for and the idea that hierarchies of
competence don't exist is it's so
cynical it's such a pathologically
cynical idea and it's actually quite
patently untrue because here's an
interesting tidbit from the
psychological literature let's say you
want to determine what the best
predictors are for lifetime success in a
Western society well what would you hope
for
how about intelligence there'd be a good
one let's hope the smart people occupy
more positions of complexity right
because they're smarter would you
want it any other way okay and then so
and that's great the number one
predictor of accomplishment in Western
societies is intelligence so that means
the system works what's the number two
predictor conscientiousness well what's
that it's a trait marker for hard work
so who kill who gets ahead smart people
who work hard now that doesn't account
for every bit of the difference between
people in terms of their hierarchical
structure because hierarchies aren't
perfect they're corrupt people get to
the top sometimes because they're
psychopathic although believe me a hell
of a lot less than you think because a
psychopath has to keep moving from place
to place because once he reveals himself
as deceitful and untrustworthy he has to
go find new suckers to fleece so the
idea that you know there's no
distinction between a CEO and a
psychopath it's like that's only made by
someone who a knows nothing about
Psychopaths B knows nothing about CEOs
and C has something fundamental against
the entire capitalist structure because
it's simply not true
corrupt sometimes greedy sometimes
short-sighted sometimes running
companies that are doing their best to
augur themselves into the ground and so
you know it's bad people writing a dying
organization but generally speaking it's
not the case our hierarchies of
competence are reasonably functional and
not only are they functional they're
valuable we need to know who the
competent people are and we need to
reward them and even more importantly we
need to tell young people hey there's
some hierarchies of competence out there
like a thousand of them go be a plumber
man be a good one you know be an honest
one be I'd a plumber once you know it
was the night it was the night before we
were putting drywall in our house we
were redoing a house and he had put in
all the plastic piping you know and I
was going to test the joints these are
supposed to be glued together with his
pipe glue right and I said I told him I
had to test the joints and he said well
you don't have to test my joints they
never leak and I thought yeah that's
okay how about if I test them so I went
up on the third floor and filled the
pipes with water capping them in the
basement like you're supposed to it like
half an hour later had two inches of
water in the basement there were thirty
leaking joints that was the night before
the drywallers were supposed to show up
so well so he wasn't particularly
competent
that's the point of that story but even
more so he had put a bunch of the
plastic pipe outside where the drywall
would be so it would have been sticking
through the wall so I spent a frenetic
night you know sawing through plastic
pipe and reglue in joints so that my
well so that the dry rollers could come
in what's the point if you're going to
be a plumber man be a good plumber
because otherwise all you do is go out
there and cause trouble we don't need
people to cause more trouble we need
people to solve problems you know and so
you can be a tradesman and you can be to
make a lot of money as a trades person
it's a bloody reliable honorable
forthright productive way of making a
living and there is a hell of a lot of
difference between a working man who
knows what he's doing and one who
doesn't both in terms of skill and
ethics right and you work with someone
who knows what they're doing it's a
bloody pleasure they tell you what
they're going to do they tell you how
much it will cost they go and do it it
works and you pay them perfect
everyone's happy and that's what happens
when you have genuine hierarchies of
competence and so you till you listen to
these panderers of egalitarian legality
egalitarianism and equity and they fail
to recognize completely that there are
differences in rank between people it's
not such a terrible thing man
maybe you wouldn't be a great lawyer
like it's certainly possible most people
aren't but that doesn't mean there isn't
something you could be great at there's
lots of hierarchies to attempt to climb
and if you fail in one go try in another
but the point is you're still trying to
aim for the top and what the hell are
you going to do if you don't try to aim
for the top you know flap about
uselessly and whine about your life it's
not helpful it'll just make you
miserable
you're not reliable to anyone you can't
help out in a crisis it's like so you
tell young people and this is another
message for conservatives like I don't
care what you're going to do but go out
there and make something of yourself for
God's sake be an honest person and work
and get to the top of whatever it is
that you want to get to the top of you
know and and and and then stand up for
yourself like a respectable human being
and be a bit of a light on the world
instead of a blight you know and you can
tell young people that and they haven't
been told that by anyone now and so the
young men are so hungry for that that
it's it's painful to watch
they're so relieved
would find someone finally comes up and
says hey you know you get your act
together a bit discipline yourself see
if you can learn to tell the truth
concentrate on something for a year or
two you could be a bloody world beater
they think really that's possible wow
that would be that would be interesting
that might make life or life worth
living it's like yeah it might so why
don't you go do it that's what the damn
universities we're supposed to be
teaching people they've forgotten that I
went to Harvard months ago months and a
half used to teach there and I talked to
a bunch of students you know and I told
them it's not easy to get into Harvard
you know like you're a valedictorian if
you're at Harvard and not only are you a
valedictorian you're way better than
most people at at least two other things
or you don't get in it so that gets I
don't know what the acceptance rate is
like 5% and believe me not everybody
applies so it's a very selective school
and so why am I saying now it's like
these are high quality kids so I told
them what I just told you it's like here
you are at Harvard so get yourself
educated man read some books learn to
talk learn to think make yourself into
something get the hell out there and
make the world that put you here happy
that you were put there in that great
institution you know and they came up to
me afterwards and said god I wish
someone would have told us that when we
were in our first year it's like Jesus
why didn't someone tell the math for
God's sake it's supposed to be the
greatest university in the world is it
so difficult to figure that out well it
is if that is what you want to have
happen in the university you want to
make cringing meltzoff to whine about
being victims while they're going to Ivy
League institutions Jesus it's pathetic
there's an old idea from Carl Jung I
really like this idea it's a rough one
man it's like a psychotherapeutic
scalpel let's say someone's doing
something to you you don't understand
it's produces nothing but misery has an
outcome I think what the hell is your
motivation they won't tell you maybe
they don't know so Carl Jung's advice
was look at the outcome and infer the
motivation okay so you produce a
generation of students privileged beyond
belief in comparison to the rest of like
struggling humanity in all of history
you put them in Ivy League school and
they come out thinking that they're
members of an oppressed group and
victims it's like well why would you why
would anyone why would that happen an
answer is well that's what the people
who taught them wanted to turn them into
and then you might think well did they
do that because they cared for them it
seems bloody unlikely to me you take
this great raw material right we have
taken a lot of work to make an
institution like the University of
Toronto or like Harvard we've been
working on that for thousands of years
and you invite people in you thank God
we selected you so carefully because we
think you could be a world beater and
then what we do is we don't teach you
how to think we don't teach you how to
speak we don't get you to read great
books and we convince you that you're a
victim and that your culture is corrupt
it's like great well those people are no
friends of those institutions I can tell
you that and they're even less friends
of those students so hierarchies arc of
competence are desirable and they should
be promoted so none of this idiot
egalitarian equity it's not good for
anyone first of all it's impossible
second it would be murderous to impose
but third even if it succeeded it would
fail as fast as it succeeded that would
be how fast it would fail why would you
strive for anything if there was no up
to strive for if everything is flat and
equal well when you're starving or dying
then everyone's equal and believe me the
egalitarian the ie egalitarian
totalitarians who dominated the 20th
century knew perfectly well how to make
people equal and they made them equal in
gulag work camps and in starvation and
I'm sure we could attain that if we
wanted to so all right next borders are
reasonable how about that the law is the
border that stops someone from stealing
your laptop and if it's an Apple laptop
well it's the sort of laptop that's
social justice where you would carry and
then the social justice warrior is going
to be very irritated if you happen to
purloin their laptop and then you might
point out to them you know it's a border
that protects you from having that thing
taken and they say well the border
should be open it's okay man no problem
you hand over that laptop right now and
everything else you own - if you don't
like borders and you can get rid of the
damn walls in your house and you don't
need doors on your bedroom either and we
can keep an eye on you whenever we want
and so much for borders one of the
things that really differs between
liberals and conservatives between the
left and the right is the right is in
the right leg tight borders between
things it's part of being conscientious
at every level conceptually sexually
familial II provincially nationally the
right says look let's keep let's keep
the borders between things pretty
distinct and the left says yeah maybe
not because some of those borders are in
the wrong place and a little bit more
free flow of information wouldn't be a
bad thing and the thing is they're right
but so are the conservatives and that's
why you have to talk it's like well
we've got some borders that's a good
thing maybe some of them need to be
moved around a little bit and that's
what the political dialogue is for but
that doesn't mean that borders
themselves are a bad idea they're a
great idea because without borders
everything mashes into the same
untenable state of undifferentiated
chaos and you can't live in that and so
the people who are trying to tear down
the borders conceptually politically and
practically what they want is the chaos
that that would bring they either want
that or they're too foolish to know that
their pursuits will produce that so
let's let's let's be a little bit clear
that if you stand up and say yeah
borders they're okay
they've got their problems but they're
okay that doesn't make you a bigot
beyond redemption
it just makes you
someone with some sense and it's
actually okay to be someone with some
sense limits on immigration are also
reasonable well we need to figure out
what those limits are and that's what
the bloody political dialogue is for but
the fact that it should be limited to
some degree is also reasonable otherwise
why not just open the borders and let
everybody come in well the reason you
don't do that is because a complex
system cannot tolerate extensive
transformation over too short a period
of time now you want immigrants to come
in especially if they're the sorts of
immigrants who are likely to contribute
properly to the success of your polity
and lots of immigrants do that I mean I
think the vast majority for example of
entrepreneurs in the United States come
from the Indian subcontinent so great
you know bring them over they're highly
educated they're extraordinarily
productive they make lots of new
businesses and then they pump money like
that like mad back in India good deal
but that doesn't mean that we had Lee
have our arms are open to everyone
immigration policy because it's complete
rubbish all that means is you're not
thinking about it
so and here's a coded to that for
conservatives here's something I've been
thinking about this a lot lately it
should not be assumed that citizens of
societies that have not evolved
functional individual rights predicated
policies will hold values in keeping
with such qualities so we could say look
there are a lot of countries in the
world that are not governed well the
vast majority of them right and they be
not governed well forever and to me that
means that there's something wrong with
the values that are held collectively by
the people who've established those
qualities well you shouldn't be naive
and assume that merely because you move
them to a new country they're going to
let their innate Democratic longings
flourish it doesn't work that way
so if you stand up and say look you know
let's be a little cautious let's make
sure that we don't transform our society
so rapidly that we lose what we have
let's be careful about that that doesn't
mean that you're a morally reprehensible
demon it just means that you're
conservative and it's a reasonable
position to hold so there's no sense in
apologizing to it for it now that
doesn't mean you get to like hide your
bigotry under a mask of moral virtue you
know
the discrimination issue is quite clear
as far as I'm concerned so that's
associated with bigotry if you have two
people who are applying for a job you
should pick the one that's most
qualified and not pay any attention to
any of the other attributes of the
person that have nothing to do with the
job okay right I think basically I think
we figured that out in about 1965 now
we're not doing it perfectly you know
but it's not that much later than 1965
and our society particularly in Canada
is pretty damn open you can come in here
and if you work hard and if you're
fortunate you don't get sick and God
smiles on you so to speak you can be
successful there's still prejudice
unreasonable prejudice and
discrimination but our society is not as
the radical egalitarian equity promoters
have it structurally racist bigoted and
misogynistic no not only that just so
you know there's a review there was a
recent review published at I mean recent
2017 looking at that damn literature on
unconscious bias and I knew the
literature to begin with there is no
evidence that unconscious bias could be
measured properly not reliably there's
also no evidence whatsoever that if you
do measure it and you can't very well
that it does any better job of
predicting actual say bias and and
prejudice than just tests of attitude so
the notion that our culture is somehow
structurally misogynistic and racist and
the reason for that is because of the
unconscious bias of the monsters who are
running it is is well maybe it's not
wrong but I can tell you one thing about
it
it is not a scientifically justifiable
proposition and that's what it's being
passed off as and I place that firmly at
the feet of the social psychologists
with social psychology happens to be a
fairly corrupt discipline by the way and
the people who invented the implicit
association test which measures
unconscious bias because they have not
come out publicly to the degree that
they should have been said our test
which was for experimental purposes is
being misused politically you know
you're damned judges now because of
federal five Fiat have to undergo
mandatory unconscious bias retraining
before they can sit on the bench and so
you don't think that's political
re-education is because you're not
paying attention there's zero evidence
that it does what it's supposed to and I
would also recommend to all of you if
you happen to be in a workplace that
introduces diversity training or
unconscious bias training as a mandatory
requirement you tell them and those no
uncertain terms that you are not
participating in a process that deems
you bigoted and misogynistic without
evidence of that being the case and if
you trot off to the training then you've
just agreed that that's who you are
and believe me once you've agreed to
that man you'll be agreeing to a bunch
of things you don't want to agree soon
afterwards so it's time just to put a
stop to that enough of that none of that
unconscious bias retraining especially
not the mandatory type
[Applause]
people should be paid so that they are
able and willing to perform socially
useful and desirable duties okay so the
radical left is they react to me this
way they say well you hold a position of
privilege and power and I think first
you don't know a goddamn thing about me
and you have no idea how I got to my
position of privilege and power and it
was no birthright I can tell you that I
was a small like thick glass
intellectual non what do you call that
athletic child I was a year younger than
my peers I suffered plenty of what would
you say trouble for my loud mouth and my
intellect when I was growing up you know
I had my struggles I'm not complaining
about it the point is is that you can't
attribute privilege to a class of people
you know one you can't attribute power
to people who happen to occupy a
position of confidence and authority
either there's some possibility that
they occupy that because they worked
hard and we're fortunate let's not
forget about that and had some good
social support and didn't have some
horrible disease thank God but you can't
just make the case that the position is
there as a reward it's not there as
feather reward at all it's there as a
consequence of the person offering
something valuable to those who want to
pay for it and the reason you pay for
them isn't to reward them it isn't so
that you give them a pat on back and say
well you're a good person and you know
you deserve this position it's because
you're saying to them produce we find
what you're producing of value and so
we're going to give you what you need in
order to be motivated to keep doing it
but it's not because we like you it's
not because we respect your rights it
has nothing to do with equity it's we're
trying to get every goddamn thing we can
from you as fast as possible and we're
going to pay you to do it and so people
deserve their damn pay and the reason
they deserve it isn't because it's a
reward it's because that's how you get
productive people to do things that are
difficult and time-consuming and that
perhaps they wouldn't do on their own
accord to continue doing them so you can
benefit from it so the whole notion that
you know we're awarding positions of
privilege to oppressive patriarchal
types it's like
we just have to get rid of that enough
about that's that's nonsense
it's absolute nonsense and the other
thing too is you know it's only been 30
40 years 50 years since women had
reliable birth control right and we're
able to enter their workforce on Moss
I'll tell you man
we produced a cultural revolution in
like 50 years women are everywhere it's
like how bloody fast do you expect
something like that to go and what makes
you think that pushing it really hard is
going to make it go any better I mean as
far as I can tell we manage that
transition about as well as we possibly
could have we're still sorting out the
details but the fact that you know this
is coming very rapidly down the pipes
the fact that half of our corporate
board members are women is not
indicative of the fact that we live in
an unconsciously biased misogynistic
patriarchal society sorry wrong not
correct and so we shouldn't be allowing
and this is happening very very rapidly
you can be sure Kathleen Wynne is going
to be putting this in his policies
rapidly as she possibly can these equity
demands to ensure that there's
proportional representation of every
gender every sex every race every
ethnicity at every level of every
organization it's like really we're
going to do that by governmental Fiat
it's like that's not a society I want to
live and I tell you I can die can I
quite certain that if you lived in that
society for any length of time you'd
learn very rapidly that it isn't a
society that you'd want to be part of
either citizens have the inalienable
right to benefit from the results of
their own honest labor that's a good one
yes that's a conservative truism you
know why what isn't because you because
you're good hearted and you want them to
have money it's because they'll work if
you let the benefit from the work and
you want them to work because if they
work then they do things that you need
it's as simple as that it's
self-interest and it's the right kind of
self-interest so if you work hard it's
like great have your money you know when
you hear people all the time talking
about how corrupt our society is and how
the 1% you know occupies this pinnacle
position you know the 1% turns over
pretty damn fast just so you know it so
you have about a ten percent chance of
spending at least one year in the top 1%
chance during your life I think that's
right I think it's ten percent it might
be higher
that but it's fast it's the 1% is stable
as a phenomena but it turns over very
rapidly in terms of who occupies it and
it's the same in every society the
wealth is always distributed in
equitably it's a natural law you can
look it up it was discovered by a guy
named Wilfred Pareto back in the late
1800s goods tend to damage to distribute
themselves in equitably it can be a
problem but it doesn't mean that there's
something fundamentally corrupt about
the social structure that's driving it
in that direction and like you you don't
want some filthy rich geniuses lying
around like maybe you do I mean look
what he long Mosque is doing for God's
sake maybe he should have 10 times as
much money as he has he's going to
launch a rocket every five days to Mars
in the next 10 years right he wants to
wipe out fossil fuel cars and he might
do it he wants to revolutionize the
transportation system and he might do it
he wants to put us on the damn solar
grid with his new batteries and he might
do it it's like oh no he has a couple of
billion dollars well god only knows what
he's going to produce with that it's
like so obviously there's going to be
some Krupke there's going to be some
corrupt rich plutocrats who do nothing
but smoke cigars and snort cocaine
they're not going to live very long
anyways but there's lots of people out
there who have the money they have
because they would really like to do
interesting and creative things with it
not because they're interested in
gathering more you know paper money to
stuff in their mattress and and to like
to feel the smooth the smooth delight of
gold coins between their fingers before
they go to bed like what kind of
attitude is that towards people who've
made their fortune you know you think
that about Steve Jobs you think that
about Bill Gates I mean good god I don't
know how those people made a lot of
money but man thank God they were around
you know they've given us some tools
that are just absolutely unbelievable so
you know maybe we could leave the
jealousy of the successful behind for a
while and notice now and then that some
of the people who got to where they are
actually deserve to get to where they
are and we should be thankful that they
exist that would be nice a little
gratitude and that's a good conservative
value too
it is more noble to teach young people
about responsibilities than about rights
that's a good conservative message it's
like you have a son
you know you have a daughter and you say
bloody well grow up stand on your own
two feet make something of yourself
right so that I can be proud of you when
you come over and so that maybe you're
useful in a crisis it's like pick up
your damn load and and and shoulder it
to do something useful and and forget
about your damn rights for a while you
can think about what it is that you
should be doing to benefit yourself and
your family and society and you'll find
some purpose in your life because of
that and so well that's a counter
position to the perpetrators of the
endless rights buffet right well as long
as we give you enough rights you're
going to be what free you're going to be
happy it's like yeah sure
you'll drown in the sea of chaos and
that's what's happening to people now
too so and that's why young people are
so hungry to have someone talk to them
about responsibilities here's another
one radical change should be viewed with
suspicion particularly in a time of
radical change okay there's never been a
time in the history of the world where
things are changing as fast as they are
now and not only are they changing fast
the rate at which they're changing is
increasing like we're moving fast
forward at such a rate that it's
unbelievable you can't even keep up I
don't care what discipline you're in
it's like it's not so bad to have some
people putting their feet in the ground
or digging their heels in and say look
we got a lot to swallow already with a
lot to chew on and digest let's not muck
about with everything that's worked so
far what has worked it's not such a bad
idea
for people to have long term families
right we could say let's try to support
the family we could even say let's try
to support the traditional family why
well maybe boys and girls need role
models of each sex I know that's a
terrible thing to say but it is possible
it's certainly the case too that intact
two-parent families have children that
thrive more than broken families and
broken families are a catastrophe for
everyone now you might say well I
shouldn't stay with someone that I don't
get along with and it's like yeah yeah
fair enough except that there's no one
that you're ever going to find to stay
with it you're going to get along with
all of the time especially in your
shoddy condition so you're lucky that
anybody else
you're lucky that anybody will put up
with you for a week much less your whole
life it's like the point of marriage is
to tough it out and you don't tough it
out for your happiness that's not what
you're in there for you're tough it out
so that you have someone to tie the rope
of your life together with that you have
a chance to tie the rope of your life
together with the Rope of someone else's
life and to make it strong and to make a
place the children can have some
security and some encouragement and
thereby contribute to the future and pay
for the miracles of your birth and your
own raising that's why you get married
and there's no reason that conservatives
can't stand up and say look we're
willing to tolerate alternative family
arrangements but when you start making
the claim that the traditional family
unit is just another construct and that
it's not something fundamental to our
polity it's like that's you've taken
your damn argument too far first of all
you have no evidence whatsoever for that
claim and there's plenty of counter
evidence so you know one of the things
the post modernists basically say is you
know every time you stand up for
something you're also standing against
something it's like yeah that's true but
that doesn't mean that you shouldn't
stand up for things and I think if what
if there is something that conservatives
could agree on that we could stand up
for it's the nuclear family now exactly
how that's going to play out I don't
exactly know but it's nothing to discuss
anything to be ashamed of to say well it
kind of looks like that structures
worked quite well for the entire
duration of mankind and so maybe we mess
with it at our peril
here's another one the government local
and distant should lead people to their
own devices as much as possible why well
part of its just humility it's like I'd
rather that there was a million of you
out there making your own stupid
mistakes so that maybe a thousand of you
can get it right then for one of you to
impose their view on everyone and risk
getting it catastrophic ly wrong for
everyone at the same time and that's
really the alternative like if you're a
social scientist like I mean an actual
scientist I don't mean a bloody
ideologue one of the things that you
learn very rapidly is you know you do a
simple experiment you think you're going
to predict some element of human
behavior so here's my hypothesis I'm
going to put people in this experimental
situation and this is what they're going
to do and then you run the experiment
and they don't do that they do something
completely different you find out that
even though what you have to do is
really simple you have a clue what
they're up to
and that's just a tiny little controlled
experiment about one little tiny thing
and you're wrong it's like one of the
great advantages to conservative
philosophy is that its humble its humble
from from the perspective of social
experimentation it's like it's not like
everything's great and we should just
continue going the way we're going it's
like well everything isn't as broken as
it might be and I'm kind of stupid and
blind and all I have is a bat and
probably hitting it isn't going to make
it any better all do is shatter it and
so the conservative says it's working be
quiet sneak away maybe it'll quit keep
working and that's a perfectly
reasonable perspective now obviously
sometimes things have to change but the
conservative can come up and say don't
be thinking that you have so much
evidence that what you're doing is right
or that it will have the outcome that
you expect it I'll tell you a quick
story this was told to me by a woman
named Joan McCord who was one of the
four world's first female criminologist
by the way a PhD from Temple University
of a genius level genius level person
their tremendous integrity tough tough
tough person she did a study in a place
called Somerville in the United States
and Massachusetts in the 1930s Fame
study and so here is the deal they'd
identified a bunch of inner-city kids in
rough neighborhoods and felt you know
that they were more likely to be on a
criminal track criminal antisocial
undereducated alcohol you know the whole
the whole dismal wretched underclass
phenomena thing was going on and so they
thought well let's do an intervention
let's set up programs to help these kids
and see if we can you see if we can
change their developmental pathways so
they designed to find study bound I have
the kids I'll get the details wrong but
I got the I got the story right um they
had the kids they made them more
literate they educated the more they had
their parents take training courses they
did social skills training like they did
all sorts of things to try to make the
kids lives turn out better and to top it
all off because the kids were stuck in
the inner city they took them all out to
summer camp for a couple of weeks a year
and so they could get away from the city
and you know enjoy the countryside and
have a little bit of a vacation a little
taste of a higher quality life yeah so
great everyone's thrilled with the dam
program the kids are having a great time
at camp the counselors are thrilled the
psychologists they think they're doing a
wonderful job with great it's working
beautifully except then they did the
data analysis guess what happened the
kids in the canoe in their treatment
group there was a control group right
that didn't get all this special
treatment randomly assigned it was a
very nice experiment the kids in the
treatment group did worse on virtually
everything that was measured worse why
don't put antisocial kids together in
the same camp for two weeks during the
year right right because what happens is
that the bad kids teach the slightly
less bad kids to be worse it's a
well-documented phenomena that's why
what happens in prisons happens in
prisons what we do with criminals is the
worst thing you could possibly do to
criminals if you don't want them to
continue to be criminals except for the
fact that you keep them in there till
they're old enough generally speaking so
they're less likely to engage in
criminal activity but what was learned
from the Somerville study was don't be
so sure your good intentions are going
to produce the results that you intend
because they probably won't and they
probably won't for reasons that you
never even imagined and the other one
was don't group bad kids with good kids
on the assumption that the good kids
will
make the bad kids better because that
isn't what happens what happens is the
reverse if you put two or three bad kids
with a bunch of good kids then the good
kids get worse the bad kids don't get
better very well-documented social
science finding well the reason I'm
telling you the Somerville story is
because God who could argue with that
study right it's like these kids were
poor they were struggling it's like you
want to you want to lift them up you
want to make their life better you do
this wonderful expensive well-motivated
experiment and then you run the damn
data analysis and you find out that
there was one thing wrong with your
social intervention philosophy that you
didn't understand and you actually made
it worse well that's a and so Joel Joel
McCord she spent much of the rest of her
life going around telling social
scientists when you run a social
experiment politicians the same thing
when do you run a social experiment
especially on a large number of people
especially without their consent then
gather the data and do the follow-up
study because it's highly probable that
you'll find that what you did didn't
work or maybe it even worked backwards
and you'll never know that unless you do
the study and so what people took away
from that the social interventionist
types took away from that was whatever
you do with your social intervention
policy don't run the study right right
that was the wrong lesson by the way ok
and this is what I would close with for
the conservatives this is a nice one I
really like this we hear a lot about the
sins of the West and their manifold
because people are corrupt and our
societies are corrupt but you have to
think about it in terms of relative
corruption rather than absolute
corruption it's like well you know your
family is not perfect but there are
worse families compared to the perfect
family your family isn't looking so good
but compared to other families maybe
it's not looking so bad at all ok so how
do we judge our political system well we
don't judge it by the dreamlike
ill-informed ideologically motivated
pathological utopia's of the radical
left or the radical right for that
matter we saw what happened in the 20th
century when you do that that is a very
very bad idea and you know there were
tens of millions of people that died in
the 20th century demonstrating just how
bad an idea was that was and you'd think
we would have learned that but we didn't
what you do instead is you take a look
at your country and you think okay how
is it doing compared to other countries
other actual real countries and maybe
you look at a variety of different
indicators because that's what you do if
you're careful and if it happens to be
hovering up near the top then you think
well might be just the grace of God
might be just good fortune but it is
possible that we've got something right
and that we shouldn't muck around with
it too much and then we should have some
gratitude for it instead of assuming
that the proper comparison is whatever
heaven that you happen to be able to
dream up that you would love to impose
on other people without their
cooperation and without their will and
that's what the bloody social utopians
are selling us and they're doing
everything they can to implement and
Institute that as rapidly as possible
it's like enough of that we've had
enough of that like I the reason I got
into this to begin with is because I
started studying totalitarianism when I
was about 13 but I really started to
study it when I was about 22 and I spent
like 15 20 thousand hours reading and
writing about totalitarianism three
hours a day for 15 years that was the
first book I wrote it just about bloody
well killed me it's horrible stuff and
you know I was curious about what the
hell had happened not only not only in
Nazi Germany but then installing US
Russia and Maoist China and in the Cold
War's like what the hell were we up to
why were we doing all of that I was
trying to figure it out it's not a
pretty sight well a lot of that's driven
by this insane utopian vision it's not a
place we want to go we want to accept
the flaws in our system with some
humility and some desire to improve
things but good god you know the 20th
century was a dreadful bloodbath it was
a horrific hundred years and we should
have learned we should have learned
arrogant utopia turns into hell that's
what we should have learned and yet we
have people plenty arrogance purveying
utopia is left and right and saying hey
look the Utopia hasn't come yet
and the reason for that is your
misogynistic bigoted and if you don't
believe that and I can't measure it by
asking you or even no to any observable
behavior on your part then I'm going to
infer it or I'll give you an unconscious
bias test that doesn't even measure what
it's supposed to measure
so you're a damn misogynist and a bigot
whether you know it or not whether you
want to be or not and whether or not the
evidence suggests that you are or not so
no we're not going to sell out our
society to utopians of that sort and so
I would say to people who want to be
conservative first of all you have every
right to be conservative and there's
nothing wrong with you for being
conservative and second it's like it's
time to get the hell organized and push
back and get that 5% of hyper educated
resentful utopian dreamers who would
like to bring the whole goddamn
civilization to its knees out of the
systems of power it's not the same
country it was ten years ago it's we
need to wake up and we need to stop this
from happening I would say these are
more practical circumstances the Ontario
Human Rights Commission that thing has
to go the social justice tribunals I
mean it men
that thing has to go that thing has to
go we need to pay a lot more attention
to what the faculties of Education are
teaching teachers because they are
transforming the elementary school set
and the junior high school and high
school systems into nothing but
propaganda machines for radical
postmodernist doctrine and if you don't
believe me you just go look it up on the
web and see what they're what they're
attempting to impose and so that's got
to stop right Boise the Ontario
Institute for the studies of education
that is not a good place they need to be
held accountable for what they're doing
they're supposed to be studying how to
educate children more effectively and
faster and cheaper and better and that
isn't what they're doing they're
producing people of the most radical and
resentful sort to get a handle on the
minds of children as young as they
possibly can and that's that's the
doctrine I'm not making this up it's
actually quite intelligent if that's
what it is that you're aiming for and
that's got a that's got to come to a
stop and we've I don't know there's more
that needs to be done done - there are a
whole bloody Human Rights establishment
has to be retooled because it's working
out counter purposes to itself it was
probably a mistake back in the when it
wind was it it was probably a mistake to
introduce the damn bill rights into
Canada to begin with it was probably a
legislative error that we're paying
desperately for now but anyways those
are more specific things and those are
more opinions of mine so you can take
them or leave them as far as I'm
concerned but these 12 points that I
made as far as I can tell you know those
are reasons to be conservative and
they're not reasons to be ashamed of it
and if you're afraid of speaking your
mind as a conservative well stumble a
bit make a few mistakes man you're going
to make some mistakes you're probably
you know not as articulate as you might
be and believe me there's lots of things
you need to know but if you start saying
what you think carefully people will
correct you and you'll get better at it
and you better start doing it because
the situation that we're in I think it's
worse than it looks that's how it looks
to me so anyways that's all I've got to
say about that so thank you for the
invitation
Lucky's going to open up for questions
and hopefully some answers as well so if
anybody has anything we only have one
microphone so you'll have to stand up
you I would like you to speak loudly and
clearly so we can all hear and sure yeah
sure ask an easy question so the
question essentially was what my opinion
was about the separation of church and
state the nature of the separation of
church and state given the hypothesis
that our society is grounded in a
broader structure moral structure let's
say that has a something like a
theological a predicated philosophical
basis it's something like that the first
thing I would say is if you if that is a
very hard question to answer and I'm
doing this series in Toronto right now
on on it's called the psychological
significance of the biblical stories and
it's an answer to that question but it's
long it's like 40 hours you know it's
and it's like the maps of meaning
program that mr. Hollyer was referring
to before it's extraordinarily
complicated and I mean I think the right
approach to that is to say something
like that something like there are
things that are Caesar's and there are
things that are gods and you should keep
those things apart that's worked in the
West now the problem without our answer
is it doesn't precisely describe the
proper interrelationship between the two
but I don't think that's actually a
political issue I think that the way
that that's properly bridged is through
the ethic of the individual it's like
your religious belief should be of the
sort that guides you to be an honest
decent productive respectable person
who's aiming at the good and then if you
do that then the
political issues will take care of
themselves not magically but because
we'll organize ourselves politically as
that sort of people and do the right
things and so I think the connection
between the church and the state is
through the individual that's how it
should work and I think that's why it's
kind of worked in the West you know
getting that church-state separation
thing right that's really difficult it's
not good when they collapse into one
another because you instantly get the
rise of like totalitarian theocracies we
all know how much fun they are so yep
everything I'll just listen that what
you understand what we're going to do
just make this work if you do we'll have
a question once you come up to the front
I'll hand over the microphone to you and
then you can everybody can hear the
question clearly and then we'll pass the
microphone back hi I'm Brian Doyle a
little loose key so people I warned you
in psychology 100 if we go this is my
expectations thank you very much less
people right the only thing I've
appointed is I don't see much diversity
in the crowd and I have a black Somali
Muslim IT director who's padico with me
of our ideals beliefs all the seeds etc
and if I'd known of the drug here's my
guest and he's a wonderful guy and have
many many solid hops together that's
probably one thing that's missing here
tonight yeah well looked at that's
something else I'd like to suggest to
conservatives now you know I've
interacted with very diverse range of
people partly because I'm a clinical
psychologist and I've done a lot of
different things with different people
in my life and so I can speak about this
particular issue with a modicum of
authority see in Canada what's happened
is that we left the minority immigrants
to the Liberals that was a bad idea now
the reason for that is because the
Liberals have a more liberal immigration
policy and a lot of them are like really
really what would you say grateful to
the
often to Trudeau personally I mean the
older Trudeau personally because he
opened the door and let them in and and
it's hard to shake that but here's
something that's very cool for
conservatives to know you think you're
conservative man you should go talk to
immigrants they're so conservative they
make you look like social justice
warriors right so there's a real
conversation there's a real conversation
to be had with immigrants and minorities
in Canada is better story especially the
immigrant minorities and that is look we
would have been a little bit more
restrictive in the past about our
immigration policies and I can
understand why that might mark us out as
enemies to you but one of the things you
have to understand is that the bedrock
values that I have are much closer to
the bedrock values than you that you
have then the people that you're voting
for and you know the minority immigrants
in Ontario in particular a certain
figure this out especially with regards
to Kathleen Wynne's education policies
because they notice the tilt of those
policies and they notice that they're
not in keeping with their often
extremely conservative traditions and so
I would say the right thing for
conservatives to do is like start
telling the minority immigrants that
you're actually their friends
now that means to establish an
intelligent immigration policy and
that's a very difficult thing to do and
to begin a real dialogue about that with
immigrant communities you know who are
often by the way very interested in
protecting what they found here and not
having it disrupted in any particularly
terrible way I mean there's there's you
know radicals everywhere but most of the
immigrants who come here they're pretty
damn I'm happy to be here so the
Conservatives should be out there
extending a real hand especially I would
say especially to the moderate Muslims
it's a big mistake not to do that
there's lots of moderate Muslims they're
people who they're not enchanted by the
theocratic totalitarians and they're
looking for a way to develop a bridge
between Islam in the West that's no easy
thing I'm not even sure it can be done
but there are people of goodwill in our
country who would like to have that
happen and the Conservatives could be
talking to them and and and extending a
hand it's going to help on the on the
what on the on the voting front as well
there's no loss
there's absolutely no Lawson oh you have
to is knock and say hey those people
that you're supporting they don't share
any of your values have you noticed that
they'll wake up they'll see it and then
they'll say well you know maybe we have
more in common with the traditional
conservatives in Canada than we thought
it wouldn't be a difficult message to
get to get out there so yeah I'm just
going to follow up on that comment from
Brian forgit for a moment and I think
it's important to recognize the
historical change and shift that has
happened with immigration in this
country over a long long period of time
you know this country was built and
developed on immigrants to rural areas
that's that's our history you know
that's where all our settlement programs
were to bring new immigrants to rural
areas that's fundamentally shifted in
the last number of decades new
immigration to this country is to are
significant urban centers that's where
it's where it's happening so I just you
know as you sow walking through calm
place it's going to be a very different
image than walking through Toronto or or
Ottawa so that's it I'm very pleased to
see the number of people that we have
out here the diversity of age in the
diversity of people but but we just
don't have a lot of immigrants in rural
Ontario so anyway
so I've come to policy but the actual
concrete issues that people may or may
not differ on I want to tell you dodging
like the root cause is strictly per
month psychological perspectives
everyone derive a lot of these
predominantly done like early amid 26
mar 2014 12 to actually engage in
dialogue with other people because
they'll expose you to their set of facts
I'm not saying that facts don't exist or
that they're relativistic or anything
like that one of the things we found out
about the politically correct types is
that they're high in a trait called
agreeableness now you might think
relation I wasn't what I would have
guessed but but agreeableness is a
maternal trait and women are higher in
agreeableness than man that's that's
cross-cultural now difference really
seems to start manifesting itself
primarily at puberty and so
agreeableness is likely the trait that
stops you from throwing your baby out
the window at 3 in the morning when it's
beaten when it's had colic for three
hours and you haven't had any sleep and
you're not in very good shape and you
just got laid off it's like it's a very
very tight bonding mechanism and so what
happens it's primarily driven by what
you might describe as compassion now
compassion is great for dealing with
infants and maybe it's great for dealing
with hurt people and really elderly
people you know it's good for taking
care of people who can't take care of
themselves but it's not a great doctrine
to be building a political system on and
so one of the things that happens with
the more politically correct types by
temperament is that they're they suffer
from an excess of impulsive compassion
and they assume that if there's an
equitable distribution of anything that
the people who are at the bottom are all
victims who should be treated like
infants and that everyone at the top is
a vicious snake like predator and and
and that's hardwired in some sense now
it's a very popular story yeah of course
of course it's it and it's an easy story
to sell and there's some truth in it but
some truth isn't the same as all the
truth and so what you see at least in
part is undifferentiated empathy and
that is not that's not a virtue it's not
a virtue you have to think you can't
just feel you have to think you know
even when you're taking care of kids
part of what you're doing is being
compassionate but if you're too
compassionate towards your kids then you
do everything for them and if you do
everything everything for them then they
grow up useless and they never leave and
they hate you and they hate everything
else - it's a bad idea and so you use
compassion judiciously you know there's
a rule if you're working in a place like
a nursing home and the rule is too harsh
rule do not do anything for the people
that you're taking care of that they can
do for themselves and so if they have to
struggle to feed themselves
you don't bloody well intervene and feed
them you let them maintain their damn
independence and you have to be a
hard-hearted bastard to do that you know
to watch someone struggle like that but
you're furthering their long medium to
long term independence and development
and you do the same thing with your
children treating your children like
they're endless permanent victims is a
very bad idea and I think that's part of
what that's part of what's also being
taught we also know that
the kids who are more likely to be
rabidly politically correct one of the
reasons that they're more likely to be
that way is because they were taught to
be that way we found that even exposure
to a single lecture a single lecture
that was associated with the politically
correct dogmatic structure was enough to
tilt people in that direction so there's
a temperamental proclivity and then
there's failure of Education to address
that and then there's the exacerbation
and exaggeration by the by the people
who are trying to produce like activists
by proxy you know one of the most
appalling things I saw for example at
McMaster when I went to McMaster and got
you know yelled down by profanity
shouting people who had the bloody gall
to hide behind a banner that had a
hammer and sickle on it for God's sake
you know if the Nazis would have been
out there with their swastika there
would have been hell to pay but because
it was the hammer and sickle it's like
it's okay there's nothing wrong with
being a communist it's like sorry about
the two hundred million dead people
folks so they're out there you know
hiding behind this behind this banner
none of the none of the people who are
teaching them we're out there they
bailed out of the damn discussion right
because there were four people who were
supposed to talk with me there they all
vanished they'd leave these student
proxies to go out there and do their
dirty work it's really it's really
contemptible so you can lay a fair bit
of the blame at the feet of the people
who are supposed to be educating them
but that are instead indoctrinated them
so that's what it looks like to me
I just have a question regarding the
extreme left using the blank which we
oftentimes focus in on the fact that
they try to restrict our use of language
but I also see nowadays there's a focus
on redefining any terms would put like
for locals inside trying to redefine key
terms of language and by way of example
I would say genocide the term which is
you know full of historical significance
very powerful time out and raw
thank you very much sorry I wasn't
ignoring you I had just made a whole
lexicon of politically correct words
today in the car and I wanted to read it
but unfortunately I can't find it
so yeah not only do they redefine but
they also produce new words neologisms
constantly and one of the things I want
to do is I'm going to make a video I'm
going to collect all these words I'm
going to do it properly I'm going to go
through a very large corpus of
postmodern work I'm going to pull out
the buzzwords I'm going to rank order
them in terms of their frequency and
then I'm going to make a video for
parents and for freshmen and with a
checklist it says you go through the
courses and if there's one of these
words you check them off this list and
if there's more than you know if you if
the course score is more than five out
of whatever on this list and don't take
that course unless you want to join the
cult and so yeah really because he I've
thought about this you know because one
of the things I proposed it's kind of a
radical solution I probably proposed it
when I was a little more angry than I
should have been I thought one of the
things the provincial government should
do is cut the funding to higher
education by 25% and let's let the
goddamn intellectuals fight among
themselves until they straighten out the
university hierarchies and decide which
disciplines are valid and which aren't
now there's a problem with that well
there's a problem a couple of problems
with that is that first of all it would
wreak havoc with the universities and
that's that's not it that's not a good
idea
the second is you got to watch it when
you're trying to control the free
exchange of academic ideas by top-down
Fiat right because it's another one of
those radical social experiments that
might go wrong and probably will because
it might be you that decides what
shouldn't be taught in universities now
but god only knows who it's going to be
in three or four years right so so it's
a problem but I think one of the things
that should be done is that people
should be educated so that they can
determine which of these courses are
like that in which professors and then
just stop attending the classes now
that's happening anyways by the way
because the enrollment the humanities
has plummeted since the 1960s and the
reason and the humanities are at the
core of the university make no mistake
about it if the humanities goes the
universities are done but so they're
already destroying their own market
viability even though they keep bring
more and more people into the
universities and colleges but I think
that needs to be accelerated what what
has to happen is that the the the
postmodernist radical types need to be
cut off at the source students need to
stop going to their classes and so that
means that high school students and
freshmen and the parents of those people
need to know what to look out for and so
yes I'm very cognizant of their use of
language it's also why I oppose bill C
16 it's like I'm not going to say words
that other people demand that I say I'm
not going to do that and the reason that
I'm not going to do that is because
there isn't anything more important to
me then the the fact that I have than
the fact that I know haven't got that
right there's nothing more important to
me than the responsibility I have to
utter the words that I believe to be
true I'm not using someone else's words
and Bill c16 by the way which your
Senate so so delightfully passed today
makes compelled speech part of the
Canadian legal system so a threshold has
been crossed and you know it's to help
the transgendered people it's like no
it's not that's not why it happened so
you don't see the language game to your
political enemies you do not allow them
to force you to use their terminology as
soon as they do that you lose so and
that was what bill C 16 was about for me
and there was something cool about that
too it was very surprising you know
because what should have what should
have happened was that no one paid any
damn attention to the videos I made at
all that's what should have happened or
the next thing that should have happened
is you know there was 15 minutes flurry
about it then everybody went back to the
business that didn't happen either
what happened was an inordinate amount
of attention congregated around this
issue and I've been trying to figure out
why ever since it's like wow you know
something's something's rotten in the
state of Denmark there's something
strange going on here and it certainly
wasn't because what I was talking about
was about
issues because it important or
unimportant as they may be at best
they're a side issue right it's just
this isn't something that affects enough
people to be of any requisite
seriousness so why all the attention
well it's because there's something real
going on underneath it and a lot of that
is a it's a fight over language that's
why Derrida you know Jacques Derrida he
criticized Western culture he's the head
trickster of the post modernist style
logo centric that's our culture and the
logos that's speech and these people who
are passing these bills they are no
friends of free speech there are no
friends of free thought they want to put
restrictions on it because they already
know what's right and if you disagree it
isn't that you disagree it's that you're
wrong and you should shut the hell up
and if you don't want to we're going to
figure out how to do it and so that's
the sort of people who are obtaining
positions of power in our mid-level
bureaucracies and hire and it's really
not a good thing that is not the sort of
people that you want to be running
things and some of that because we've
abdicated our responsibility to run
things the competent people have
abdicated their responsibility to run
things themselves you know
they've abandoned politics and they
don't serve on the school boards and
they don't run their own churches and
you know they leave that to other people
it's like it's not a good idea
because it's the wrong sort of people
who step in to do that yeah
[Applause]
like it's autumn considered a suburb the
bottom now and you can see the steam
rising from Ottawa County local
education language
crtc is comprised of 98 percent of
Canadians and that doesn't sit well with
the rest of the 76 percent of the
population of our own and others
I wonder if you catch some feedback on
how this can be improved bilingual is
really in my opinion is a farce and
merely means of a younger population
when you get 98% of one particular
Department in ceremonies that is totally
French minions
and this is not an equitable situation
to the hiring always attracts me
[Music]
thinking that they must fight for your
rights but there's nothing to fight
about people doing a library ok well
that's also a really hard question so
see a lot of did my way of thinking a
lot of the entrance of the idea of group
rights into the Canadian polity was a
consequence of our attempt to sow the
country together when the separatist
movement was at its peak and we did so
the country together twice right I mean
it damn near fell apart and that
probably wouldn't have been a good thing
so but we paid a price for it and the
price we paid was that we let the
specter of Group rights enter our common
law polity essentially and a lot of
what's happening now is the price that
we're paying for that having given that
diagnosis I don't have any cure to offer
I don't know what can be done about that
my suspicions are it's the kind of
problem that has to be solved at a micro
level you know but I don't know enough
about the specific issue to to offer
anything other than that I understand
why you'd find that frustrating
I've thought similar things about the
way the federal government is
constituted on the other hand we managed
to keep the country together and there
is a sacrifice to be made for that
so apart from saying you know I get the
problem like I don't have anything to
offer on that so yep
so I'm actually only going to take one
more question because I'm tired enough
so that I'm probably going to say
something stupid and since this is taped
well you know you got to watch that
because you don't want to say any more
stupid things than necessary
no I a little uncomfortable talking to
you because some what you said really
made me a little uncomfortable but I
think that's what we have to do we have
to be uncomfortable some of the time
when you talked about don't send your
kids to take humanity I kind of went
what are you talking about that's crazy
I think what you're saying is the way
that's structured now it's just
dangerous so I guess my question is
where do we go to get the critical
thinking skills that we need how do we
develop them you said the you want high
school students and parents to be aware
what the problems are
where are they going to get these
critical thinking skills and develop a
certain resilience
that's chanting that world around them
so where would you direct this ago yeah
well the first thing I should say is
like I'm a great admirer of the
humanities like and of the universities
I mean the humanities you learn to be a
citizen through the humanities the
humanities are at the core of Western
culture if they go we're in trouble
so the problem is is that what's
manifesting itself as the humanities in
the Universities is no longer the
humanities it's something almost
virtually the opposite of that and so
and so when I tell people not to go to
humanities courses in the Universities
it's with a very heavy heart believe me
you know now the question is where do
you go instead well that's a good
question you can always read you know
one of the things that's really cool
about Amazon is all the great books are
free they're literally free you can go
download them on your Kindle for nothing
the copyright has expired and people
have been putting electronic versions
online so the great books of the Western
world and even many of the great books
of the 20th century are now available
completely for free well so you can read
them there's lots of information to be
garnered now on YouTube and that's
really going to explode over the next 10
years and I mean one of the things I
want to work on probably over the next
ten years is to set up a humanities
University online and what I'm starting
to work I already have some programs
online they're called self authoring
programs and they help people write and
partly we designed them to help people
learn to write as well as to help them
write about themselves so the self
authoring programs help people write an
autobiography and analyze their
personality faults and virtues and lay
out a future for themselves and when
we've had students do that do the Future
authoring program it's so cool what
happened was that there the probability
that they would stay in school went up
by about thirty percent but something
even cooler happened it worked best for
the worst-performing students so we did
a lot of it in Holland at a business
school called Erasmus there's a School
of Management Waterman Rotterdam School
of Management at Erasmus University and
we run several thinking about 10,000
people through the future authoring
program now and what happened if you
looked at the academic performance of
the students the Dutch women the native
Dutch women were at the pinnacle and
then it was the Dutch men below them now
the women were in a minority and they
were probably a little more highly
selected right so maybe not accounted
for the performance gap and then
underneath that there was female
non-western ethnic minority immigrants
and then below that were male
non-western ethnic minority immigrants
and there was a massive gap between the
Dutch women and the male non-western
minority immigrants like a performance
gap of about 80 percent a massive gap
within two years after writing the
future authoring program the male
non-ethnic Western minority students
passed the Dutch students yeah and some
of them didn't even remember that they
had done the future authoring exercise
and we replicated that at Mohawk College
just a while back same thing the young
men who went to Mohawk College they did
this exercise in the summer just before
they went to college they only took
about an hour to write out their future
it's not that long to think about your
whole future and what happened was that
the young men who had the worst grades
in school who were in non career
oriented trajectories had a retention
improvement of about 40 percent so yeah
so that was just like we were just
thrilled about that so so the reason I'm
when you all of this story apart from
the fact that it's vaguely interesting
is that we are experimenting with
technologies to teach people how to
write now normally the way you're taught
how to write is by having someone edit
your writing but that's prohibitively
expensive I don't think it can be
transformed in something that's
available on a mass basis and so what
we're trying to do is to break down the
process of writing into its requisite
step so that's kind of what behavioral
psychologists do we've done that already
a bit with these in with this essay
writing format and then - so to teach
people what the mechanics of writing
actually are and then maybe to try to
figure out how to crowdsource editing so
that many many people can participate in
the process but we'd like to set up an
online humanities University over the
next 10 years and since the universities
have abandoned their intellectual
property there's no reason not to just
move in and take it as far as I can tell
so that's the plan ok ok well thank you
thank you very much for thank you very
much for coming out and listening to me
and you know it was quite interesting in
all of that and so I was a pleasure to
have spoken for you hey my pleasure man
big man for dr. Jordan Peter thanks for
your patience
[Applause]