[Music]
you
[Music]
welcome back to awakening from the
meeting crisis this is our third time
together last time we were talking about
more what was going on in shamanism and
the Upper Paleolithic transition we
talked a lot about the flow experience
and how it integrates altered states of
consciousness something like or at least
on a continuum with mystical experiences
and meaning making enhanced insight and
intuition and how this resulted in an
enhanced capacity for metaphorical
cognition which greatly expands human
cognition makes it much more creative
much more capable of generating all of
those fantastic connections in meaning
that drove the upper paleolithic
transitions explosion in culture and
technology and then we moved to consider
some other intervening revolutions that
also had an impact we talked briefly
about the Neolithic Revolution and the
beginning of Agriculture and then the
rise of civilizations we got into the
Bronze Age civilization and then that
led us into the revolution we're
concentrating on now which is the axial
revolution a period around between 800
BCE and 300 BCE following the Bronze Age
collapse the Bronze Age collapse if you
remember was one of the greatest if not
the greatest collapse in civilization
the world has ever seen and that
facilitated much more experimentation in
smaller scale societies and that
experimentation resulted in the creation
of new psycho technologies one was
alphabetic literacy happening in the
area of canaan and it's eventually going
to be taken up very quickly by the
Hebrews and then taken up by the
Phoenicians and taken to the Greeks the
Greeks as we'll see today or at least
today or next time further improved it
we talked about how that psycho
technology alphabetic literacy makes
literacy
more effective more efficiently learned
more powerful its operation greatly
expands the number of people that can be
literate enhances the distributed
cognition and how that psycho technology
gets internalized into our meta
cognition and produces second-order
thought we get an enhanced awareness of
our own cognition both its power and its
peril we get an enhanced awareness of
its capacity for self correction and
self transcendence we also get an
enhanced awareness of its capacity for
self-deception
we talked also about the invention of
coinage to help deal with the mobile
armies of this time and how that trains
you in abstract symbolic thought and
more rigorous mathematical reasoning and
that also gets internalized it gets
exacted right into second order thinking
and people start to become aware of
themselves in a different way they start
to become much more aware of the
meaning-making nature of their of the
cognition its capacity to generate
illusion and self-deception and also its
capacity to break out of illusion and
self-deception and to come into a
contact with a more real world so this
leads to some fundamental changes people
start to become more aware of their
responsibility for the violence and the
chaos and the suffering in their own
lives and they start to become aware of
how much the transformation of mind or
mind and heart because in the actual age
these terms are often referred to in a
singular manner how much transformation
in the mind and heart is the way to
alleviate suffering so what starts to
happen is the mythological framing frame
framework and the way people are framing
themselves and their world changes now
let me explain to you how I'm using this
word myth because I'm not using it the
way we standardly use it this you did
the use I'm going to talk about it's
been deeply influenced by people like
young people like Tillich Victor Turner
just a whole bunch of different fingers
so when we use the word myth
to mean a falsehood that is widely
believed okay and that's unfortunate
because we've lost the term for what I
want to talk about see miss aren't fault
stories about the ancient past
there's symbolic stories about perennial
patterns that are always with us that's
a very different thing so a lot of
what's going on in myth is an attempt to
take these intuitive implicitly learned
patterns and put them into some form
that is shareable with ourselves and
with each other so in the Bronze Age
world before the axial revolution people
experience the world in what's been
called by Charles Taylor like the
continuous cosmos well I have a few
questions about the use of the word
cosmos but we'll come back to that later
the idea here is human being has
experienced themselves in radical
continuity that that sense of
connectedness right that you see even
back in the shamanic world was very
prevalent in the continuous cosmos and
the continuous cosmos people feel
there's a deep connection a deep
continuity between the natural world and
the cultural world and between the
cultural world and the world of the gods
so the difference is right are not
really differences so much in kind as
they are in power it's not odd that
animals might talk alright or they might
have sort of deep societies it's not odd
for us for certain human individuals to
think themselves divine like the
greatest actual age sorry the great the
greatest pre Axial Age Empire is Egypt
and the Pharaoh is a God king he's
something like a God why for up for us
we can only understand that at most
metaphorically here's what you have to
try and understand it's not a metaphor
for the ancient Egyptians why because
the difference is between right human
beings and the gods our differences in
power this is a cosmos that is
experience where reality is experienced
primarily in power in terms of power the
gods are just more powerful than us more
glorious than us
you can even see this in the Old
Testament right where if you got if you
ask people you can ask people what you
know what term is most often used of God
and people will say you know righteous
or holy well those are used quite often
but the term that's most used is
glorious shining with power right which
it's not a moral term at all think of
the Greek gods they're not moral
exemplars at all they're just extremely
glorious and extremely powerful the
Egyptian King the Pharaoh is extremely
glorious and extremely powerful
so of course he's godlike or potentially
even a god so there's a continuous
cosmos and it's continuous in another
way right it moves like this it moves in
great cycles just like the seasons just
like day and night time moves in large
cycles that repeat through eternity in
fact what you're often trying to do with
your ritual behavior is you're trying to
tap into this continuity you're trying
to get back to the original power of
creation so you often enact the
metaphorical story the myth of how the
universe is created in order to try and
tap into that creative power there's a
there's a there's a constant nostalgia
for getting back right and your attitude
towards the world is you want to fit in
to these cycles you want to be in
harmony with them you don't want to
really change things a lot because if I
change this if I change my future I'm
actually undermining my past it's a very
different way of relating to the world
so it's there's this continuity between
the natural world the social world and
the divine world and time is wrapped on
itself in this really important way now
what happens in the axial age is this
way of looking at things
is shattered now it doesn't go away
there's aspects of our thinking that are
still like this but what gets layered on
top of it is a totally different
worldview a totally different mythology
for understanding the relationship
between the self and the world so
Charles Taylor's talks about this as the
great dis embedding when the axial
revolution hits this world is replaced
by a different one
now again I'm speaking mythologically
here people will talk about it
mythologically and you have to
understand that doesn't mean the way we
would think of it as a literal
scientific thing nor is it what we would
merely call metaphorical mythological is
neither scientific nor just metaphorical
now what's this new world well this new
mythological worldview uses a mythology
of two worlds the idea is this is the
everyday world this is the world of the
untrained mind this is a world that is
beset by self-deception self-destruction
the illusion violence chaos it's a world
in which we are out of touch with
reality but opposed to this is the real
world and mythologically you can talk
about this as two worlds but of course
in a lot of the traditions the real
world is just cutting through the
illusion of the everyday world but the
idea is the real world is how the
trained mind the wise mind sees the
world this is how the world looks when
you're in touch with reality when your
mind is not beset by illusion and
delusion when you have that sense that
this is how things really are this is a
world also in which there is reduced
suffering and violence precisely because
the mind is not beset by foolishness
precisely because it is not out of touch
with reality
now here wisdom is power oriented to be
a wise individual is to learn how to
acquire the power that was imbued at
creation into the cycles it's like
energies put into the system and it
cycles around and then energy is put in
the system it cycles around and you want
to tap into that power wisdom is how to
tap in to that power
because what you're after is like long
life live long and prosper
as it's in the Star Trek when with ology
for the Vulcans right you you want to be
prosperous you want to live long you
want to be free of conflict right you
want to provide security for your
offspring so that's a sense of wisdom
that is still captured in our sense of
the word prudence right being very
Prudential is to have that sort of
knowing how to fit in to the power
structures of society how to make things
work for you getting the most power and
prosperity you can but over here there's
a radical change wisdom changes because
look you do not want to fit into this
world because this is the world of
suffering and violence it's a world in
which you're out of touch with what's
real and as we'll talk about it later
you deeply desire to be in touch with
reality it's one of your most powerful
drives you don't want to conform to this
world you want to be transformed out of
this world you want to move from here to
here now notice what's happening here
the old shamanic enacted myth of soul
flight flying above is being accepted
into a new sense it's being exempted
into this sense of self transcendence
out of the everyday world into the real
world and wisdom is now knowing how to
make that transformative leap and
meaning isn't about just connectedness
as it was here but a special kind of
connectedness a connectedness to the
real world as opposed to a detrimental
connectedness to an illusory world so
meaning is changing and the notion of
wisdom is changing
and the notion of yourself what it is to
be a self because here you're defined
largely by how you fit in and of course
that's always gonna be part of our
definition I'm talking about emphasis
here I'm not talking about absolute
differences but here you're defined more
by how you fit in but here you defined
increasingly more by how you can self
transcend self transform how you can
grow as a person
notice how pervasive this has become in
our self understand notice how we don't
like to be with people who aren't
growing who aren't somehow transcending
growing which way do you growing up
right becoming more mature getting more
in touch with themselves and reality so
this is called the great dis embedding
because now we we have a different
relationship to the everyday world and
this is a metaphor that you don't see
before you don't see over here this is
the idea that we're somehow strangers in
the world
we're pilgrims we don't belong here we
belong there
now as I keep saying I mean some people
some people of course will literal eyes
this and this is really one world in
another world
most people will see this alike we talk
about Plato and others their
understanding this as a mythological
representation for the process of self
transcendence and self transformation so
once again we see the exaptation just
like the shamans were engaged in
excitation we see the acceptation of
that shamanic ability into this new
mythological framework
so there's three places that I want to
talk about in particular about this
because they're the ones that we're
going to talk a lot about I will mention
China periodically throughout especially
when I talk about Taoism but I want to
talk about Greece and ancient Israel
because those are the two foundational
world mythologies for us those are two
places and when theocracy or revolution
took place in a way that has become
deeply deeply constitutive of what we
are how we are still here in our minds
the way we experience ourselves and the
world I also want to talk about India
because India is the source of that of
that how do I put it that source of the
confluence between Buddhism and the
Western world that we talked about in
the first session together
the mindfulness revolution mindfulness
is a psycho technology that came from
India so the axial revolution of
Siddhartha Gautama and the Buddha we're
going to talk about that and what I want
to talk about is how each one of these
areas in addition to the axial psycho
technologies of literacy and coinage
alphabetic literacy and coinage write
how they also develop particular psycho
technologies that have become
internalized a lot of what you think is
natural to you just part of how your
mind works is actually culturally
internalized it has been generated
historically and you have internalized
it culturally and you think of it just
as how your mind works think again about
literacy it is hard for you to remember
and I mean to reenact what it was like
to not be able to think in write like
literate terms to imagine words
in a similar way a lot of these ways of
thinking these psycho technologies have
become so second nature to us that we
forget the historical origin and that's
problematic because the degree to which
we don't have a historical understanding
is a degree to which we are going to be
ignorant of the historical factors that
are driving the meaning crisis let me
foreshadow that meeting crisis right now
so this is a mere foreshadowing we're
going to come back to it this is a
mythological way of thinking which
allows us to articulate and train the
psycho technologies of the axial
revolution these psycho technologies of
self-transcendence of wisdom and
enhanced meaning but the problem is this
mythology is failing for us now the
scientific worldview is destroying the
possibility of this for us in a way that
might seem sort of cosmically or ironic
the scientific worldview is returning us
to a continuous cosmos there is no
radical difference in kind between you
and the primates that you evolved from
naturally there isn't some radical
difference in kind between your mind and
your embodied existence right science is
leveling the world we're returning to a
one world we're going to talk about that
but if we can no longer live in this
mythology and that's what mythologies
are they're they have to be livable
people claim to believe this don't tell
me what you believe tell me what you can
practice tell me what's livable for you
for most of us we can't live this
anymore
we still talk this way but we can't live
it so here's part of the problem this is
a foreshadowing
how do we salvage the ability to
cultivate wisdom self transcendence
enhance meaning overcome self-deception
realize realize who we are and how the
world is when we can no longer use the
mythological worldview in which it was
born we are going through a reimburse of
and increasing right Copernicus and
Galileo REM bettas Darwin reom beds us
Einstein reinvent us were that we're
being reinvented back into the physical
world but we don't want to lose all that
we gained through the great dis
embedding how do we reconcile those how
do we live with the legacy of the actual
revolution when we can no longer inhabit
its world of view that's part of the
problem that's only part now the place I
want to turn to first is ancient Israel
as I mentioned some of you have probably
read parts of the Bible or at least
heard parts of the Bible although
biblical illiteracy is rising and that's
problematic not not because I think
people should be Christians or Jews I'm
not here to proselytize but the degree
to which you don't have a grasp of the
grammar of the Bible is it re to which
you don't have a grasp of the grammar of
your own cognition and you may say I'm
an atheist I don't care that's
irrelevant I'm not talking about what
you say I'm talking about how you think
there's a big difference there grammar
is how you put thoughts together it's
not the vocabulary it's not what you say
and so this is what Nietzsche meant and
like like when he said I fear we are not
getting rid of God because we still
believe in grammar we still talk this
way we still are filled with the god
grammar
of the Bible and you say no I'm not yes
you go to a movie and you watch the
person who falls in some way and then
they have an insight and they are
redeemed and they find their way back
maybe it's through Alcoholics Anonymous
or they come out of addiction that's
biblical grammar okay
again what matters here is how it shapes
our sense of self and world I'm not
advocating for a particular religion but
of course I'm going to talk about the
judeo-christian heritage precisely
because I want to explain to you how
these psycho technologies have been part
of the very grammar not only of your
cognition but of your existential sense
of being so there's an important psycho
technology that's invented or at least
significantly developed by ancient
Israel perhaps it was influenced from
from Persia through Zarathustra but it's
this idea and when I say it it's gonna
seem to you like of course but it's not
of course even saying of course is
important remember that here's the idea
it's a psycho technology of
understanding time as a cosmic narrative
as a story it's applying something again
that's universal all cultures tell
stories and we'll talk about the
cognitive science of this later but you
see this isn't a story this is a circle
it's a cycle
what kind of structure does a story how
well the story has a beginning and has
some crucial climax turning point and
that and there's a resolution there's a
direction to it there's a purpose to it
so you get this idea of cosmic history
of using our skills for story to explain
how the cosmos is unfolding through time
it's a radical idea so why is it radical
well notice the difference here this
this is not an open future right you're
condemned to repeat that so cultures
we're cyclical time is still prevalent
Eastern cultures for example the
repetition of the cycle is onerous it's
horrible
people think reincarnation for example
within an Indian context is a wonderful
I'll be born again that's good no that's
horrible what you're trying to do is get
free from those cycles because doing
this again and again and again and again
and again is terrifying
moksha you want freedom nirvana you want
cessation you want release from the
cycle because there is no purpose to it
but here the futures opened your actions
now can change the future if you figure
out how to participate
remember that participatory knowing if
you figure out how to participate in the
story your actions can change the future
there isn't the all at once creation at
the beginning there's an ongoing
creation through history and you can
participate with God in the ongoing
creation of the future how because how
do stories operate they operate in terms
of meaning and morality how you make
meaning the moral content of your action
decides how things are going to go see
this is why the god of ancient Israel is
such a different God if you look at the
gods of the pre axial world look you've
got a god and it's a god of a place a
particular function here's the god of
weaving or here's the god of ancient
Thebes right the gods are located in
place they're tied to a function they
have no significant moral arc attached
to them what's the God of the Old
Testament what he or she like it's not
bound to time in place
think of the great story of the Old
Testament the story of the Exodus what
right here you have the Israelites and
they are imprisoned they're imprisoned
in the epitome of the Bronze Age world
Egypt and God comes and liberates them
and sets them on a journey towards a
future that is promised the promised
land this God moves through time and
space
the God of the Old Testament is the God
of the open future that's why at first
he has no name because to name something
is to locate it to specify it to tie it
down and for the longest time this God
has no name and then when Moses finally
challenges it and he reveals his name he
says it's badly translated in the older
versions of the Bible it's often
translated as I am that I am but it acts
in the Hebrew means I will be what I
will be I am the God of the open future
and you can participate with me in this
this ongoing creation of the future
because you can shape it you can cause
it to come to resolution but you can
also cause it to go off course the idea
when I said of course to you remember
the sense of time passing as a course we
still take courses in universities this
is what we have here and you're looking
for turning points where the course
turns and of course that's what you're
looking for in a movie you know at some
level that none of that is how the real
world works you know at Psalm level come
you do that your life doesn't unfold
like a movie yet you love it
you love going to a movie you love
seeing this structure and participating
in it and there's the great turning
point where something is learned or a
problem is solved and there's resolution
and the future is now made so this God
is interested in becomes progressively
not now again you can't point and say
there there's where it changed in the
Bible but you can see there's aspects of
a pre Axio god but as you read through
the new as you read through the Old
Testament God becomes more and more
axial it becomes more and more the deity
of something that you now take for
granted progress
the idea and right for us it's not just
an idea right it's it's it's it's in the
lifeblood it's in the very bones of your
sense of self in your life is your life
progressing or are you stuck
is it moving forward this is this idea
history progresses and it can degenerate
and it can improve God becomes more and
more a representative of that now
there's a technical term for these
turning points
Kairos it's developed by the theologian
Paul Tillich this is this sense of the
crucial turning point getting things at
the right time and the right place to
turn things either right back on course
or to further develop them now let's
talk about that because again we're
going to go back to talking about these
set these senses of knowing that we've
lost touch with important is this sense
to off
so people sometimes note and often
humorously that the Bible will talk
about sex sexual intercourse with the
verb knowing so you'll get things like
Adam knew his wife Eve and he's like
what what does that mean
and it means has sex with it's off in
this sense and it's like what why what
we don't use sex as a metaphor for
knowledge you'd be surprised how many
cultures actually do because this is
again this is a participatory sense
there's a course here and you're
participating in it now what do I mean
by participating you don't know it from
the outside just having beliefs about it
or just having skills you know it in
this way you know it by identifying with
it you change it while it's changing you
and you're changing it while it's
changing you you are immersed in it like
a stream like a course of a river you
are participating in it when you're
making love with somebody you are
participating in them you are
identifying with them empathizing with
them resonating with them you are
changing them as they are changing you
and it rises forgive me the pun to a
climax to a turning point to a
resolution see in ancient Israel faith
this term has become useless for us now
but faith didn't mean believing
ridiculous things for which there is no
evidence that is that is not that is a
recent idea that is not what it meant
faith was your sense of de ha faith was
your sense that you're in this
reciprocal realization you're in course
you're on course you're involved and
evolving with things it's your sense ah
I'm on course or even your sense ah this
is the turning point and I know what to
do I know who I need to change into I
knew how to turn myself and things
notice you have this in your
relationships you'll often be asking
yourself how is this relationship going
is it on course is it progressing is it
growing is this the kind of person I
want to be
what's my am i becoming what's my sense
of how I'm changing is this all going
well that's the off now of course you
can get it wrong you can think you're on
course when you're actually dramatically
off course you're trespassing to use
older biblical language you're walking
off the path you're no longer on course
that's that's the basis of a word that
we can't use anymore again because of
our biblical literacy and the fact that
we've lost touch with this sense of
knowing in fact this word many people
treat this word almost like like a
comical word sin sinning isn't just
doing something very immoral right in
the New Testament the word that
translates this is when you're shooting
a bow and arrow
so if you've done archery you can't
shoot for where your eye tells you to
look because you'll actually miss the
bull's eye you have to have a kind of
faith to sense right where you need to
actually shoot so you don't miss the
mark so the idea here is I'm trying to
sense the course of things and if I'm
self deluded or illusory I'm actually
dramatically off course without
realizing it that's the original meaning
and so the idea is that human beings are
thrown into this universe in which they
have the option because it's an open
future of participating in the creation
of the future but of course human beings
sin
in the sense that they are
self-deceptive they go off course so
notice what the Hebrews are doing
they're taking this movement from the
everyday world to the real world and
they're turning it into a historical
story the way you go from the false
world to the real world is you start now
and you move towards the promised land
they understand it historically but
human being sinned they make decisions
that steer the course of history away
from its culmination and so the idea is
God has to intervene periodically God
has to redeem God has to do something to
wake people up to remind them to help
them to sense how they've gone of course
and so that they can come back on course
and so what you have is you have in the
Old Testament you have the creation of
the prophetic tradition prophets here's
another thing that we've lost the sense
of a prophet is not somebody who for who
tells the future like some sort of
psychic okay prophecy isn't about
telling you what's going to be happening
200 or 300 years from now prophecy means
a telling fourth yeah the job of the
Prophet is to wake you up right now to
how you are off course so a better
analogy isn't the psychic when you so
when you go to the psychic and oh you
Will Meet a Tall Dark Stranger or some
crap like that that's not a good analogy
for a prophet a better profit is when
you and your loved one go into therapy
and the therapist says something and it
wakes you up the Holy crop this is how
I'm going wrong this is how I'm
off-course this is how I need to get
back on track
that's the job of a prophet and what you
have in the prophetic tradition is you
have an increasing emphasis on the
morality of human decision-making more
and more and again it's not perfect
there's all kinds of pre axial stuff
that's still woven in there and mixed up
with it and mashed up with it but you do
have more and more this discussion this
exhortation to wake up to your moral
responsibility for helping everybody to
get back on track and to turn things
back towards the promised land this idea
of justice and righteousness and waking
up so that we get back on track become
endemic now think about how much and
I've tried to show you three examples
how much this is just how you naturally
think of yourself you think of yourself
as somebody who's on a journey you're
starting here and you're trying to make
a better self and you're trying to make
the right decisions and you're trying to
steer things you want your life to
progress you want your culture to
progress try to think about what how you
would understand yourself how you would
judge yourself and you couldn't make use
of this notion of progress
so what starts to happen is a commitment
to more and more trying to cultivate the
wisdom of deeply remembering God which
doesn't mean reciting beliefs it means
participating participating in the
ongoing creation of the world shaping
the future helping yourself your
neighbors in your society to progress
where that progress is measured mostly
in terms of moral improvement increasing
justice increasing flourishing
increasing sense of people living up to
their promise and this is what I ask you
do you feel like you're living up to
your promise is it an important thing
for you if it is and I feel it's
probably the case that for many of you
it is that very way of thinking that's
part of the grammar that we have
inherited from the Hebrews it's part of
the very way we think it's part of the
warp and woof of our cognition now we're
going to come back to this strand we're
going to come back and look at a
particular way of understanding Kairos
that became right central and
Christianity because what Christianity
did is it made a really radical claim it
claimed that this Kairos was found in a
particular person and what's that what
that's going to do is it's going to
personalize all of this in a really
dramatic way but before we do that I
want to switch back over to what's
happening in a similar time in ancient
Greece
as I mentioned the psycho technology of
alphabetic literacy is taken to the
Greeks but the Greeks do something
that's very important and it helps to
explain right some of the differences we
see in the Greek axial revolution from
the ancient Hebrew actual revolution now
the Greeks do something that again seems
inconsequential now but they add vowels
to the alphabet and it's like oh well so
what well the thing is when you add
vowels you really again increase how
easy it is to process information so
let's stop here because we need to be a
cognitive science because this ease of
processing really matters so I want to
introduce you to an important idea from
cognitive science this is the idea of
cognitive fluency so we've got
increasing experimental evidence for
this basic kind of fact when you
increase the ease at which people can
process information regardless of what
that information is
they come to believe it is more real
they have more confidence in it etc now
that can be something very simple it can
be as simple as changing the font
contrast between the letters and the
page so consider two individuals Tom and
Susan Tom is reading our words in which
the color contrasts between the letters
and the page isn't as good as the color
contrast that Susan's reading they're
reading exactly the same thing they can
both clearly read it it's just the font
difference makes it easier for Susan
than for Tom they read the same thing if
you ask both of them well how true is
what you read
Susan's more likely to say that was true
which is more likely to have confident
in it regardless of the content the
fluency of your processing actually
increases your confidence in it your
sense of how real
the picture it's giving you is now it's
not really ease in some simple sense
because right it has to do more with how
well your brain is accessing information
applying it it's very complicated right
but what I'm telling you is when I do
something that increases your cognitive
fluency you get an enhanced sense of
your brain your brain get generates an
enhanced sense that you're actually in
touch with things we'll talk about this
later that turns out to be a good policy
your brain is using it's a very good
idea for your brain to try and use the
fluency of its own processing as a
measure of how much it's in touch with
reality by the way when you get a lot of
fluency you of course are going to get
into the flow State
so when the Greeks introduce vowels they
improve the fluency of alphabetic
literacy they ramp up how powerful it is
they also just introduced something else
they introduced a standardized reading
from left to right which you now take
for granted many of you know that other
languages go the other way
Hebrews read this way for example that
has an impact on your cognition first of
all it's standardized that improves the
fluency why does it improve your fluency
when this is standard you know always if
you look at Egyptian hieroglyphs they
can go up they can go down they can go
this way they can go that way when you
standardize things that increases the
fluency of the processing so they rats
it up
this power of literacy to enhance
cognition they're also developing
something else so the Greeks don't form
a unified nation state they have
individual city-states that are in
competition with each other and in
Athens in particular and oftens is going
to be the hotbed of the axial revolution
in Greece although not the only place in
Athens you have slowly the emergence of
democracy now it's it's a particularly
problematic form of democracy it's
direct democracy we'll talk about stuff
like that later but what this does is
this puts a premium on argumentation and
debate so the Greeks start to sort of
speed up the actual revolution of their
own cognition they enhance the effects
of alphabetic literacy they enhance
write the use of reason and reflection
and so they start to do things that
again don't happen before lots of
cultures were doing arithmetic but the
Greeks invent mathematics they invent
geometry they start to create abstract
symbol systems for their own sake now
that's what's going on in what's
basically being invented in ancient
Greece is this capacity for rational
argumentation that's the psycho
technology again you think of this no I
want to be cleaner I'm not claiming that
other groups or people are irrational or
there can't be reasonable I'm not being
ethnocentric but you get the explicit
training of rational argumentation as a
core psycho technology in ancient Greece
now that is going to have very important
consequences
now it's interesting again is how this
comes in to ancient Greece I'm going to
introduce you to two individuals who are
sort of the epitome of the axial
revolution in Greece Pythagoras and
Socrates you know Pythagoras of course
because of an important mathematical
theorem the Pythagorean theorem
now Pythagoras is a very interesting
person because he seems to be people he
belongs to cornfield makes this argument
very well right Cornford mixes argument
very well he belongs to a group a group
of individuals that are around you know
sort of just coming out of that Dark Age
around 600 BCE these these individuals
were called the divine man it's pretty
clear that these men seem to represent a
rediscovery of shamanic psycho
technologies they seem to they have a
lot of associations with sort of
capacities for healing for flying
through the air and so a lot of this is
is legendary
right it's mythological that's not
literal but Pythagoras is a real person
now of course there's lots and lots of
legendary material around him but the
legend even points towards these
important aspects he seems to have gone
through shamanic training he engaged in
something called the Thunderstone
ceremony which involved him isolating
himself in a cave and going through some
radical transformation and then coming
out of it he seems to have experienced
soul flight because he talked about the
capacity for the psyche to be liberated
from the body
he was very tall and he dressed like a
god but no one found it offensive for
him to do so at least not the people
that followed him he discovers in this
right he he discovers the octave he
discovers that there's mathematical
proportions in the world he comes to
this realization that there's new psycho
technologies of rational reflection and
mathematics give us access to abstract
patterns that we are not directly aware
of like we all take it for granted that
we know what an octave is and we know
there can express by ratios but that was
his discovery so what he does is he
takes this idea about realizing through
music and math these abstract patterns
and then he links them to the project
the shamanic
ability to engage in self transcendence
he comes up with the idea that were
somehow trapped in this world but we can
learn to fly above it we can fly free
like the shaman but he's allied it
explicitly to the actual project of self
transcendence of getting in touch with
the rationally realized patterns because
that will liberate us that will change
and transform us now Pythagoras gives us
a lot of the words that we take for
granted I said earlier that I didn't
like calling the Prix axial world the
cosmos because Pythagoras actually
invents this word cosmos he's the first
person to describe the universe as a
cosmos now many of you probably treat
those two terms as synonymous universe
the one verse and cosmos they're not try
to think of a word that's actually
related to cosmos that
familiar with so the word that might not
come to mind is the word cosmetic
cosmetics come from cosmos what it
caused medics do they right reveal the
beauty of things how beautiful and
ordered they are so Pythagoras has the
idea that if we go we can use music and
mathematical thinking and practices that
engage in this altered state of
consciousness and he is integrating them
all together it's not quite clear how
but what we can do is we can transcend
and see the world as beautiful and we're
going to come back and talk about this
how when people have awakening
experiences they suddenly experience the
world as a cosmos as radically beautiful
now remember Pythagoras because he's
gonna have a huge influence on somebody
we're gonna talk about Plato but there's
somebody who had an even greater
influence on Plato and somebody who
really epitomizes the axial revolution
in ancient Greece in fact he has a
revolution named after him this is
called the Socratic revolution and the
person we want to talk about is Socrates
I'm going to argue how Socrates
epitomizes the Greek form of the axial
revolution and then what we're going to
do is we're going to see how Plato takes
Socrates and Pythagoras and puts them
together and how Socratic and platonic
your cognition is how it's part of the
grammar of how you think
but once again even though that's the
grammar of how we understand meaning and
wisdom and what a self is and how we how
we grow how we self transcend how we get
in touch with reality we are no longer
in the worldview of Pythagoras do we do
you actually
I mean that's seriously do you actually
experience the universe as a cosmos
we'll take a look at that the next time
we're together thank you very much for
your time
[Music]
you
you