right I was so nice try again been too
long and we all kind of stuck in our
little bubbles at the moment
connecting virtually and thanks so much
for making time and I would love to
because I know a lot about your story
and we work together for a couple of
years now but I would really love to
start off with hearing how you got into
because I see you as one of the real
Weaver's between movements even would
you like the way you use your position
in lush to actually energize a global
network that is on the ground trying to
do the regenerative work that we now
really need to do and and but also with
with strategy preparing for what's
coming towards us and building the human
relationships and the capacities through
all your work with with socio cracy and
I'm impressed by what what you do and I
would love to see how how what took you
on this journey
oh I don't know I think I I grew up in
Brazil and and I think from early on I
I've always had a sense of the world you
know like sometimes you grow you grow up
in a place or you have a kind of a very
place-based life I think I also enjoy
the world and I loved science and I
loved like I was very curious um and I
think I had a few early influences
mainly for my own family my sister my
older sister about ecology and the
environment and I got interested in this
topic but I I grew up I he thinks just
because when I'm trying to piece
together my influences I think actually
one of the core influences was like okay
growing up with someone that was
studying in college in biology that was
my sister
also I grew up listening to punk and
hardcore aimed at some follow you know
punk hardcore scene which really shaped
my political views and really created
that thing of like do-it-yourself and
honor keys erm and and and I think that
I'm very grateful for that influence
because I think I think it just made me
feel powerful like he made me feel that
I have agency and power to change the
system to fight the system to you know
fight injustice uh and then when my
interests for the environment and the
planet and also spirituality came it
kind of came on top of that frame so I
always joke that I'm too Punk to be a
proper hippie and I'm too hippie to be a
proper phone so I you know how do you
charity an activity like together just
briefly because I resonate strongly with
that because I also always felt
balancing between the the punk and the
hippie but have you and I know from from
the rules has recently written is um I
think it's actually a book and but I
only just saw the article that's called
was it mystical anarchism and in it he
redefined anarchism for me because in
since my Punk days I kind of got to the
point while we need some form of
structure and it made the same mistake
of defining anarchism as if there's no
rule at all and no order at all but he
defines it much more in the sense of a
subsidiarity based system where people
in place make the decision that's that
matter to them which is basically the
reader regionalization localization and
regeneration agenda you know I always
and then I mean we're gonna jump forth
and back anyway I don't think they I
think it isn't gonna be a very lucky
because I think for me as well that's
when that's why I went into sociology
and understanding governance because for
me that's making sense of anarchism is
like we actually need the tools and the
processes to be able to self-govern
right and
and and I feel a little bit sad that
like a small state has become so
attached to the right-wing or liberal
economics that a made the left want a
strong state instead of the left also
saying actually no we need we need power
devolved to the people and I think
Brazil had some really great experiments
about this when I was growing up so I
think that that was also an interesting
political influence but I I feel I feel
sad when I see the left so you know
wanting a big a big welfare state and
the people that are actually asking for
or a small state are all the the free
market capitalist and neoliberal so yeah
I think we need to like reframe how can
we how can we also aim for no states but
in a way that actually looks after
people better that's people are looking
after themselves I'm increasingly
getting to understand how central the
reorganization along the principle of
subsidiarity actually is to the redesign
of the human impact on the planet
because that's how life feels exactly we
will never be able to adjourn our
presence with the presence like the
dynamics of ecosystems and this nested
wholeness that isn't separate we're
local regional and global like yet
another boundary in our mind that we
created and but but it to enable
appropriate participation in this nested
complexity you have to give the people
in the place to that this right to make
the decisions and to meet their needs
but of course in a saver type attitude
of being in service to life creating
conditions conducive to life and if we
all agree to that and we build a
political system that enables it then we
enable diversity which is how life
thrives and is creative and continues to
and if anything else just won't work so
yeah I think that it is central there's
this restructuring of the political
process to and
to keep that like for me book ching is
like my you know my gaiden and the idea
of social ecology and while he says that
i really love it's like you have what
what he calls first nature which is this
wild you know life creates conditions
conducive to life it's how healthy
ecosystems work is how our body works is
like the patterning of living systems
and then we've created a second nature
which is the human nature we created our
institutions our economy our educational
our health systems that don't follow
with the don't follow the same
principles so how can we integrate you
know first and second nature to create
what I calls free nature which is this
alignment of like human endeavors to you
know the principles that have ensured
that life has continued to evolve it's
like you know that what we say how can
you learn from fungi you know what do we
have to learn from our like blonds
ancestors and fungi ancestors that have
gone through so many shots and so many
pandemics and and managed to to thrive
not only thrive and and and for me this
is the key here it's like I've
understood recently that love it's a
it's really about life like I see we can
take the movement and whether it's the
political unfolding or the economic
unfolding or business unfolding life is
at the core like we're here to create
more life we're here to you know
increase complexity diversity order
differentiation that's what and what I
like about this is it doesn't matter why
your belief system is like you don't
need you can be a fish yeah yeah me
that's so central that if we if we
continue and this is what what's paining
me so much in being in touch like you
are as well with a wide spectrum of the
movement towards healthier better saner
world just give it some kind of framing
because there are people in industry
they're people working in the UN that
really are passionate they get up every
morning with passion and meaning in
their life trying to do a good thing
at the same time in all the the activist
movements and the people were saying
that's the wrong kind of green we don't
need these these kind of corporate green
deals that ultimately won't work
they are also passionate good people but
what I find frustrating is that we keep
em standing still telling each other
where we're just a little bit wrong and
haven't quite got it yet
um or our strategy is mistaken or you're
still believing in that how can you
instead of understanding that the deeper
intention to be in service to life to to
do things differently in a sane away is
something that we all share and that
that if we and that's why I'm so
obsessed with this starting with
questions rather than answers and
solutions because the minute you hold
answers and solutions really lightly and
understand they're never final and
they're never fully correct and they're
never perfect you can allow everybody's
opinion and you can still move forward
together because as we walk
shoulder-to-shoulder into the future we
can have the conversation about where we
might be mistaken we can improve our
questions but if we just argue with each
other we don't get ya I've been thinking
a lot about this as well so for me it's
like the first I think because we're in
a moment that is really existential and
wet and you know it's really about the
existence of humanity on the planet like
I go as into a like the essence of
really wha what's on the table here in
terms of like global problems and and
the the and the issue is existential so
I think we need to approach it with that
kind of intention that this is I I keep
saying that
because it's so existential this is
about humanity
owning our role on the planet this is
about you know this the awakening for me
is the awakening of us owning really
what it is to be a human and an active
participate er in this community of life
on the planet right now
but how we get there I keep saying that
you know we have the Revolutionary
approaches and the revolutionaries which
is let's create a new financial system
let's create a new money system a new
educational system and we have the
reformist approach which is oh let's
let's make an impact investment
portfolio so you know even philanthropic
capital is not being used in to support
fossil fuel companies or porn and you
know like it is now um or you know let's
change education a little bit like I
think we need both at the moment as long
as we have the revolutionaries and as
long as we're resourcing them and as
long as they are you know focused on
that task and create space so there are
people that are fully focused on
developing the new stuff I think a lot
of people can just reform where they are
and and what you know Joanna Macy says
as well like the the hand actions you
know that our buying airs a bit a bit of
time because we're not gonna get the
revolution done in 10 years and for me
10 years is what we have so uh yeah I I
feel like we need everyone and maybe
just to go back to yeah it's it's it's
again it's this like I've heard myself
say right and and spread the idea that
we we don't need incremental change that
it's just not going to do it we need
transformative change for many years but
the both/and of that is to say can we
not see for example right now if if some
european governments are committed to a
kind of green new deal response to post
pandemic reanimation of an economy that
we actually don't really want to
reanimate again but in the process it
means building green infrastructure and
and finding ways to basically phase out
entire industries because we realized
that there's no point in rescuing them
now because they're basically making us
run against the climate wall
em
it might only be incremental change but
who am I to know or judge how this
incremental change shifts the overall
enabling conditions that would then
finally allow the transformative change
to really learn so that that's again
it's it's trying to do a both and like I
another way that I've sort of tried to
play with this lately because you know
in our movement lots of people are
saying oh it's the movement from ego to
equal and tribe you loves very much
it's these tool that the pyramid and the
circle and and I just quickly sure if
you've seen this M yeah if you apply the
the the Triad to this and you see ego
and equal as an expression of life's we
talked about this briefly earlier and
before we started recording that that we
are actually all of it that's all but
we're also in our experiential space we
are being for our self yeah so intention
of all life is between M being for
oneself and being part of a larger whole
in both of them that's the paradox of
existence that we were all of it and
we're manifestation of it with a
viewpoint and and if you just rather
than seeing it as a pendulum swing of
saying oh yeah we've created a world all
about it equal a ego and and now we we
need to just leave all that behind them
and become eco and put ourselves in the
circle of life as once one member in the
community I don't think that's taking
responsibility for Hamid haha fuck
things up and also for the special role
why we came here because if exactly the
essence has a place than we do to as
badly as we've done the job so far maybe
and and and that's why why I love this
when you put it into the tried and you
see that Sivir the ancient notion of
being in service to life to a larger
hole to the the process
it's it's been around for 3,000 4,000
years or when the Vedanta was written em
and and for me that's the resolution and
it again would then allow us to
communicate with all the people who are
still trapped in the ego race in what
Joseph Campbell says getting to the top
of the ladder and realizing it's it's
leaning against the wrong wall yeah that
kind of notion as so many people still
trying to get up that ladder and and
that the people who just got to the top
are going
this is lonely and meaningless yeah and
but to talk to them you need to also
honor that taking care of self is
important and both of us know how
quickly you can burn out if you forget
that and and I'm in position right on my
life where I feel like I need to take
care of my family my community my health
in order for this to be like fun for me
to be of service and in the long run and
if I burn up like a flash fire in a
couple of years of just thinking about
out there and not caring for my
community and my immediate family I am
NOT of service to anybody anyway and I
want we're going everywhere but I would
like to come back briefly to your story
because like so how did you end up in
Europe and um because you yeah please so
yeah I think
ah I I am I mean I have a really
interesting biography and and connected
to psychedelics I could share that you
but I I think the the I I can see like
the turning point in my life and they
like when you know I I say that in this
video game of life you changed levels
you know you saw the monster you like
thought the monster and then you went to
the next level with like new weapons and
new resources I don't know I'm not a
gamer so excuse if I don't have the
right metaphor but you know I
me I think one like one key thing that I
the first time I ever took LSD it was
very small amount of LSD I was at a rave
trends for the solar eclipse I came back
from that trip like so in tune with it
with the earth that I never I was a
vegetarian like I turned into a
vegetarian I started doing yoga I became
an environmentalist it was like
overnight I cannot explain like the the
like really being able to feel love I
think it was the first time in my life
that I could really feel the sense of
interconnection at a much deeper level
than just reading about biology or
ecology or you know I also studied
physics at the time I went to university
to study physics cuz I was really
fascinated by you know the universe and
and I wanted to be an astronomer that
was my main like my main goal and then
these experiences allowed me to like
turn back to the planet you know turn my
attention from the Stars and and and
turn back onto the planet and this
fascination you know with the universe I
think just kept growing and then I came
to Europe just because I wanted to live
in London for a while and I ended up
working for lush I I was doing something
completely different in Brazil I was
teaching yoga and being a translator and
interpreter and teaching English as a
second language and then in London I
just I said I'm just gonna be here for
six months I'm gonna try to get a job
with a business that I believe in you
know I was already vegan I was already
into animal rights and into more
environmental activism and then this was
2004 and and I started working for lush
in the shop as a sales assistant and
then you know I was a bit bothered by
some of the things that I considered
green washing back in 2004 which is like
okay if you want to be an s4 business
why do we have this like why are we
doing this where it's like and it's
lighting and like how are we going to
recycle the waste from the stores and
then like the owner of lush who's like
the big boss you know one of the owners
of lush walked in and then you know I
think it's someone that that's used to
getting
like a lot of attention from people and
I just grilled him and then said okay do
you want to do it and I said yeah hell
yeah you know I have this policy of
saying yes to life
yeah and it's how study then I became
like the Environmental Officer for lush
like it was you know it's an accident
right and then I think as I became as I
became more aware of management systems
and teams and like also the you know the
kind of dark side of power and and not
even like lush is a pretty cool place to
work but but just already understanding
a little bit more of how can I uphold my
anarchist values you know as as I'm also
working in a more business sector then I
went fully to dragon dreaming so shiok
we're seeing a lot for see like and then
this idea again how can we align I I
went into permaculture and oh because
for me it's the same pattern it's like
living systems based approaches that you
know allow us to organize the human
endeavors in a way that's more aligned
why did you get into the the link with
permaculture after you already got the
job with Russian so it was part of your
job or were you already connected there
and and and then brought that into lush
uh I think the second I think I became I
think I wa I already know about
permaculture and eco villages already I
think I think also one of the one of the
things I wanted to do when I came to
Europe or to do any any D that was also
one of my things I want to do any D in
train horn was my Michael ended up doing
in Samara which was a whole experience
in itself those also really shaped Who I
am too
um and yeah and then I and then I
remember I organized the first
introduction to permaculture at lush I
think it was 2009 so maybe over ten
years ago even less um and then you know
and then I think at the same time people
like famine Constantine who has been
super important
in the in the building the dream of lush
to become a regenerative business I
think he really fell in love with
permaculture and then you know the whole
thing ended up developing in a more
structured way like with the buying team
actively seeking out permaculture
projects and actively funding
regenerative design and agriculture and
permaculture and that's I think the
first time I heard about the link
between lush and the eco village
movement and particularly through
cautions even Lyndon and Martin Stengel
and the IDI there and and then I think
it was through Paulo he told her or he
was on one of those he isn't and then he
ended up through the gen network helping
to build some of these links for where
small suppliers like growers would
actually start growing for lush directly
and that was 2009 yeah I think the so I
met Paulo and then we ended up moving
together so you know we became partners
2009 and then I was already working for
lush so you know we were trying to to
bring more influences but I think from
it was actually a really beautiful thing
that happened we took I took six months
off lush and Paul and I were living
Portugal in a project that he was
helping to build this trouble building
and you know like living the dream
living in a yurt with an outside kitchen
and I would find bath and compost toilet
solar hot water for my culture gardens
all of that and then we started writing
this vision for lush and it was because
we wanted to go back to Brazil and
create this we had this vision that you
could create community with what we call
bio refinery so no longer a factory but
just like how can we take plant matter
in really interconnected circular design
and you know produce raw materials but
soap but also essential oils and use the
waste to grow mushrooms like you know we
designed that whole thing
like really connected to permaculture
designs and ring of energy and and
community and all that and then we
presented that to much like they you
know they loved the vision so they asked
they said of course this is totally your
topic but why don't we start and then
they invited Paulo to join and this is
when Paulo started working Simon and and
then using the huge network of
permaculture and and Jen and real global
eco village network to identify key
partners that had already the
permaculture framing and I had already
the right kind of I think the right
frame so instead of trying to develop
like standard farming practices they
were working with people who already
understood it and and then allow them to
build their businesses in a way that
that could fund lush and of course good
friend Ansari could send raw materials
to lush with lush funding them so they
have this idea of financial succession
where you know lush slowly reduces
investment while the local business with
a network of farmers the sort of process
of active incubation yeah not only
builds up a responsible and regenerative
supply line but actually also helps in
the place a whole community pattern to
develop it's wonderful and it's also
returns of development it's not easy and
we made so many mistakes and a lot of
projects didn't go well and you know
there were trust issues there were
issues where you know you count on a
certain yields you know like there are
also business pressures there where you
make you know you build it your business
case and then if the yields are not
correct because maybe the you're trying
to grow things that should not be grown
in that place or that you know you're
trying to grow things organically and
may take longer in order to get the use
that you're used to by the industry
that's not operating from the same
principles and so I think that we're
yeah but but we had some really
successful projects as well like with
with JP I began a permaculture institute
they've been supplying Moringa oil to
lodge for ten
years now but it's a large network of
farmers that is I mean it what you're
just explaining we've had these
conversations before about the stories
of where it worked and where it didn't
work in and how it also sits in the
larger like as a business like lush
grows the demand we're not talking or
can you send us a hundred liters of
olive oil or fifty like we're really
talking about production that is so
large that the administrative effort of
getting it from 50 small producers
rather than one large producers brings
up the cost hugely insecurity but that's
the question is it really because in a
way it's more resilient to have lots of
diverse suppliers and it always makes me
think of like this recent like a years
ago when Avant Kanade published
something where he was basically
lamenting that basically along the lines
of they called me up and they said
Patagonia is a billion-dollar business
huh
I was I was dreading that moment and how
can I do what I'm wanting to do company
that big I'm too big not to fail and and
I find that fascinating because it is
even with it with the kind of I know it
like having talked to Simon and I deeply
believe in the commitment of the impulse
of lush and like they are basically but
whatever the real the company name is
cosmetic warriors rather than the lush
it's it's it's a bunch of activists it
started a company rather than a company
that did some active yeah which which I
really when I've learned that I am
deeply impressed by that ethos but then
they're still stuck between a rock and a
hard place it's the this conversation of
can you build a regenerative company in
a degenerative economy and that kills
that just don't work and and so for me
that that the the big challenge for all
these these leading companies is poor
like what we're talking about earlier
subsidiarity I can we build that into
company structures how can we build
mobile networks of lots of small
companies that somehow still create
collaborative advantage between them em
but where the supply chains are just
smaller where Russia becomes many many
lushes everywhere yeah I think I think
we always like to use the idea we talked
a lot about this with Tamara and
blueprints is like human scale you know
how can we have human scale developments
and and then I mean at large sometimes
we do feel like wow you know there is
this enormous business now which is
super complex and then if you try to if
you if you have a central brand you know
the more the business grows the more
complex it is to build coherence right
and you want to build some coherence in
the system and then and then something
that but also like I'm a little bit of a
dreamer and I know I'm like super utopic
but what I mean what I've been trying to
talk about more recently is the earlier
conversation we were having as well
about like transformative change you
know an incremental change so how can we
grow the business while transforming the
system that we're sitting in and it's
the thing of like you know we have the
Train on the track and we're trying to
change the track as the Train is running
on top of the track I don't even know if
it's possible but I'd like that
commitment I keep joking how can we
create the post capitalism while being
inside capitalism and create a business
that can actually build a bridge to the
post capitalist world I think that's an
interesting challenge for brands now
like we know we know capitalism has
failed so what is our role in helping to
redesign the post capitalist world and
like help redesign this new economy
system but in order to be alive so we
can redesign it we also need to survive
now in the current system I see that
this is the paradigm so and I think what
lush has been doing really well is
seeding a lot of things and a lot of
initiatives that can exist outside of
lush and I'm I think we could even do
that more where I see lush as an
ecosystem of
different business entities and if you
can really like in in true regenerative
design think what's the essence and the
potential each one of those entities
that allows them to honestly develop in
not in a complete dependency to the
zeeco system but actually developing its
own right so we forget to the point
where we need to you know read
regionalize everything and supply the
global supply chains are completely
broken we can still survive like you
know slime molds you know like now we're
like one organism but how can we
strengthen all the individual parts of
this organism so they fully understand
what their potential is and then when
it's time you know to feed and to grow
they can be there on their own entity in
many ways it's in just the business
world question it's the same question
that I feel like we're actually having
to grapple with globally as a species
like in this this wonderful definition
that Jon Stewart has of how evolution
works it's it's a process of
diversification and then subsequent
reintegration of that diversity and
higher levels of complexity in emerging
and and that this reintegration of
diversity at higher level of complexity
can only happen through the emergence of
new patterns of cooperation and and and
and through our life that's that's how
it has worked and but that means that we
in the push towards this globalization
thing that that had lots of negative
impacts but also had some positive
impacts and and it's what we've now got
so it's no point in arguing about that
the past day anymore and it's how do we
make it healthy is to understand that
we've we focused so much on the global
and the large on the on the economics of
scale on efficiency that that we we
eroded the patterns of redundancy and in
duplicating at multiple scales in order
to create capacity for self regeneration
and
of the whole and so so whether it's in
our political systems in our companies
in in the way we live our lives we it's
not giving up the global it's it's
strengthening it by becoming much more
local and regional again and I think
that like if companies move into that
space of like taking for example the
circular economy pretty serious and
particularly the insights from the
earliest industrial ecologists that the
biggest bang for your buck in circular
economy is when you shrink the magnitude
of the cycle like when you when you make
it more local more regional you can get
much more efficiencies or right practice
at that local level but of course in the
current economic system that there is no
it would only work if we go out of the
bubble of the three sectors like M
that's when you have to have a political
conversation with the people in there in
the region and saying we as a company
want to devolve into really becoming
supportive actors in this region but
that means we need conditions that
enable us to do this with you across
sectors because it's like wait if we
don't somehow in wrote this business
public authority civil society
separation create integrated community
solutions but then we're back to honor
give them right we're like the the
workers own the means of production
right that there is no and again I'm
gonna say something really really
revolutionary in which is about private
property right so he nature there is no
such thing as private property so for
you to to go beyond these three sectors
like also ownership needs to be in the
hands of the people and not in the hands
of the shareholders that are always
maximize maximizing shareholder value so
so and this is why governance and
ownership is a big conversation and this
is why
I are you worried that sometimes that
the regenerative movement or the
permaculture movement they don't get
political enough because the the kind of
changes that we're talking about here
can truly only happen if we also own
that everything is political and that
the movement is also political and you
know how how are we going to create the
new kinds of regenerative politics and
regenerative governance to support
regenerative agriculture and to support
regenerative manufacturing work you know
um yeah so I think that's one one thing
that I wanted to just park there for now
and and be other about a real
localization it's at the moment as well
like for example what we see a lot is
that because we've developed global
supply chains and we have all these
developing countries that are you know
basically their economies completely
reliant on commodities like Brazil like
like Sierra Leone so we wanted some new
cocoa butter because we were going to
launch a new product and are like okay
let's find you know a really super
beautiful cocoa butter and then because
we have the ecosystem of lush which is
global and has scale we can also support
really incredible projects for bio
regional development so so you know
often i and i've been i've been saying
this to Lush i think now it has finally
being understood sometimes we don't need
to do anything we just need to be the
private sector partner you know when
we're talking about these blended
finance or blended models that go above
you know by region or landscape
integrated management it's amazing to
have the power of a large private sector
actor that can come and say we'll buy
your product get the finance get the
development get the governance right all
we can do is buy your product you have a
guaranteed market also there's an
enormous power in that at the moment so
it's like it really for me this but we
need to have the transitional roadmap I
also don't my calling in a row map we
need we need to have the right
presupposing place that can guide the
evolution of the system into
into this new integrated levels you know
of complexity and order which for me now
at least in the human in human nature is
the post capitalist world right so let's
diversify lots of multiple parallel
experiments like happening nature so we
can integrate at the higher level harder
and you know the free nature where we've
integrated but yeah I don't think we're
there yet I think we're done folding
yeah I mean that's why like Joanna
Macy's image of the hospice in midwifing
and the dyeing system and the birthing
system is it's it's a long journey and
it's been going on for a long time and
and it's kind of accelerating to some
extent that we're now seeing that this
system is clearly dying but but up what
I recently really connected with deeper
in this metaphor is that if you call it
Hospice in mmm Hospice my father I
realized that all the anger and all the
boy that wasn't right that you did back
then and all that it disappeared the
judgment was gone and there was a
celebration and a forgiving of
understanding that he himself was a
traumatized and wounded being and tried
his best in his way and and so I could
be with him in a different way and in a
similar way I find that we're not doing
the hospice in right if we yell at the
perpetrators of the dying system and
very few of them were like some of them
are real perpetrators like yeah so so
but that doesn't mean that most it
brings us back to like for example I
have a little bit of connection to this
whole impulse of future stewards and and
Nigel's hopping in with that we mean
business alliance and and how they
really work with the
process now to to move forward the the
role of large industries in in
decarbonization and all that and I know
how many activist friends of mine would
feel that were world highly suspicious
and so on the same with like that the
wonderful work that Christiana Figueres
and and Connick have done with the world
we create and they in that process
they're still dealing with that system
and and but I know that they have deep
integrity and really can really really
want to be of service and and so for me
it's it's like I want to come back to
that is the private property on on one
level I like I can consents in me
there's sort of two responses to that on
one level um I've also in the last few
weeks like actually in a conversation
with John Fullerton it sort of landed in
me completely that that one one way of
summing it all up and did is rooted in
all indigenous knowledge from all
corners of the world is that it
literally is a fundamental mistake to
believe that the land can belong to us
rather than understand that we are
expressions of the land we belong to the
land and in the only way we can live in
serving our enlightened self-interest is
to heal and contribute to the abundance
of the land that we are an expression of
that we are means of generating
abundance for through ass and em and on
that level I completely agree with you
that on the other hand I uh I also it's
the it's the whole participation how do
we like we need to transform education
we need to bring everybody into
responsible appropriate participation
but but with getting ownership and
getting rights comes the responsibility
of also being a steward and what I'm
currently worried about is that if a I
know that there's huge amount of wasted
interest of people who own something and
it's like when we say we don't need
private ownership like we often think of
these the Jeff Bezos is and and and Elon
Musk's where it becomes obscene the kind
of it's even unthinkable what kind of
sums and amount of resources they've
amassed in the ownership of one person
but then all these wonderful projects
that owned their land in order to do
their healing of that land to have some
sort of radical revolution that takes
all of that away and we all get our
whatever our footprint percentage
hectare rich is M oh and then the only
way to manage it some well-meaning techy
guy comes in and says don't worry as
long as you have a mobile phone and
everything you do gets tracked then we
know exactly how many resources you used
and what you owe and what you don't know
and and all your social relationships
when you and help that lady across the
street you get a bonus point and social
and when you when you do that when you
plant a tree you get a bonus point then
that's crazy that's Big Brother watching
you that's it's it's a technology it's
us saying we give ourselves over to the
AI and to these these technologies as
much as they're well-meaning and so I'm
and I'm it they're concerned about how
we actually without it I I think then
again it's to go back to utopia right
this is like the utopia so in India
Autopia where where we fully align human
systems to living systems I think we go
back to the Commons and we are common
stewards of the Commonwealth right this
is the common earth like the commoners
have items you know I love that name and
there's so much work being done around
the comments and and again because this
is a transition it doesn't need that
suddenly we're not gonna have any
private property and we were going to
like give everything up and you know
like we need to create the right
relationship for we need the right
consciousness we need the right
relationship we do need the right
governance because we also don't want a
state government that owns our
before you know we also see we have also
seen how that how that pans out and now
we're in a state where everything has
commodity that has been commodified so
we own everything and then you know the
carbon markets and the whole climate
change the response to climate change
was how can we commodify even the air
how can we commodify forests you know
like we've we've commodified everything
so I can own people I can own
intellectual property which I find crazy
like we can own culture I can own a song
I can own poetry I can own you know life
we can OG genome we can own DNA we can
own the genome like you know like it's
crazy so so it's like this pendulum
swinging to like full ownership of
everything and I think in this world
where we go back to the Commons I think
it's also a transition and I think the
first thing is to protect what is still
the Commons and then these ideas
rewilding you know and then rewilding
land so there are some ownership
structures where we can buy land and
making sure that's not owned by people
it may be owned by an organization and
held in perpetuity or protected in
perpetuity I think there are some what
even less for example lush has given
lucious part employee-owned you know so
so we we are and the idea is to continue
growing the shares that are owned by
employees I think we're seeing so many
employee owned enterprises like it's a
beautiful movement and I think yeah how
can how can we also again to to go back
to that to them metaphor where we have
to survive in the current system while
trying to change the fabric of the
current system at the same time and yeah
anything we're just gonna be in this
dance until either we move towards
extinction if we're not successful or we
move towards you know emergence of these
new crazy properties of life that I
wonder thee I think they I think it's
all happening like sometimes I I need to
try to relax back into the trust that
we spoke about earlier before I started
recording that that we are actually in
everything we do we do exactly what we
do as that larger flow like we can't do
but like that in a more kind of
academically terms like I recently found
myself quoting Mitch Lee professor for
system science at University of Hull who
I know through the IFF almost in every
conversation with the sentence
everything is an intervention yeah I
mean if you really sit with that
sentence pushing for a bit or up on top
of a mountain and just repeat everything
is an intervention and really let that
sink in oh it's a pretty powerful
statement that connects to exactly the
same place that did my actually it's not
even just an intervention because then
it feels so much like you're doing
something to the system but you're
actually doing something as this as the
flow and and for me that is trusting
that that will never get there like we
need to imagine these utopias we need to
I think we desperately need a sort of
Lighthouse or North Star that says as
humanity in all our diversity with all
our disagreements celebrating our
different points of view as part of
life's diversity and the source of our
creativity we can still find a common
ground to move forward which is the
common ground that all our indigenous
ancestors have given us which is if it's
not in service to life that it's not
appropriate and so yeah evolution has
one direction right even if you don't
believe mysticism even if you don't
really want to believe the indigenous
its technologies like whatever again
even if you believe pure Darwinism
evolution is one direction and that
direction is towards more
differentiation or diversity towards
more ardour and towards
complexity and we are you know also life
unfolding itself so for me that's that's
the very basis it's it's the it's a it's
a core principle of our of our
decision-making is my intervention
whether is my intervention aligned to
this or not and if not we also know that
extinction is also a valid process in
evolution you know extinction is also
how life unfolds towards more complexity
diversity and orders so that the whole
thing that life is basically a sin
trophic process we that we are
negentropy that we're moving against the
tide of entropy in order to create and
of course and it doesn't violate the
second law of thermodynamics it just the
mistaken thing is that is confusing time
scales of physics and human evolution
and biological evolution and yeah we can
create more complexity and and in order
in a pocket of the universe for a few
million years or even hundreds of
millions of years and but that doesn't
mean that in the long run entropy
doesn't hold and there is a brilliant
brilliant theory I think it's from 2014
I'm really bad with names so forgive me
I I'm not gonna remember I'm gonna have
to reference later but there was this
theoretical physicist in the UK that
postulated that actually life created
life light like so the move from
inorganic to organic life was a way for
the atoms and the molecules to dissipate
energy more quickly so by organizing
into a living entity you dissipate
energy more quickly so you're actually
like life is because of the second
theory of thermodynamics you know like
it he brought everything together and
then for me was such an insight because
it also then I can also connect that
even to a very highly spiritual level
you know like like it for me just align
align everything analyzed ISM folding of
complexity towards you know entropy but
also towards consciousness one
to expand and wanting to know itself so
we can evolve higher levels of
consciousness like look I hold those two
things like I am a you know I also
really love science but really love
mysticism and and yeah and I I'm happy
that I can hold all of those trains um
and then just I wanted to go back to one
thing about evolution in life and ah yes
to also honor something that I I think
for me is becoming clearer and clearer
and maybe part of the work that I'm
doing now is to address that
it's how wonderful that you and I have
the privilege of being able to have this
conversation yeah because our basic and
human needs are met because we have the
privilege of doing lockdown in in you
know under shelter we're now suffering
the worst you know storm like they are
in Bangladesh
you know like worse to start floods
we're not we're safe and I think from
safety safety allows us to have this
deeper thinking but we need to bring
everyone with us and and and the people
who zips technologies and whose cultures
are already so close to being
regenerative cultures are being
decimated at the moment so how can the
work that we do really be in service of
like support because that's where the
richness like they are the people that
are outside the system they're much more
capable of thinking outside the system
they already our outside capitalism
they've only already fallen through the
fringes they have now lost their sense
of the comments they have no lost their
sense of community so how how do we how
do we support them and resource them in
a way where they can be here having
these conversations with us where they
also have time to influence us and and
supporters and I and I just kept naming
that because I also sense that this is
going to be the source you know as
you're mentioning indigenous communities
this is also going to be a source of the
knowing that's important for us to
connect to but not only to connect to to
create space so we can thrive and
develop and at the moment is just being
you know yeah no wait I been touching on
that
in in my reflections big like I feel
like for example yesterday it was it
yesterday no on Wednesday I talked with
Alex prior from from Guayaquil and with
Martin from him and from Amazonas and
they're doing a really wonderful
partnership why a key is helping guy
Amazonas in their work with the
indigenous people in in Colombia in in
Amazonia and sure you know that guy
Amazonas in Havana has helped to
basically they've helped to facilitate
the process that led to the turning over
16 million hectares of Amazonia to 35
different tribal units in nations
peoples that that now have legally the
ownership of that land there's issues
with of course they had the ownership of
the land but the subsoil according to
Colombian lawyers name everywhere same
everywhere land right land right an
important very important part of this
conversation but what I found really
interesting in listening to Dhamma Dean
about his process with with the people
is is that it really addressed that the
paradox that we're running into with
with this because the minute you engage
everything is an intervention so you
also intervene in their cultures and you
bring a connection and a different type
of so again it it can be positive and
negative like everything like very much
linked to technology the story that
Martin was telling is that the elders
approached him and said something is
going on like we on the one hand
wonderful we still have our larger
frameworks of meaning that give us clear
patterns of how to pursuit to
participate in this forest and nurture
it that in our language you have to do
with in this type of year you can't go
there because of the spirits
but also like the biologists would say
at that time of year in that part of the
forest somehow
reproductive processes happening for
keys he sees so there's always a reason
depending on how the storytelling frames
it and in all oral tradition cultural
tradition that is going on on all levels
from the shaman's to the storytelling to
the songs to everything is informing
people is the lifelong learning process
by which that culture has transmitted
that deep knowledge of how to be in
place over time but then because of the
contact with other ways of living the
youngsters after if they put on a
three-day ceremony the youngsters say
after a day and how much longer is this
ceremony gonna go on and can we can we
now get out of this poison and get back
to our recharging station to look at our
mobile phones or something and and what
they have to do and what they seemingly
did successfully is to turn into the
skid and say okay well video our
ceremonies make documentaries about this
knowledge it for you age group
yeah and suddenly it became more
engaging again and and and invited
process it's still questionable whether
that's the way forward but but in this
particular incident it seemed it seemed
to help but for me what I in this
context I've I'm concerned that some of
the technologies we're working on
they're wonderful people in our
regenerative movement are trying to
build their are based on crypto this
that and the other and monitoring and
sensing and proof of change of state and
and all those kind of sensible building
blocks in our Western logical frame to
put everything in place that we can n
value the work of people Stewart land
not just from the produce that they
produce but for the stewardship that
they do on healing the land and meant
the health of the land but in the
process we also create an infrastructure
that for anybody who wants to access
that wonderful benefit also has to
access the world of zoom calls and
mobile phones and technology and
satellite monitoring and whatever it is
and is it inevitable like is that where
we're going like for me if we wanted
preserve diversity do people not have
the right to be Luddites if they want to
be Luddites or do they not have the
right to not use technology if they
don't want it or if they choose to see
how a double edged of a sword technology
is to to only use it in a very limited
way and not be cut out of all sorts of
the human agreement that we're now
building if they don't have a mobile
phone or they don't have an implanted
chip or they don't have whatever is
coming at us yeah I I think two things
and I think that's because that's why I
was super careful with how how I said
what I said because I think for me it's
like resourcing resourcing the what we
generally we talk a lot about those
doing the planet's most critical tasks
and then sometimes it's resourcing them
with money with time sometimes with you
know opportunity for peer-to-peer
learning and exchange but ultimately
trusting that they are the ones that
like I think I I would also like to
trust that the people that are still
connected to a different sense of
knowing would have the discernment to
choose whether to engage or not with the
technology and then to do it in an
appropriate way and I know it's I know
that's also a bit naive of me but um
like we I mean I decide I'm connected to
like little networks and and one of the
most beautiful things that we catalyzed
also through lush and through my work
collage and the work of others you know
like Simon and and the work of spring
prize that you are also involved he's
really is so read or a lion read - Eliza
or
and it's the idea of working in the
nexus between humanitarian and
development but creating you know a
group of practitioners that can mutually
support each other it's networking or
the blueprint yeah yeah exactly that
came out a blueprint
yeah and that came out of spring prize
because we met in spring prize and we
decided to tack to add a meeting after
spring prize calling a lot of actors and
I luckily also some catalytic Mundi um
we're fundraising now for the second
year but it was you know paramount to
get that funding from lush and we're
having this really beautiful calls where
you have people that are you know
working in Carthage and people they are
in Bangladesh working in the refugee
camps there and then we have Morag you
know amazing permaculture teacher from
Australia and then you have you know
collab and all the amazing people in
Kenya that are really doing incredible
response to kovat 19 their communities
by like trading food for perennial plant
so though give food is people commit to
planting perennial food crops you know
like and and and that's the kind of
space that we need to create where where
where we're really honoring that knowing
and we're really allowing and and the
reason why I said that is because they
decided to together develop a radio
training program so it's super
accessible and it doesn't have to rely
on technology on smartphone or whatever
how can we teach regeneration and
permaculture godbye you know
peer-to-peer but but also with amazing
support from Morag an amazing support
from a hana apricot and um yeah so it's
a really cool I love this idea or or for
example like um Boniface in Bangladesh
you know he was struggling to be able to
come up with a coffee 19 response that
was more regenerative because they're so
in the thick of it you know and it's all
about food and cash and then and then
they vote they self-organized the design
support group for Boniface to bringing
different perspectives and then again
it's people from the global north and
the global south and then the results of
that is beautiful you know
then we have only fans I know through
education as a number of projects with
him yes is that still the same project
as it a parallel project it evolved now
he's working a lot in the refugee camps
within rural India in Bangladesh you
know the enormous meeting people refugee
camps Lodge has been funding him I think
for the past two or three years and then
yeah and then I think I think it's
really interesting too to be working
with someone that is riding the thick of
it like we also have also part of this
team of these Alliance our people in
Uganda that are you know working
directly with refugees and home gardens
you know in the land that refugees
receive when they started in Uganda any
anything interesting to bring the
immediacy of the work to the table
that's what I loved about like learning
through you about blueprint and the
really that is so clearly and actually
building the skills of the intervention
teams as well like all those people are
learning a lot by helping and yeah I'm
learning process of how to help more
effectively and how to really build
capacity locally quickly and work with
local local actors and together um but
at the same time it's it's immediately
helping the people that most needed and
that's I mean that's true
anything trusting because for example in
some cases is like really what they
really need our mosquito nets you know
and we know mosquito nets are plastic
it's gonna create plastic waste and but
they have like a dengue outbreak so what
they need are must get on it so how do
you bring like in the sense of immediacy
how do you then keep upholding this
bigger vision of regenerative the design
and development and building local
capabilities and strengthening the local
resilience that goes beyond mosquito
nets but you don't turn down the
mosquito net because it's plastic you
know like how can we how can we be
constantly holding that space of the
emergency and the emergence you know
like and I think I think we
have other partners like Sarah Kay
blessing as well in the Philippines
doing this work really well and and this
is where I think like the more we can
make these responses and and and mix the
conversations the more we're both we're
learning happens so fast in this
circumstances that's how I feel about it
like because it it's a because it's
being based we're taking theory to
practice in a way that immediately bumps
into a reality shock like we're
constantly it's like we're being
bringing the reality shock into our
series the whole time the whole time
like we're testing it so yeah so I'd
like to create more of those thriving
conversational dialogue spaces they have
an immediacy connected to them and and
because we're seeing what's happening
with the pandemic and all these multiple
crises that out you know it's gonna be
the pandemic climate change the economic
downturn it's gonna be on our face all
the time so okay what is the strength of
our living systems theory that can face
reality and like head-on you know like
we're facing the green aspect of reality
where millions of people are gonna die
how can we really hold this principle
even in the thick of it and like this
makes me alive you know I also I also
honor being alive at this moment I can
feel the power and love about you
working I mean one of the we've only got
another 15 minutes and then you have to
another call because you've got like
like we famiry generosity really grew
out of the frustration of the the the
last spring price judges like after
sitting with the judges for three years
of saying this is wonderful these
projects are all worth like they're the
ones that came through to us of the 50
52 53 that we got to read the
applications for the last spring presser
I always felt there were one or two
maybe three
that I had some question marks where I
was like sure how did that get through
the due diligence process they sound
like they're talking really all the
right language but I don't see them
actually doing it or being able to do it
but apart from these little red flags
that that slipped through 97% of them
were just like I don't want to just give
them that much money I want to give them
more money and I'm gonna give it every
year and and all of them and um and then
we we just started this conversation of
looking more into the whole how much by
making it participatory and celebratory
and bringing people together and doing
all the social weaving which is what
lush does so beautifully around the
spring press it also makes it expensive
because lots of people can immerse in
college and and all that and but it is
actually so much part of the price it's
it I think the gift that these activists
from all over the world and
practitioners from all of the world get
by being in a communion from a community
from all over the world seeing their
significance and feeling celebrated by
each other is super powerful and worth
the money spent but but when I realized
that the back end of the price was
almost as expensive or equally maybe
more than than what was being given away
I was saying that this pattern must
happen in all these other prizes too and
then and then we started have this
conversation and I mentioned that
how about Buckminster Fuller Institute
and they're in the same situation and
then I asked David Mocambo is a true is
the back end more expensive than the
front end yeah it is
in that case there was much more and um
and so I'm so glad that this has evolved
now and that it's actually moved over to
be helped by BF I am in terms of that
the C 501 status and all that but I have
Hanna lost a little bit contact with it
because of my own life and and all the
diversity of things we're holding so
this way where is it now like em how's
it involved so we
we have an offer on the table so maybe
let me backtrack a little bit I think
with region rasa tea I think at the
heart of it like we know that only 2% of
philanthropic money around the world
goes to environmental causes and we all
know you know the speed and the level of
regenerative work that needs to be done
now so so again I think our main goal is
to create space for mutual learning so
you know the kind of funders and donors
can also learn from the projects and the
projects can learn from each other and
then we create this kind of thriving
fast learning space where where there is
a better understanding of what's
actually needed you know really at the
grassroots level because I think there
is a lot of money that ends up in the
hands of the big the big NGOs doing
environmental work but very little gets
into the hands of you know indigenous
communities people of color and you know
small holder farmers and and and the
people that are really actually getting
their hands into the earth um so we are
about to launch our launch event which
is going to be already a webinar and we
also want to talk to you because we want
to invite you who I've been out to bring
donors and funders but also start we
want to become a platform for the voices
like the regenerative voices that are
coming from the ground and build this
relationship that can be more
longer-lasting in order to of course
allow the financial money to flow and
then we we got an offer of match funding
of half a million euros so if we can
raise half a million euros we already
have a match funded so I think that's a
really interesting opportunity and that
money would go to projects but it would
also help us build the network um and we
created a really beautiful nested whole
theory of change where you know we
understand that change done at one scale
can also create more health for the
other scale and then more health in that
how can we also hold the complexity of
what we're trying to do in our theory of
change um yeah so we spend a lot of
development work in order to write a big
application application fund
and that's where we are like we we are
in the space of about to launch more
publicly this initiative and we are in
the time of fundraising so we can flow
capsule and and then just to say that we
have a combined list of I think 500
vetted projects and we've been reaching
out to the projects to update on their
needs so we're trying to get a new a new
sense of what what the projects require
and then region uraza tree is also in
conversation with other people doing the
same thing so trying to move more money
to regeneration so we can always work at
a meta strategic level and then also
working with other organizations like
common areas Alliance and and realize an
GRC and others that are looking to can
we create a shared back-end where we're
sharing information even if you know our
front-end is talking to different
stakeholders but I think our main thing
is to go into funding to transform
philanthropy
for the just transition as well and you
know decolonizing wealth and all of that
well I had a little bit of a moment
where I was felt like okay help in
birthing the impulse but now it's kind
of moving somewhere where I'm my own gut
feeling was starting to get a little bit
uncomfortable and but I think it's
evolved from from that age was when it
was sort of going a little bit into a
model of M well this is this learning
community and you buy into it and then
like it can bury it and and also a
mixing philanthropy and impact
investment and I feel like that's where
the vultures come come back yeah and and
there's a there is a role to my mind to
be really clear that and the returns
over the long term through the health
and wholeness of the whole system is
what your return on investment is and
and and so it's okay to sink money into
projects that are truly regenerative
because the returns are multifold
they're just so systemic that you you
might as well not waste money in trying
to monitor them in detail because
you would only catch out of it so I
think the I think the reason we went
there and I think we're still want to go
there is the bow kiss is flowing
philanthropic Alto as gifts to projects
and then also coming up with better ways
of monitoring that you know don't create
so much more work for the projects
but there is a really let's say dark
aspects of philanthropy which is the
foundations receive this big endowment
they're only spending 5% a year or you
create the donor advised funds so all of
those funds are invested yeah so a
foundation that is only donating 5% a
year the rest of the money is invested
and often the philanthropic capital is
invested in the same shit that's causing
all the destruction everywhere right so
it's like generate the money that you're
giving away by activity and then pay a
little bit of the money yeah so we
didn't want to go into into normal
impact investment we just wanted to
offer an alternative for philanthropic
capital to be vested in regenerative
enterprise because when you look at our
whole like 500 plus you know 500 project
database a lot of those projects are
regenerative businesses that actually
need investment you know and I can
actually give funding the other the
other dimension that I feel is so
critical that we in our conversations as
we're sort of developing this in the
beginning got to the inside that there
is a need for I think at the time we
called it either pulverization or
whatever we were like that it's this
this process of without creating a
system that that siphons off money like
that takes too much of a cut for doing
this process and to create a process by
which the large foundations that that
basically 500,000 is a small grant that
doesn't he
of directors it just gets either signed
or not signed off it's a decision of a
split second and people are putting lots
of effort in getting there and writing
large applications and spending huge
amounts of hours to get into that split
second opportunity to maybe get the
small grant
well that small grant for a lot of
organizations that are not among those
500 would be too much money to handle at
one moment and again blow the
organization apart they would invest in
the wrong things they would transform in
in a non regenerative way but the same
organizations if they would if that
somebody instead of saying we've got
five hundred thousand for you this year
would say we have a commitment to give
you 50 thousand for the next ten years
so you keep doing what you're doing and
grow organically and slowly and build
your team they would do amazing work
with that and and so this this need to
create the intermediary where the large
funds that we can't change at this
moment can be approached and say give us
a million or give us a two million which
is still small money for you we're gonna
do the rest of splitting this to 30 40
projects instead of one I think it's
Superman but we've just done that so we
just spend hours and hours and hours
hours of our time hours we figured we
must have spent maybe forty thousand
dollars worth of work to jump through
all the hoops to get a meeting yeah and
then we you know so we have to do that
work of jumping through the hoops to get
a million and it's so difficult because
we're not big enough and you know they
are then all the hoops and so
interesting Scandinavia yeah yeah yeah
only thing is because because then we're
holding a lot of complexity and we're
thinking so systemically then they come
they came back when they said it's very
hard we come see you into a box like we
have these boxes of what we want to fund
and we come for you into any box because
you're not really doing pure climate
change and we're also not doing pure
gender and you're also not doing pure
like poverty alleviation but like our
aim is like co-benefits if you do
regeneration
put a little bit of us in every box or
change your boxes exactly but I'd like
to know how this big foundations work so
now I think we're changing our strategy
to go into you know individual donors
that have already figured out that we
don't even have the time for them to
spend all the money that they have like
we just have no you know like if you're
a billionaire at the moment if you're
not trying to become a millionaire by
donating your billions like you're like
wasting everyone's time because you're
not gonna spend billions your children
are not going to inherit that money
they're not they're not even gonna be
able to spend it like there will be no
world like there will be no planet yeah
if we continue so it's like it's
pointless to be accumulating so much
capital now it's the time to use all the
capsule that we have to increase it go
systemic function you know it's going
back to that life you know life is the
guiding for its life at the heart like
the core that the basis of all value
creation on planet earth is very bio
productivity and biodiversity and the
health of the process of life that's
that's the basis and so the other things
is it's it's nonsensical to to hold
zeros and ones on a computer but I just
wanna share one story briefly with you
did before we go and the you know you
met Oliver carriers from LG T venture
philanthropy they're the ones the people
who organized that meeting that I would
I learned a lot there because I also saw
how many of the large foundations in
California are kind of applying a sort
of how do you grow a unicorn comm
company and I know how to manage things
approach and to then how are we going to
show these people to scale up and be
more efficient with their wonderful
little project in Africa and and it felt
really like not 100% comfortable with
with some of these large monies how they
use the fact that they have a lot of
money to then transform the processes
that they're actually supporting rather
than support them
but but they were also wonderful other
projects in in in the room and one of
them is this kind of flagstone project
of their work is with the Maasai Mara
Game Reserve and the Nature
Conservancy's around the game reserve
and all that the sort of blended
business models that they've created
still weren't basically using tourism
money to pay to local farmers to do
regenerative agriculture instead of
teaching and it worked beautifully and
it started to grow naturally because
everybody is saying wow you get some
money to do the work in the way that
you'd really like to do it and and now
with co19
that whole model is in danger of
collapsing there's there's also a need
of not building these blended ones that
are too dependent on these Robin
hood-like repurposing of money from one
degenerative industry into regenerative
practice but so again it's the
transition like we needed money now to
build local resilience and local
economies like local resilience and
local regenerative economies you know
and to help regenerate ecosystems so
they can really support local
populations right this is really about
increasing the carrying capacity of
bioregions
to support populations without having to
rely you know on imports or or having to
rely on future like barring from the
future um and I think if we can if we
can use that money to build a capacity
now then ad systems unravel which we
know you know there will be then then
we're just yeah we're better capable of
weathering the storm so so that you know
I mean that's exactly we can continue
evolving right that's the thing again we
go back to evolution and life I mean
that's the the huge opportunity that I
see right now and so many places that
are hit by a crisis that I when we were
talking eight months ago
um pre-pandemic situation yeah
so my good ol time well not really the
the thing was that the the established
players whether it was the car industry
the fossil fuel industry the tourism
industry we're making a mint in such a
way that they will I say what's the
problem there is no problem you talk I
think that might happen in the future
but now all these heavy hitters with all
their big lobbies and all their power of
influencing political process are
queuing up to get government support and
ultimately the government is for us and
an voice has been strong enough to say
we need a different normal not the back
to the destructive degenerative normal
that we have before and so there is a
huge opportunity now to say okay if
you're gonna put what would is eight
months ago bill unimaginable sums of
money in political wielding and
collaboration between different sectors
and so on interaction then let's build
by a regional resilience and climate
resilience at the communities say let's
build the in like if we're gonna have to
pump stuff in let's build the
infrastructure that can hold us in in
the disruptions that are definitely
coming in the future rather than build
and even walking out of the fossil fuel
industry or the aviation industry which
is insane yeah and I I like I think in
Europe is much stronger than in the US
for example I I think I think they're
quite a few you know the German
government has said something about this
the Danish government even the British
government has said something about this
I think the the idea of restarting the
economy you know with the idea of a
green new deal which then literally
would be a green utila um after the
recession ah and I think I think at the
moment this is why we can join forces
you know this is where we can get
everyone of all the movements it doesn't
matter if you're you know taking a
reformist or a revolutionary approach
doesn't matter who you are where you are
if you're working on corporate
sustainability or if your extinction
rebellion or you know like I think this
is we can have this collective push I
think this can be the the unifying voice
now is like look as we start the economy
let's restart a better
and then the diversity is the approaches
right of course there's going to be a
corporate approach and of course there's
going to be a you know you level
approach but then really also need to
make sure that the community based
approaches are included and then you're
developing that to not have to go yeah
okay you have to go that this was
wonderful and there's so many the things
that we didn't get to but and this fact
lovely and I'll see you on Sunday at
this yeah well something will be part
two
thank you so much they don't have to
know that you're out there doing your
work thank you