[Music]
you
[Music]
welcome to the fifth episode of
awakening from the meeting crisis last
time we talked about how the axial
revolution came into greece we first
reviewed Pythagoras and then we
concentrated especially on the figure of
Socrates and the Socratic revolution and
we saw again how issues of meaning
wisdom self transcendence are so tightly
bound up together we took a look at
Socrates and we took a look at how he
has a particular conception of wisdom in
which what we find salient irrelevant is
closely closely coupled to what we find
true or real and those two things those
two concerns what is transformative of
us and what is true of the world are
meant to be held together and this was
pivotal in Socrates's method of trying
to get people to realize how much they
all of us are so prone to having those
two come uncoupled from each other and
we become subject to and to
self-deception and that a life that is
beset by self deceptive self-destructive
behavior is not a life that's worth
living that way to afford human
flourishing is by developing the skills
the wisdom to keep those two tightly
coupled together and Socrates was so
convinced of how important this was in
fact to making a life meaningful that he
was prepared to die for it and as I
mentioned there was somebody who was a
follower of him who was at his trial not
present at his death but was deeply
traumatized and affected by his death
and this is of course Plato
now if Socrates was controversial Plato
is beyond even that statement every year
there are hundreds of books written
about Plato this is why Plato is one of
the foundations not only because of his
ideas but as we'll see there's an
inexhaustible nurse to Plato and his
writing we can come back to Plato as a
culture we come back at different times
and see things we did not see before
that are transformative and
as individuals myself personally you can
come back to Plato at different times of
your life and Plato speaks to you in
ways he did not speak before I want you
to remember that because I'm gonna try
and suggest to you that that is a better
model for what we mean by something
being sacred than it being filled with
some kind of supernatural presence that
what makes something sacred is that it's
an inexhaustible fount of insight and
intelligibility that's transformative of
us that's certainly the way many people
in the ancient world read Plato they
were deeply affected by him I would go
so far as to say the platonism are
Neoplatonism as verse lewis and others
argue is sort of the bedrock of Western
spirituality and we'll come back to that
now Plato was traumatized by the death
of Socrates it's deeply I think
disturbing to him why I think that is
because he keeps coming back to it and
and trying to try and understand he
wanted to understand how is it that the
city he loved the city he belonged to
Athens could have killed this man that
he admired and loved so deeply how is it
that his beloved Athens killed his
beloved Socrates so where where Socrates
had this sort of dilemma given to him by
the gods Plato has this dilemma given to
him by the death of Socrates Plato
wanted to understand how people could be
so foolish and so what he's gonna do is
he's gonna take that two worlds
mythology that we talked about the the
lower less real world and remember it's
myth mythological it's not meant to be
literally two worlds but he's gonna take
that two worlds mythology and he's going
to do something with it very different
than what the Hebrews did remember the
Hebrews turned it into this is where
things are fallen now but we're moving
towards the future we're progressing
towards the future so they give a
historical answer to how we move from
the world of illusion to the world of
reality Plato is not going to give a
historical answer he's he's
to give a scientific answer because
Plato is deeply influenced by the
natural philosophers that we talked
about last time and what Plato is in
fact going to do is he's going to create
the first psychological theory in
history with Plato you can really see
the beginning not just of science but
the beginning of cognitive science
psychology as a discipline begins in a
very important sense and I don't mean
this trivially like oh yeah it started
with that
Plato's psychology is still currently
relevant right now in important ways
which we'll talk about so let's get into
that because this is again going to take
us into these interconnected issues of
meaning wisdom self transcendence
altered states of consciousness etc I'm
gonna hope to show you how Plato in
trying to answer the question of how
Athens could have killed Socrates is
ultimately influenced not just by
Socrates but also by Pythagoras we know
that Plato spent some time with a
Pythagorean community and he seems to
have gone through something some kind of
training in that community so Plato
develops a particular theory about why
human beings do foolish things when
there's different aspects of it but a
good way to think about it is by
relating it to something that we're all
familiar with this is the experience of
inner conflict and a conflict is when
you have two strong motives that seem to
be working against each other and you
can see how this is immediately going to
be relevant to existential meaning -
meaning in life because very often we
feel most distraught most anxious or the
most sense of being stuck when we have
such inner conflict when we're divided
against ourselves in an important way so
here's a classic example right so I like
chocolate
I'm more than like chocolate chocolate
mmm has a kind of deep attraction for me
so now recently I lost about 20 pounds
right so I went on a diet now dieting is
one of the most unsuccessful thing that
human beings can do the recidivism rate
is 95% recidivism means that within a
year 95% of people who are on a diet are
back to their pre diet weight so the
diet industry has a five percent success
rate even though it makes billions of
dollars I mean I wish I had that success
rate for my job I wish I only had to
succeed at 5% and I was given millions
of dollars for that kind of work because
and you have to ask yourself well why
does that work well that works because
of the problem it's such a pressing
problem that people will grasp and pay
money and anything in the hopes that it
might work because what's the problem
well the problem is right it goes like
this and we'll talk about the cognitive
science about this I know I should lose
weight like there's the evidence it's
clear makes rational sense to me I
should lose weight yes yes okay I should
lose weight and then I go home and
they're sitting on the counter there's
some chocolate cake right and and and
that doesn't quite capture right it's
not just sitting there it's like it's a
it's like how men with its chocolaty
goodness right and it's drawing me in
it's sort of and so you have to you end
up sort of often just eating the
chocolate cake or another example you
might be familiar with procrastination I
know my students face this right yes yes
I have an essay due in two weeks two
weeks there it is I should work on my
essay tonight because if I start now I
won't be rushed I know if I'm not rushed
I'll do a great job I'll have more time
to research I'll be able to change my
mind I should start working on my essay
tonight nobody calls up want to go up
for some drinks yeah and you're gone and
you procrastinate
so we are clearly beset by this inner
conflict and Plato Plato gets this great
insight he gets the insight that there
seems to be a deep connection between
inner conflict and self-deception
self-destructive self-deception so Plato
posits an idea that has become again so
natural to us that we just think oh yeah
of course but again he comes up with it
pedda comes up with the idea that we
have different centers in the psyche and
each Center has a different cognitive
relationship to the world and motivates
us in different ways and he represented
this mythologically right
he said there's like a part of us that's
like a man I want to say something here
right now because although Athenian
democracy is horribly sexist and treats
women horribly and so remember that
context because what's intriguing is how
much Plato was able to rise above that
Plato argues that women should rule as
well as men that women should be in the
army as well as men now he doesn't
perfectly free himself of course from
sexism but given the context I think
it's very admirable the degree to which
he was able to do it nevertheless he
does use this idea of a man that's in
your head and represents reasoned and
that man is motivated by the true by
truth what's true so he cares about
truth and falsity that's what it cares
about right and right scope right you
can go into very long-term goals
and it can deal with very abstract
entities like your health or a si all
right very abstract entities so this is
you know health and I should lose weight
that's going to take me several months
and I should do that because it's true
that if I lose weight my health will
improve so why don't I just do it well
because opposed to it there's a monster
right and it's sort of in my stomach and
genitals right and it represents
appetite
now it does not work in terms of truth
and falsity it works in terms of
pleasure and pain very different set of
norms now there's nothing wrong with
operating in terms of pleasure and pain
if you don't have a capacity to work in
terms of pleasure and pain your dad so
Plato doesn't think the appetites are
evil what he wants you to grasp is that
they operate according to different
principles than the man okay so they
presume long-term goals no immediate
when do you want the cake I want it now
now I'm going to the party now right
works in vary it doesn't it works in
terms of very superficial properties all
I care about the cake is how it looks it
looks yummy
I don't have some in-depth analysis
right it's just ah chocolatey sweet umm
so very superficial again that's not
necessarily bad often in life and death
situations a superficial appraisal is
exactly what you need I don't need to
know a great deal about the inner
workings of the tiger I just need to
know oh crap deadly get out of here okay
now notice how these are opposite to
each other now I put a space between
here obviously because I'm setting you
up for a third thing that Plato talks
about but before I do I wanted you to
notice what Plato's doing with Socrates
here so Socrates didn't really have a
theory he had a practice Socrates
practice if you remember last time was
to get people to realize how often what
they find salient is rushing ahead of
what they find truthful do you remember
that
what Plato is saying is that's not a
coincidence the reason why that happens
is because we have different parts of
the psyche that work this way
this makes things salient to you really
catchy motivates you urgently right now
this is the part that you use to
understand and see here's what most of
us face this monster is constantly
racing ahead of what we understand do
you see what Plato is doing is it's
explaining why we are so prone to

why salience often exceeds understanding
we are perpetually vulnerable and we'll
talk about why we have this now let's go
back to the dieting as an example what
what helps though there's certain
strategies you can use of course to
improve right how you frame things and
we'll talk about that later but
typically what's one of the things that
improves people's chances of losing
weight they join a group like Weight
Watchers right or they join a study
group to avoid the procrastination why
well here's an important thing you are
not just a biological creature as I've
been arguing throughout you're also
cultural you have evolved across you are
the result of evolution that has crossed
several species in which you come wired
to learn about abstract symbol systems
use technologies both physical and
psychic knowledge ease so you have a lot
of powerful cultural cultural
socio-cultural motivations so he
compared this to a lion because lions
are social animals quite sort of and
lions have been associated with sort of
honor because that's and right that's
what this works in terms of it works in
terms of honor and shame
right honor is to be respected by those
you consider your peers to be shame is
when you feel that you have failed to be
gained respect from your peers we should
not confuse shame and guilt they are not
synonyms right guilt is when you feel
that you have failed to meet your own
ideal of who you should be shame is when
you have lost the capacity to get
respect from your peers now what's
interesting is that and this is Plato's
point but this part of us can pursue
sort of intermediate scope because we're
cooperating with other people it doesn't
operate just a short term but it doesn't
quite operate abstract theoretical it
ought it works within the socio-cultural
domain so it can pursue sort of midterm
goals not just immediate goals but not
sort of abstract symbolic goals but
socially agreed-upon shared goals and it
works on sort of the cultural aspects of
things not their abstract meaning or
their superficial meaning but their
cultural their shared meaning the way we
can share it with other people notice
how much you want to share with other
people your experience so I I see I've
been saying this for years I still see
people doing it even people that I've
taught it to people will reliably do
this they'll be eating something they'll
trying it for the first time and they'll
go oh this tastes horrible have some
they'll give it to somebody else because
you want to have that in addition to
whatever immediate response you're
having you want there to be a shared
cultural meaning to what's happening in
your experience and there's good reason
for that because as I've been arguing
throughout your connection to
distributed cognition is one of the most
powerful ways you increase your
cognitive power over the world
now he there he sort of represents this
as being like in the chest and this has
to do because we we feel mm-hm our
social emotions and motivation in the
chest you know your pride and honor and
you know you know shame right things
like that
now this is problematic for us what
should go there because the Greek word
doesn't have a direct English equivalent
sometimes people put emotion there
that's not quite right sometimes people
put the word spirit there that's closer
but the problem with spirit is it has
all kinds of spooky associations with it
all right I'm not going to translate it
I'm just going to leave it as is this is
your Phi Moss this is the part of you
that is motivated socially so here's an
interesting idea Plato has all right
they there is a lot of potential
conflict in this system it's a lot of
potential conflict in this system what
you want to do is get it properly
ordered now when you don't order it
think about what this means
salience and understanding and
participation get out of sync with each
other and then we're subject to
bullshitting were subject to
self-deception the more inner conflict
we have the more likely we are to engage
in self-deception because these two are
zinc and the more likely we will become
very egocentric so when people are
suffering especially inner conflict
anxiety they tend to become more
self-centered even selfish because when
you're experiencing inner conflict
you're getting sort of a threat signal
some things aren't right and when people
are under threat they tend to become
very egocentric again that's adaptive
now we're gonna come back to this but we
want to do a little bit of cognitive
science well why do like why do we like
what why okay it makes sense that right
we have this as a motivation because
we're social creatures right one of our
greatest adaptation is our ability to
cooperate together so you know you throw
me into the African savanna on my own
and I'm dead soon because like I don't
have great claws I don't have great
teeth
I'm look at what is sillies structure
right on teetering around on two feet
almost always losing my balance
I can't run quickly everybody can see me
from a long distance because I'm
towering above the grass my throat and
my vital organs are nicely exposed for
any predator this is a bad okay but you
know what I can do I can get together
with a bunch of other human beings and
we can get some pointy sticks and some
dogs and then we can kill everything on
the planet our ability to work together
has always been adaptive so we know why
this is here why is but why does this
have so much more power than this well
there's there's a there's an actually an
important reason and this has to do with
from work started by Ainsley and others
on what's called hyperbolic discounting
or temporal discounting and what Ainsley
and other people found is this pattern
of behavior is exist across species it's
not just something that human beings
engage and you can find it across
species it's even more Universal than
something like flow it's not just
Universal amongst human beings it's
Universal across many species so in this
is a deeply adaptive mechanism what does
this mechanism look like okay so this is
called discounting and this is a little
bit confusing discounting is how much
you are reducing the salience of a
stimulus the more you discount the less
salient something is the less it stands
out for you the less it grabs your
attention this axis is tying in a tenth
sense this is the present and this is
the future so what I'm showing you is
what's happening to discounting which
means how much a stimulus is losing its
salience and this is what it looks like
is what the curve looks like okay so a
present stimulus has a large degree of
salience to it remember the monster
something that's in the future
especially as it gets into the far
future much less salience to it that's
why the monster can override the man but
why why don't we like why do we have
this well this is actually very very
adaptive that's why it's a universal
phenomenon how is it adaptive so I want
you to think about doing your you're
about to do something here I don't smoke
I do diet but I don't smoke but let's
suppose I was doing this here's right
now and I decide to smoke a cigarette
right and that could have one of two
options right you know I get a coffee
roar I don't get a cough there or
something like that right now notice and
I'm doing this very simplistically I'm
not saying that whenever you do
something there's only two effects from
I'm just doing it simplistic in a very
simple manner so you can understand the
point okay
now the probability of now happening is
a hundred percent because it's happening
the probability of each one of these
happening is 50% now when if I were if
it goes this way and then there's two
more effects the probability of each one
of these is 25 right and so on so do you
see what's happening as you move into
the future the probability of any one of
these events occurring is going down
very fast now here's the thing this is
this is actually adaptive you should pay
less attention to things that are less
probable than happening that actually
makes good sense the less probable
something and of
tis the less attention you should give
it imagine if you didn't have this
imagine if you didn't screen off things
that were low in probability think about
how you would be overwhelmed by all the
possibilities so if I get out of bed I
might twist my ankle slightly and that
might slow me down getting to class and
if I slow down getting to class that
might have an impact on my mark and that
might cause me to fail my course and
then if I fail my course that might
disrupt my degree and that might cause
me to failed in my career and and then
I'm going to end up in Buffalo alone
married to a lamp or something now
that's ridiculous right now it's
possible it's not impossible except the
last part you can't really get married
to a lamp but right in fact here's a
hypothesis I have no notice the word I
used please I think one of the things
that goes wrong in people who experience
generalized anxiety disorder is that
this is not working well enough it's not
screening off and making low salient low
probability events so how the anxious
people find things salient that they
shouldn't they find low probability
things too salient so this is really
adaptive this is why you have it but
there's a problem with it and this is a
problem with any adaptive machine and
you're gonna see later why this is the
case ok let's go back to the cigarette
smoker I smoked and through a long chain
this is me dying in Hamilton right this
is the event of me dying in Hamilton
lung cancer in my left lung I'm not
going to write these all out this is me
dying in Hamilton of cancer and my right
lung this is me dying in Toronto cancer
left right this is me dying in
Burlington because and so on there's all
these different deaths now here's the
thing each one of those deaths has a low
probability of occurring right you see
that each one of those death
has a low probability of occurring but
here's the thing about me and I bet you
I share it with you I don't want to just
avoid death in Hamilton oh that would
although that would be a particularly
about death I don't want to avoid just
dying in Hamilton I'm from Hamilton so
I'm allowed to do that
I want to avoid death I want to avoid
all these deaths think carefully and I'm
using this very technically but I'm
speaking accurately I want to avoid
death in the abstract I don't want to
avoid this death or this death or this
death or this death I want to avoid all
possible deaths
I want to avoid death in the abstract
now here's the thing the chance of dot
each one of these deaths is very low but
if you pull them together the chance
that cigarette smoking will lead to a
premature death is very very high okay
so what does that mean for me the
hyperbolic discounting blinds me to this
because it's not very probable blinds me
to this because it's not very probable
blinds me to each one of these because
each individually they're not very
probable but in blinding me to each you
know what it blinds me to what they
share in common it blinds me to what
they all have in common and what they
all have in common is a premature death
by blinding me to what they have in
common what they abstractly share this
adaptive machine actually has me take
another puff on the cigarette and sets
me on the course towards cancer or
emphysema DC now please remember this
this is going to be a theme we're going
to be coming back to again and again and
again I mentioned it before when I
talked about flow the very machinery
that makes you adaptive is the machinery
that makes you pray to self deceptive
self-destructive behavior part of what
meaning and wisdom have to do is they
have to wrestle with that unavoidable
reality the unavoidable reality is you
can't you can't throw this away you
can't throw away this machinery because
if you throw this adaptive machinery
away your
doomed you can't get out of bed because
you're overwhelmed by crippling anxiety
you can't throw it away but you can't
just let it run untutored because then
you smoke the cigarette you eat the cake
you go to the party and you harm
yourself in a septa self-deceptive
self-destructive fashion so what do you
need to do here's the monster what you
need and what we developed is we
developed an ability especially here
frontal lobe area to form abstract
thought to abstract what is in common in
the distant future and symbolically
represent it to ourselves that's what
the man does the man can grasp the
abstract thought of avoiding the
premature death but you say but but the
man is so weak the man's weak because
you don't want him to be able to shut
this off you want him to be able to
override it but in a very minimal sense
because that's so adaptive see so Plato
is deeply right so in fact I think Plato
is so deeply right that's what we keep
discovering this division Freud divides
the psyche into these three things a
super-ego the ego the it'd you know
there's there's a movement in the 90s
and neuroscience to talk about you know
the reptilian brain the mammal brain and
the Neo core we keep rediscovering this
platonic division the Plato had an
interesting idea
[Music]
he said you know what the man can learn
the man is capable of grasping theory
abstract symbolic representation of the
case now the lion really isn't capable
of theory but what the lion can be do is
the lion can be trained you can use your
reason to train your lion how do you do
this well this is this is this is where
Socrates is so relevant right and this
is this is why Plato writes dialogues
because what Socrates did was he took
reason into the social arena
Socrates goes into the marketplace and
dialogues with people there's this
social interaction is happening and the
social interaction is being read to
rational reflection and to inspiring
people to try and overcome
self-deception and so using a Socratic
method the man can train the lion and
then the man and the lion together can
tame the monster not kill it
but tame it and what you want is you
want that keep that teaching of the man
the training of the line and the taming
of the monster so that something happens
you reduce as much as possible the inner
conflict so this is like for Plato Plato
describes wisdom as an internal justice
within the psyche in which the man has
been taught the line has been trained
and that their monster has been tamed so
they can get along together as much as
is possible since this is what's known
as an optimization strategy right if I
let the monster rule everything else
shrinks to a minimum what you want is
you want the
coordination of the parts of the psyche
so that each can live as much as it
possibly can without putting the other
two in danger when you can get that
inner harmony that optimal relation so
each is living is that much as it can
without putting the other ones in danger
this mutuality of the most existence
this is for Plato this is to experience
a fullness of being this is to be as
fully alive as you possibly can be
it is also to expend experience a kind
of peace because your inner conflict has
dropped so this is this is very powerful
one of one of your meta drives in
addition to all the drives people have
they want to have whatever they're
having without inner conflict they want
to be at peace with themselves now this
of course is a powerful meta Drive that
you can tap into because if you have a
strong drive within you to get this
inner justice to realize wisdom to get
this fullness of being then I can appeal
to it I can appeal to it Socratic aliy
but notice that this has this has this
has an important component to it because
as I reduce inner conflict my
self-deception goes down and as I reduce
my inner conflict I'm less egocentric
both of these things are making me more
in touch with reality so I'm reducing
inner conflict
but the effect that's having is right
I'm getting a clearer vision of reality
because my self-deception an egocentric
egocentrism is going down now that
matters because as we've seen before you
want to be in touch with reality
you have a meta Drive philosophers have
various thought experiments for talking
about this no one else sometimes do with
students is I'll say imagine the
following right you go home one day and
your parents say
I'll come won't come here I want to show
you something when you say what and they
take you to this hallway that you've
walked out a thousand times before and
they they press on a part on the wall
that for you is never meant anything and
when they press a door opens and there's
a room in there and there's TV screens
and there's video tape and there's
pictures of you at all stages of your
life and then they say the following to
you just before you were born nine
months before you were born we were
hired by the government to have you this
is part of an experiment the government
gave us scripts to memorize and we did
this as we write as a part of a
government experiment experiment we
don't actually love you or care about
you at all we've just been following the
script doing what we've been doing
because the government has hired us to
do this and what but we're obligated now
that you've turned 21 or whatever to
tell you the truth we don't care about
you now we still have to keep doing this
when we'll leave the room we can forget
all about this if you want right and
we'll just say that we what we've always
said we'll tell you how much we love you
we'll make sure that your needs are met
just know right now that none of that is
how we truly feel okay now ask people
how would you feel and they'd go well
I'd be devastated but but I say but
nothing's changed they're gonna still
say all the same words to you they're
still gonna treat you exactly the same
way and what people say is well it's no
longer real here's another thing I'll
deal with people I'll say
how many of you are in satisfying
personal relationships quite a few
people put up their hands and then I'll
say how many of you would want to know
that your partner was cheating on you
even if that meant the destruction of
your relationship almost everybody puts
their hand up they're willing to destroy
this relationship that's giving them so
much happiness because they don't want
it to be fake they want it to be real
and we'll talk a lot we'll talk later
about why this need to be real is so
important but I want you to understand
what Plato is talking about here notice
that two of your most important meta
drives are being met in the Platonic
model you're reducing inner conflict and
you're becoming more in touch with
reality now that that feeds on itself in
an important way I get better on picking
up on real patterns in the world my
skill at picking up on real patterns is
improved because I get a clearer vision
I get better at tracking real patterns
right but what does that mean well as I
start to get more inner peace I start to
be able to pick up on real patterns I
get the skill the vision ability but of
course what I can do is I can apply that
to myself
Socratic self-knowledge as I get better
at picking up on real patterns I can
apply that to myself I can get better
knowledge of myself as I get better
knowledge of myself I can better teach
the man when you to be a good teacher
you have to know your student better as
I get better knowledge of myself I can
teach the man I can better train the
lion I can better tame the monster so
notice what's happening here
I improve a little bit my skill at
picking up on real patterns I use that
skill on myself to increase my
self-knowledge and get better patterns
which means I reduce my inner conflict
as my inner conflict goes down I get a
clearer vision of reality as I get a
clearer vision of reality I get better
at picking up on real patterns which
means I improve myself knowledge which
means I reduce my inner conflict and you
see what happens this starts to spin
like this these two sides feed into each
other and reinforce each other and
improve each other and this is wonderful
for you because you're becoming less
inner conflicted and you're coming more
in contact with reality now Plato has a
famous story a parable a myth in the
sense that I'm talking about in this
court in this series it's called the
parable or the myth of the cave and it's
a way of talking about this the
relationship between these things notice
two things here you need to remember
this notice how much self transformation
and getting more in contact with the
world are interconnected this is
participatory lower knowing I'm not over
here as an impartial impassive sorry
impart impartial passive observer just
forming true beliefs about this I have
to change myself in order to see the
world and then the world changes and
then that puts a demand on me to change
myself and as I change myself the world
discloses itself in a new way and so on
and so forth
this is participatory knowing I'm not
just changing my mind this is not just
knowing with my mind this is knowing
with the very machinery of my self
now what's plato's myth so here's the
surface right pathway going down
all right that leads into this inner
cavern right there's a fire here alright
there's people chained to chairs so all
they can do is look at the back of the
cave then there's other people walking
in front of the fire and it's casting
shadows onto the cave because of the
firelight and they're hearing the echoes
and what Plato says is people take the
shadows and the echoes to be the real
things because they're chained they're
caught up but what happens is an
individual gets free and what does that
individual do that individual turns and
sees the fire and that allows them to
realize that the shadows and the echoes
aren't the real things the shadows and
echoes and what happens is the person's
ability to notice the real patterns as
opposed to the merely correlational
patterns is changed remember we talked
about that people start to see they
start to realize oh these are what real
patterns feel like as opposed to what I
thought was real you get the taste for
reality development and that taste means
they start to look around and explore
and then they realize there's a path
there's light coming through it and then
they start a journey upward now notice
how this journey works when they take a
step forward they're blinded by the
light and they have to wait they have to
wait for their eyes to adjust the self
has to be transformed and then once the
eyes have adjusted they can see how to
go and then they take another step and
then they're blinded again and there's
this slow process and Plato keep talking
about at various stages they have to
stop because they're blinded and then
they adjust and then they gain the
ability to see where they couldn't see
before it's this participatory
transformation
I talked about it and eventually you
come up here and they look around right
and what what are they looking for they
want to see the source of the real light
the light that's making them allowing
them to pick up on the real patterns
where is this light that shows the
reality of things coming from and not
only is it showing the reality of things
this light is the source of the life of
things where is this source of
understanding and life and if they look
around and of course they glimpse
because I can't stare at it directly the
Sun and it's overwhelming it's beyond
their comprehension but they see it and
it that fills them or they're kind of
off and of course what they do is they
go back down into the tunnel rapidly
right and they get here and they try to
tell their fellow prisoners what they
saw but of course they're stumbling
around because their eyes don't work
anymore in that darkness and they're
saying things that don't make absolutely
no sense to these people and so they
ridicule them and if they could they
would kill that individual and of course
this is an allusion to Socrates now
first of all notice that contrary to
what people think enlightenment is not
just an Eastern idea this is a myth of
enlightenment of coming into the light
it's a myth of self transcendence and
self transformation it's a myth of
coming and I mean myth in the sense that
we've been talking about it's a parable
of coming in to greater and greater
contact with reality to see notice the
story is right you pick up on real
patterns that challenges you it sort of
blinds you and then you transform to
pick them up and then you're enabled to
move forward then you confront those
real patterns again and you're doing
that cycle that I talked about there's a
Greek word for this ascent called
an agog a and a GOG II this is the
anagogical
or the anagogical aspect of Plato's idea
notice what he's doing he's taking the
you know the movement between the
illusory world and the real world and
he's turning it into this account of how
you can make your lives rationally more
meaningful you can become more fully
alive and more at peace in conjunction
in concert with you coming more and more
in contact with the real patterns that
make sense of reality you can satisfy in
a mutually supporting fashion your
desire your Metta drive for inner peace
and your Metta drive to be in contact
with reality this is what Plato calls
wisdom a fullness of being we become
more and more real or self ourselves as
become more and more at peace so that we
can more and more realize the real
patterns we conform ourselves more and
more to reality and you may say this is
kind of a crazy story is it is it
because here's a story from 1999 there's
all these people and they're trapped in
a world of shadows and unreality it's
called the matrix and they need to wake
up and be welcomed to the real world and
the character that's in there is neo
from Neoplatonism the new man people
flock to that movie and all it is is
this with some great martial arts and
some interesting science-fiction special
effects this parable this is what I mean
about a myth this isn't a story from the
past right the reason why you go to The
Matrix and people still watch it and
talk about it is because it's a myth it
seems to you it speaks to you now
because it talks about perennial
problems that you face problems of the
psyche being in conflict with each other
the problem of being caught up in
illusion out of touch with reality and
it presents the possibility of
liberation and self transcendence and a
fullness an enhanced meaning in life
it's a myth of wisdom that is perennial
II relevant because it's not about the
past it's about what's happening in you
right here right now
I want you to notice a couple things
about this I want you to notice first
how reason and spirituality are not
opposed to each other here there
inseparably bound together I want you to
notice how Plato is putting Socrates the
Socratic project is Socrates is what how
you you know get the man to teach the
lion how you get to realize your own
foolishness with Pythagoras because
here's right the self transcendence the
rising above yourself the radical
transformation of your consciousness and
cognition that Pythagoras talks so much
about now this is such an entrancing and
enriching and empowering myth a
perennial parable that it's going to
beat the constant refrain throughout the
West people are going to be coming back
to it again and again and again
and I want to talk now more about the
Pythagorean side of Plato just to bring
out a few things so Plato talks about
like he uses a term I dass and that gets
translated into the word form and when
people hear the word form their shape it
also gets translated into the word idea
when they hear idea they think of
concept or an idea in your head that's
not what Plato means the we need he's
using that words it's much closer to our
word like a paradigm II he's using a
word to talk about the real patterns
that we're discovering in reality now
there's an interesting thing about these
real patterns they're both the access
the pathway we have to understanding
something the pathway we have for
getting at the reality of something
because that's those are the real
patterns but they're not just the
affordance of our knowing the real
patterns are also what makes something
be what it is so
this is work also from the psychology of
concepts and how people understand
things well you ask people what a bird
is they'll say the following oh yeah
well I know what a bird is right it has
wings feathers a beak and it flies there
you go that's a bird they give you
what's called a feature list and then
you think that and then you can get
involved in a very long process which i
think is largely been something of a
mistake we'll come back to this no not
code totally because it's important in
science but of thinking that the way I
understand something is by having a
definition of it in terms of the correct
features now there's a problem with this
although people believe that this is how
they know what a bird is they're
mistaken in an important sense because I
could satisfy this definition in the
following way I could put a couple wings
on this table a bunch of feathers a beak
and then throw it all up in the air have
wings because in flight do I have a bird
no I don't I have a bloody mess
because what's missing is something more
important what's missing is the
structural functional organization the
way all those things hang together the
way they're structured together so that
the bird functions as a whole what's
missing from this is the structural
functional organization that makes the
whole greater than the sum of its parts
the Germans have a great word for this
Gestalt in English we don't the Greeks
have a good word for this is the word
logos although a word that's being
discussed a lot today I think it needs
to be discussed a little bit more
carefully now here's the thing I want
you to realize member we talked about
how you pick up on real patterns and a
lot of those patterns you're not picking
up an explicit sense you know what a
bird is you have some sense of the logos
of it but if I ask you what is that
logos what is the structural functional
organization and most of that most of
what makes a bird a bird is found in
that logos but if I ask you what is the
locus of a bird how do these all
structure together so they function as a
whole in which the whole transcends
simply an accumulation of it you can't
tell me that's what the research shows
in fact you can't tell me your grasp is
intuitive so notice something very
interesting here you often have an
intuitive grasp of the logos of things
and the logos is form what form doesn't
mean shape form means something more
like formula it means the structural
functional organization and that form
that logos is not only how the thing is
right integrated together it's how your
mind can be integrated with it
member this logos this real pattern is
not only how you know something but it's
also the pattern that makes it be what
it is so this is a very different idea
of knowing you thought already in the
myth of the cave but when I really know
something I cut I come form to it I
become like it in some important way I
get in my mind the same real pattern
that's in the thing because that real
pattern is what allows me to come to
know the thing
and to enter into that reciprocal
realization with it now this is going to
be an important idea this is an idea
that's going to be taken up by Plato's
greatest disciple somebody we're going
to talk about next time when we're
together and that's Aristotle thank you
very much for your time
[Music]
you
you