[Music]
so Jordan you wrote a piece a
situational assessment in the wake of
the Trump election that went kind of
viral and that's what I'd like to do is
kind of recap some of what you've talked
about in your latest one the 2019 and
see whether the overview that you put
forward at the time of the Trump
election that it was gonna be a
revolutionary or it was already a
revolutionary war and that this was
about the different phases of the
insurgency versus the existing structure
what you've called the blue church and
if so where are we in that in that frame
well I think it since I went ahead in
2018-2019 ask that question and answer
that question in the affirmative I'm
gonna go ahead and stick to my guns and
say yes taking a look at the prevent I
would just take the event of the Trump
election and endeavouring to make sense
of what was going on in the context that
particular event I'm coming out of the
perspective that it's it's taking place
in a larger context so within that
larger context I can take a look at what
that particular ban say hmm there's some
things that I noticed that I would like
to point attention to and in that
pointing attention to identified four
things that are calling I was gone front
so I used the metaphor of war and the
proposition was that in fact it was
really more than a metaphor that perhaps
we're actually experiencing something
that is a closer to war than say
politics they have to reference your own
closets to go deep on that notion so in
the context of there being something
akin to a war going on and what might
that would look like identified four
distinct fronts that if you were to
watch those fronts you might get a
better sense of what's happening and
maybe even a better way of making
choices of acting and the Front's had to
do with one relationship was a
relationship between the the media the
the mass media and the emergent media
another front had to do with the
relationship to as I was calling the
insurgency in the deep state
the next front had to do
with globalism and the relationship
between globalism and what next question
mark and then the last had to do with
this conflict of the cultural level that
I identified as being between something
called the blue church and then
something that I was naming the red
religion and if you would call which I'm
sure you do I sort of found those terms
sitting out on a in Reddit and said
those are really good terms from what's
being described here and particularly
like the nuance between Church and
religion that many people sort of gloss
over so if you walk down those fronts
and they're obviously related to each
other cuz it's a war so they're part of
a larger complex if you look at the
first front from 2016 to two
contemporary I think it's not
particularly obscure that it's a front
that the notion of was the fake news as
the enemy of the people is now there has
been an explicit statement which wasn't
in 2016 and that evolution has continued
and the notion of there being a
antipathy a natural intrinsic deep
separation and conflict between
something the mainstream media whatever
we may consider that to be and something
else this notion of the insurgency
whatever may think that is I think is to
be perfectly frank quite obvious there's
certainly something going on there now
that by itself may not be in fact fully
disruptive but the notion that you
started now get real salvos being fired
across this divide and the degree to
which the underlying legitimacy of the
mainstream media has now been quite
significantly undermined I mean I would
say that the the amount of legitimacy
that had in say Rush Limbaugh followers
in the late 90s I think has moved into
sort of 55% of the population like it's
assumed to be biased deeply deeply
biased with an agenda and now it's
assumed to be biased and incompetent
it's not a very solid foundation of how
much to build something so I also
predict that this war is more that's
going to go this way now
in the larger context of course the
frame is that there's many many
different things that are going on that
are deeper than what we're seeing and
that we if you look at the deeper stock
to really make sense what's happening
and one of the things that I pointed out
in that in that particular series was
this notion of media the way the
different media generate different
landscapes upon which these kinds of
conflicts can occur in the metaphor of
are you fighting in the desert are you
fighting in the jungle and if a certain
medium that produces jungles is replaced
by a meeting that produces deserts then
people who are optimized for jungle
warfare gonna find themselves in a
desert are gonna be in deep trouble
right so just watch what's happening
underneath and then see as the battle
ships and the proposition of course is
that a big piece of what's happening a
very big piece after that's not the
dominant these but a big piece is this
transition between centralized broadcast
linear media most notably television to
decentralized symmetric oftentimes non
linear or non what is it called not
temporally continuous media ie what
happens when you see on the internet the
Internet has discontinuous news
different better term for a synchronous
asynchronous so when I'm watching a
television program there's a flow to it
that it's happening moment after moment
and my ability think 1977 to go to the
bathroom and come back I've missed
something there's something that's
happened is objectively in a flow
whereas on the Internet of course that's
not the case I just hit pause or even I
just take clothes come back and hit open
again right so there's a different thing
going on there so you've got very very
very distinct underlying media
topographies and these give rise to
massive shifts in the stuff that happens
on top of them that's the one of the
deep thesis or at least one of the TP
theses that are driving this story so if
you come back up well what is the
insurgency in some sense the insurgency
is people who have figured out how to
use this new medium to accomplish their
ends that's just the equivalent of
you know the vietcong figuring out how
to engage in guerrilla warfare in the
jungles of Vietnam to actually fight to
a standstill the world war ii era ish
american army and that's that kind of
idea so it's an insurgency playing this
new battlefield honed to the new
characteristics of this new environment
playing it's people who are designed to
fight the old war
so it's fait accompli that eventually
this sides going to lose and as we're
watching it happened we can see the
breaks occur and see as the sand keeps
getting swept out from underneath the
wall how does the wall crumble that
makes sense yeah so then you move to the
next stage the next front this is the
front where much more of the energy is
actually taking place from my
perspective that has to do with
something between the deep state and
again the insurgency there's different
language that used to describe it over
over time but here when I when I talk
about the insurgency I want to be clear
that there's a broader sense of that so
there's a concentrated sense the Trump
administration but there's a broader
sense which includes other kinds of
things like in 2019 I called out the IDW
and Qi on our part of that phenomenon
you know the the Donald on reddit is a
part of the insurgency and while is
named after Donald Trump it isn't
causally linked but he doesn't control
it it doesn't control him it's just
happening and I would say it has more
influence and impact and is more fully
of the essence of the insurgency than
the administration itself is for example
so the conflict between the deep state
in the insurgency is of the same sort
except in this case the deep state is
deeper it has a lot more going on a lot
more capacity a lot more degrees of
freedom with which to operate and when
it might even say in many senses the
mainstream media that's happening appear
is an aspect ever deeply connected
they're not one-to-one but they're
deeply connected to each other
so here we're talking about a whole
broad category of institutions and
bureaucracies that have the
characteristic of lifers you know people
who work there for 40 years and so they
tend to know each other and when you add
to the the fact that they tend to know
each other because they've just
been living and working the same kind of
place for a long time and had a certain
affiliation with the institutional
structure they're attached to say for
example more than a broader context you
add to that the notion that they
actually have over the past 70 or 80
years begin to develop personal
relationships they marry each other or
they mirror each other siblings and so
there's a meshing as that happens among
the context of this this cluster of
things I'm talking about a place like
Harvard and the relationship between say
Harvard and the State Department there's
a lot of cross-fertilization people
moving back and forth and there's even
situations where a person happens to be
the head of some particular division of
Harvard might be married so there's a
head of a certain division at State
Department this is perfectly normal or
they just travel in similar circles and
have lots of bonds it's a and it's a
consequence this thing the deep state
which has a relationship with
institutions bureaucracies people who
have long term relationships with that
and binding has a consistency to it and
it acts in the world as an agent there
was kind of agenda clip and I proposed
less obviously that the deep stayed in
the insurgence you're also in conflict
that was another major proposition and I
would say that we've seen that and we've
seen in the in the contact of the
Mueller investigation in the penumbra
around it it's gonna be another term
that describes the Russia gate problem
with the terms of disused I don't know
but I'm semantically assuming the word
gate will be attached to it in Russia at
the beginning I believe that the FBI
putting together some notion of what was
it called an insurance policy like this
is just a peek into it's obviously mecca
nations of the sort that will always be
happening it's inevitable people are
doing things they will do things within
the scope of their agency but we've been
watching that play out over a couple of
years and if you have a sense of the way
that these kinds of things tend to play
out historically from my perspective has
kind of been on script thank you you see
the kind of thing happened that you saw
with Russia games and you see with the
music poor emerge and what you haven't
normally
scene is the recipient of that treatment
continued to kind of just Bob above the
surface when there's clearly something
about Trump himself as an individual
that has very you know he makes Slick
Willy look like velcro there's a lack of
friction in him which is notable but
also I point out the concept that the
insurgency because its operating in the
context of this decentralized medium in
a full a very flat graph has what's
called an udder loop that's very rapid
and that means is this is a concept from
military theory or strategy observe
orient decide act and then obvious when
you act you do something in in the world
and then you observe again to see what
happened and the proposition is is that
broadly speaking the more bandwidth your
utter loop has which is say the more
information that say you can push
through the other loop faster both
combined the more a strategic and
capacity you have so more or less
I knew the loop with higher bandwidth
what I'll completely loop with a lower
bandwidth in the proposition is that the
insurgency is tapped into something a
network decentralized collective
intelligence that is running a much much
faster
luta loop than the deep state the deep
state is i think of them just like very
simply the deep state is running 50s
nineteen all the blue Churchill both
well we're gonna go to the blue church
next and the right now I'm just
partitioning them as part of a story of
these things going to deeper deeper
levels so yes but right now we're on the
deep today so we might think of the deep
state is running 1950s era server farms
like you've ever seen with this look
like just big rooms full of ENIAC
machines with tape drives and there's
big rooms and lots of them do them for a
long time and they're controlling all
kinds of like big lumbering robots and
the dinosaur metaphor is quite
appropriate and then the insurgency is
connected to a bunch of fortunately own
kids on cell phones on fortunate that
quite literally and now we have the
metal metaphor it's smaller and has less
focused capacity to deliver significant
directed energy but it's
stir and is extremely responsive so as
the deep state sort of winds up and
fires off its its agenda so for example
the concept of fake news if you wind
back the clock actually emerged from the
deep state before it was co-opted by the
insurgency it's a very specific moment
we saw it come out through sort of the
ordinary channels and then what happened
was that the the insurgency co-op's it
and converts it and begins mutating and
so wrapped with it they could just sort
of see the deep state so do i back and
it seals wondering what the hell
happened and the conflict has been
locked since then and of course in the
meantime over the past several years the
deef states been mutating has been
involved in those strategies that don't
work or being dropped is trying to find
new ones and different groups are coming
in to try to form something happening on
this side but it's all still more or
less running the basic code of the deep
state we should just say running the
blue church alright so we'll get there
and then on the insurgency and of course
has also been evolving in mutating and
gathering and so the IDW emerges and q
and on emerge and from my perspective as
examples of something happening more in
alignment with the essence or more in
line with the grassroots characteristic
of the generator function that's coming
up that's the Trump insurgency from my
perspective is a phenomenon kind of like
a cork floating on a wave and the wave
came and it's been radial to right or
actually a surfer riding in a way that's
even better metaphor they've been able
to figure out how to ride that wave and
surf it and show up his head in
directionality an agency on their own
but it's the wave that matters in some
sense we can kind of skip the globalism
pieces to happen that fast I mean I
remember way back in the day when things
like the trans-pacific partnership had a
characteristic of really seriously scary
how the hell are we gonna stop this
fight this kind of a thing and they just
woke up one day and was completely gone
and of course we've seen the a lot of
the machinery of globalism has just been
but I think nafta's gotten is just
amazing the rapidity with which that's
been evaporated and I think that's
largely because it never really
established a strong position
in tozzoli so the globalism was
fundamentally still a American to a
lesser extent EU functioning so as the
forces of decentralization have been
happening at this level this doesn't
have a whole lot of its own coherency in
so I continue to believe that that will
continue to evolve and of course that's
an area that has anyone who understands
the history and political theory is
reasonably concerned because any shift
from a hegemony to a multipolar
structure generally goes badly doesn't
always but generally goes badly but
doesn't mean that multipolar structures
aren't themselves able to achieve
stability over periods of time but what
it does mean is that the shift is tricky
so to the degree to which we are
watching something where the notion of
an American hegemony which was in some
sense showing up as globalism the
neoliberal globalist insist is breaking
down and there's a move towards
multipolar nationalism or something else
by the way and I don't think that's
stable we're in a moment of significant
potential risk in small movements if
anybody decides they want to reach for
the brass ring then it creates a cascade
of conflict so then we have the last
front which is the culture front the
culture of war and here I talked about
the blue church in its specificity and
my proposition is the blue church is
deeper than these other ones so it's
it's closer to the center of what's
happening and on the other side now I've
talked about the red religion which is
deeper than the insurgency it's closer
to the essence of what's happening and
both of these are happening at the level
of culture so here we have to actually
think about how culture manifests itself
up into causation but maybe we'll get
there in a second so just for clarity
we're talking about the blue church what
I'm talking about or what I proposed
that means is a certain
way that culture is able to be and do in
a context so the blue church is a given
very specific instantiation of this kind
of thing in the essay I wrote about the
blue church in particular I called out
for example the Victorian consensus the
Victorian synthesis as something of the
same kind some kind of organism a
cultural organism if you'd like and that
over the period between World War one
through the end of World War two that
collapsed and a new one formed and
there's a whole bunch of things that go
inside that box but broadly speaking you
have things like how media technologies
enable groups large groups of people to
be able to make sense together make
choices to get there an act effectively
together right so basically forming a
noodle loop as a group and the blue
church was that sort of thing and its
characteristic had to do with this sense
of broadcast a sense of whether you're
talking about in school there's a
student so there's a teacher and there's
a bunch of students so asymmetry and
passivity one you know directionality so
agency lives in the center in the
broadcaster and reception lives in the
in the receiver and there's a lot more
receivers that there are broadcasters
you see that basic topology show up over
and over and over again over the period
of the second half of the 20th century
and the blue church is in some sense
built around that or uses that it's a
primary components mean it's like the
skeleton the muscles of the blue church
are that and we've talked about the who
like who are who are characteristic
representatives of blue church or are
become Archbishop's in the church and
again somebody like Harvard an entity
like Harvard would be an example the
State Department would be an example
particularly like Kennedy's State
Department would be an example you can
see like how much those things connect a
sense of meritocratic verticality NASA
is an example of a blue church
organization meritocratic verticality
and
then GE like Six Sigma highly efficient
effective bureaucratic actuation down
and that's that kind of a structure GE
be a classic example so notice that a
lot of these examples are 1970s right
the blue church was at its highest and
is most clear pristine in the late
seventies and has been in the process of
decline since then decline both because
these kinds of systems have a built in
like a rust or atherosclerosis they
become burdensome in enough himself and
become less efficient just on their own
they're also subject to various forms of
corruption the longer they're around and
in this case the underlying basis the
the source of a lot of the structure of
the blue church a broadcast media has
shifted and so the blue church is
suffering for three distinct maladies
simultaneously and it's shifted to this
new place right so we have something
where we have an old mature strong
well-functioning I'm not well
functioning but long functioning
structure the blue church which actuates
for example through the deep state
through the mainstream media that is in
the state of decline and then we have
this new emergent thing the red religion
which is in the state of Ascension
trying to figure out how to do stuff and
I think the developmental metaphor of a
biological organism is quite good if you
take a look at the age you might say
that the blue church is saying in their
mid 80s and they've been smoking and
drinking a bit much so it's not a
healthy eighties and then the red
religion is maybe 14 so that's kind of
that's a good sense of the shape of it
maybe nothing's maybe they're in there
even their late 60s but it's not a
healthy sixties there's something about
that and so so what is the red religion
the red religion is first of all red and
I need to kind of dial in on why it's
red and what that means for long-term
evolution so before we get there and
just talk about religion versus church
and then we'll talk about blue versus
red
the church leanness of the blue church
was most of what i was talking about its
form the way it shows up the balloonist
the content is as far as they can tell a
little bit of just an accident that over
the period of the 20th century when
Beaulieu which in the u.s. kind of
represents the political left and read
the political right ran into each other
and conflicted blue one the culture war
so by the mid eighties blue had won and
it was in the process of them
propagating itself out into the social
field so most of the engines of the blue
church are running blue code we're
loving running blue content they tell do
the stores they have values it's
actually more to the point and while
there was in the 50s for example a red
church that was running red that's more
that's gone and so so now I switch
quickly to the mission of a red religion
religion then come back to redness so
the idea of religion is this idea that
there is less formal structure it's like
the Protestants versus the Catholics
it's a much more of a peer-to-peer
Bottoms Up grassroots spontaneous
formation building up something that
maybe looks like structure but is
actually made of of sand that can fade
right back and go back out into the into
the dust and this of course is the
natural way that organization will
happen in something like the Internet
and something like a asynchronous
symmetric decentralized and by the way
digital communications medium and so you
see the mean wars our great example I
mean wars in the blue church look like
Madison Avenue and they look like a
small number of potentially quite
talented individuals trying to figure
out what will sell and maybe using focus
groups to home their message and then
firing it out with a lot of intensity
through all channels
whereas what the meme Wars look like so
the red religion is self-organizing
self-assembling essentially everybody is
participating and they kind of bubble up
and certain one certain means that kind
of vaguely go
the right direction get picked up
mutated replicated disseminated picked
up a new peanut replicated and submitted
and what works is sort of naturally
grasped and felt and evolved in
real-time and by the way in the process
of evolving in real-time Orient's the
tension in the organism towards those
streams that evolve those that one so a
good example would be the NPC meme maybe
from a good NPC name is fantastic I mean
think about it if you watch it and you
can we can we we live in a digital world
you can literally just zoom back the
clock and see it emerge right there was
a tweet from a gamer using the NPC
metaphor don't be an NPC which to gamers
mean something very obvious and simple
and don't be something that is driven by
non-agency that it has by the way sort
of characteristic stupidity and
simplicity to it
they're just run scripts but the because
a lot of people in the read religion
were the way of gamers I think it landed
and then it got picked up and hit it's
stung there was something about it that
generated an effect so it was both on
this side and the red side it was felt
as yep that makes sense that that lands
I get it I kind of croc the essence of
it and then oh these guys don't like it
very much a press press the attack and
so it was a spontaneous formation and
then it spread huge amount of energy was
pointed to figuring out how to modify it
and and and move it into deeper and
deeper levels of effectiveness and by
the way effectiveness in the sense of
like being cool figuring out how to be
the one who innovates the thing that
everybody else picks up oftentimes by
the way anonymously so it's not being
cool and becoming in a centralized point
but I don't know being cool like just
ended in the moment and then also what
is up taken what sticks and does it and
of course as we watch it over a period
of very briefly like two weeks it
dominated dominated the entirety of the
social media environment to the point
that centralized structures like Twitter
had to modify their basic rule structure
and roll out entirely new approaches to
try to combat that thing and of course
this is a classic example of trying to
squat you know a hundred million flies
now whack-a-mole whack-a-mole well like
a fly because there's hundreds of
and they're stinging and okay you just
wiped out the entirety of the npc mean
who cares by the time
Twitter had moved to swipe it the red
religion already moved on to something
else and and the damage was done because
now you remember Junius oranges point
way back in the day when wiki leaks came
out the bureaucracies are already dead
because to the degree to which they are
subject to negative risk from leaks they
basically have two choices
well three they can either just take it
on the chin and then ultimately lose
because they're subject to negative risk
they can endeavor to constrain leaks
which means significally increasing the
internal policing or they can radically
reduce the amount of communication they
engage in and in any one of those three
cases they're shrinking their sphere of
operations dramatically same basic idea
here right the idea is that the loop of
the insurgency is moving so rapidly that
when something like Twitter moves it's
actually hurting itself more than it's
hurting the insurgency and basically the
insurgency is using its capacities to
cause the blue church to punch yourself
in the face over and over again question
that comes up like the insurgency in the
red religion are they synonymous and
also and also because you you mentioned
the IDW like would you identify that as
part of the insurgency great yeah so if
I think about it as like layer cake
layers up the red religion is more basic
than the insurgency the red religion is
at the level of values and the level of
strategy the insurgency is more at the
level of purpose at the level of goals
its endeavoring to do something you may
even say the interest is level of
aesthetic sensibility and so the
insurgency is a manifestation of the red
religion which is itself a manifestation
of just religiousness which I was trying
to describe and in that sense the IDW is
also a manifestation of the same kind of
thing which is to say it's showing up as
a bottoms-up self-organizing structure
that is powered by the wave by the
energy of this new kind of medium with
this new medium makes available
and as such it is a natural ally so you
could say that as part of the insurgency
unconsciously but remember I've made a
distinction between the Trump
administration and this thing down here
which is by definition decentralized all
right so it's not a there's no point on
which you could say that's in charge so
to the degree to which the identity was
doing this kind of thing functionally
and effectively visiter the mass media
then it is acting as part of the
insurgency and it's an expression of
religion and now here's where's get it
gets interesting so this is actually a
really nice point so remember I wanted
to focus on the difference between the
redness and the religionist
piece so the redness is again kind of a
historical artifact red was the loser of
the last war so they weren't distracted
by trying to run old machinery they
didn't have any old machinery to run
they were given the beautiful
opportunity to have to learn new things
and so the value structures the
sensibility the even the dispositional
types who were disempowered by the loss
of the culture war of the 20th century
found themselves in a evolutionary under
evolutionary pressure and so they
therefore more rapidly figured out how
to begin playing the game in this new
space they playing the religion game as
opposed to the church game playing the
network game as opposed to the broadcast
game and I should mention by the way
they also evolved mimetic defense
mechanisms they the same tools that had
been used in the cultural wars the 20th
century calling someone a racist for
example which still kind of decimates
people who are from the 20th century has
very little impact on people who are
truly coming from the grass like 4chan
doesn't care at all like it doesn't have
any impact at all so that's true
distinct things like one has to do with
the semantic emotional language games
that happen and the other one has to do
with the OODA loop organizing collective
intelligence piece and the redness of
the red religion has to do with the
artifact of a particular dispositional
group kinds of people with backgrounds
and values found themselves having to
figure out how to new use new tools
they figured out how to use those new
tools and then began to have some
success initially and by the way in
gamergate as far as I can tell there are
obviously than earlier examples that was
the first time that I think we really
saw the red religion had a certain
self-consciousness or a win a win a
fight it's probably better put and
notice that they want to fight
surprisingly so this makes the question
of could it be a blue religion and of
course does even need to be red or blue
because many senses the notion of
written blue is itself an artifact of
kind of the landscape of the past
century the last two centuries something
like that means if you go back far
enough that ideas that make a whole lot
of sense maybe for 50,000 years but at
some point it dissolves back into the
the basics of humaneness so obviously
there could be a blue religion it's sort
of a question and then 2019 I pointed
out the fact that perhaps with AOC we're
beginning to see the emergence of that
right so there's a blue content blue
narrative blue story blue values showing
up expressing themselves but now
expressing them solving away which is
very very I was a obviously different
than the blue church and so AOC and
Nancy's an insurgent in the Democratic
and yeah in blue she's a blue insurgency
and operating in the same sensibility as
the red but because of the different
valence of the typology of blue the
dispositions the values the aesthetics
and in the relationships in the position
where the action happened actually
happened to be it shows up differently
and will continue to evolve different
it's a different kind of organism in
this environment so sort of the
difference between I don't know a Jaguar
and a crocodile both are predators both
happen to live in the rainforest they're
quite different cuz they have different
origin stories and neither will do well
in the desert and both are very
effective in their particular sub niche
of the broader ecosystem ok so then we
can kind of move to the last piece when
I wrote was writing those pieces I
actually brought it for fronts and then
line and then here's the deeper story so
now we're kind of
deeper story then of course the deeper
story is all of the superstructure that
we're talking about even culture with
certainly media and bureaucratic
institutions and globalism and
particular political parties and
particular political candidates are in
many ways ephemera there are they're
they're dust in the wind in the context
of the bigger movements that are
happening underneath and me and
historically we've seen this happen many
times I think a nice one happens to be
the kind of 15th 16th century transition
around the Gutenberg Bible if you want
to just use media as one line right the
shift of the the church in the classic
sense to everything that followed after
science capitalism the nation-state and
the line that happened there you know
all the hot stuff changed your feudalism
shifted to a completely different
political structure economic political
structure your religion shifted from
Catholic meaning truly universal to
meaning one among many competing
narratives and stories and structures
and etc and even underlying human
concepts of the nature of lived reality
you know the Copernican revolution
happened in that context the Darwinian
revolution happened in that contact I
suppose massive shifts are happening and
we're in a circumstance that is at least
as if not more significant in terms of
the magnitude of the shift from this
broadcast style to this decentralizing
style media and therefore the culture
that will emerge on top of it and
therefore the institutional structures
economics political structures that will
emerge on top of that is going to
undergo at least as much of a shift
alright so looking at a massive change
and the changes they were seeing up here
are just kind of evidence of it yeah if
you're pulling some sort of boat through
the water and all you can see the boats
invisible so all you can see is the
waves we're seeing those are the waves
and then even the bow waves and we're
looking at okay here's the boat that's
making them and so for example in this
kind of context red and blue begin to
become very problematic you start to see
a lot more
ability of smaller chunks and we're
already seeing that like we're seeing
for example the the balkanization of
blue which is sort of naturally going to
balkanize anyway but showing up as
having lots and lots of little sub
communities that are perhaps looking to
find coherence in and of themselves and
there's a really nice essay that was
written culture war two dot oh I think
so Peter Lindbergh where he just
enumerated a list of like 13 or 15 of
them and how they showed up and some
scenes mimetic tribes a city called them
yeah it's a very nice term which is
hilarious of course because it begs the
question of what does me anything mean
to you and what mimetic tribe you're in
will in some sense answer that question
so we start getting some very
interesting self referentiality of
course that's where we are the you know
the postmodern condition all the way
down and in so my proposition and in
fact my prediction is is that the story
that we're watching is going to be a
story that continues to see an
increasing movement into balkanization
and fractionating but fractionating at
the level below culture freshening at
the level of how we make sense of
reality at all infractions the level of
how we collaborate and come together as
groups of people at all and by the way
fractioning in these you know massive
proliferation of agency many many many
different ways to actually shift and
change reality there will be mutating
evolving at a accelerating pace because
to the degree to which we have one shift
the shift from broadcast to decentralize
notice also the shift to decentralize
carries with it is both a product of and
an accelerant of technological
innovation collective intelligence that
has the capacity to change its own
environment so this move is not just
sort of a move from A to B it's a move
from A to B miss where B is actually a
dynamic process that is implicit ly
accelerating and so it's moving was kind
of like static to accelerating and it's
a very different gig or to say velocity
to accelerating feudalism to velocity to
acceleration the things is actually
group call acceleration ist's who I
don't know very well but I measured
just recapitulated certain things that
they believe and so well I mean once you
kind of settle there and say well where
does that imply it implies a lot and
okay we can kind of go for that if you'd
like but that's the end of that story
that situational assessment ends there
and going back to sort of the blue
church and there's a sort of sense in in
the article it's breaking down
increasingly quickly I mean the
Covington story was a real was a real
moment where I think a lot of people
sort of looked at the media and thought
wow it's the picture that's being
painted by the media is so off and so
clearly dysfunctional but you date it a
little bit further back you dated to the
Cavanaugh hearing I do yeah I my sense
was that was kind of the the last ride
of the blue church an effort to bring
full churchly power to bear on a thing
that is this topic and subject of
churchly capacity Supreme Court justice
I mean there's very few objects that are
more centralized and more concrete you
know we're talking about a if the
metaphor is the blue church has the
feeling of like a big heavyweight boxer
who can punch hard this is somebody
who's standing there with their chin
punch and what happened they had to
actually shift their agency into the
blue insurgency so at that moment the
blue church did the thing that happens
all the time if you look at politically
they brought in the mercenaries they
brought in the the folks who are not
part of their church see structure
intrinsically as allies but if you watch
what happening Cavanagh all hell broke
loose at the church something was not in
charge they did not control the
narrative which is kind of their thing
and and they lost but the losing wasn't
what matter what mattered was they had
to give power they had to actually give
the game to a different kind of force
begin to explain us what was the force
um see that
the hashtag resists hashtag me too which
are much more of the blue insurgency
John Robert stack has sped quite
specifically from his point of view you
have the insurgency and then you have
hashtag resist right and these are two
blue red and they're coming from the
same source in energy and in my point of
view happens to be that there's a lot of
threads going on but I wouldn't disagree
and so what ended up happening was they
they move this from the declarant it's
Thomas situation that dynamic to a
dynamic that suddenly was happening in
real-time in public on social media and
was being not just fueled but then
driven by the energy of the grassroots
coming up just like me more fair that I
described before the stories that were
emerging were happening from the bottom
up and they were being upregulated in a
decentralized fashion and to some extent
and somewhat clumsily
and awkwardly the the people in the
church you know Nancy Pelosi and mister
lady from California so obsolete that I
can't I don't even bother to store her
name anymore she was recently in another
mean where she told a bunch of kids
Dianne Feinstein yeah Dianne Feinstein
like very clumsily trying to imagine
that they were steering this ship but
obviously not at all
they were on the other side of the
waterfall riding the turbulence and it
didn't take them where they wanted it to
go do you have a sense that the the blue
church broke decisively during Kavanagh
and then covington for example was was
the flailing around of a broken sense
making system yes was to be sure i think
the metaphor is over nietzsche actually
had this really great quote where he
talked about the idea that you know
buddha died and they should have shadow
for a hundred years something along
those lines the the or the idea that i
remember as a kid hearing this story
that like a dinosaur would die but
because its brain was so small and far
away from the body that it wouldn't even
know it was dead
for like some meaningful amount of time
something like that the blue church the
back is broken it is no longer a vital
living homeostatic organism but it still
has a lot of energy right so it's
flailing is a good term
it's actuated in capacity it's ooodle
ooodle and so it's going to increasingly
actually a really good example here
would be a drunken fighter yeah so at
Cavan I reach that threshold point where
it's actually a drunkard at a bar before
where the reason keeps drinking where
it's no longer actually in control of
its actions it suddenly unconsciously
reacting to the environment and it
decides it's a really good idea to try
to punch the bouncer and that's that's
Cavanaugh and then and then it drinks
some more it's now bleary-eyed and it's
swinging wildly and as events are coming
at it its responses are increasingly
obviously what they are and a lot of the
blue church's power lives in fantasy
remember television has this
characteristic of creating a fantastic
Sensibility we project ourselves into a
world that is not actually the world
that we're in right for me to believe
that I am watching what's happening in
the video has a feeling of it being
present but you reach for and you touch
the screen you don't touch the face of
the person that's not 3d in reality and
of course even more characteristically
I'm watching The Avengers which is
really really not reality and yet
particularly from contemporary humans
weaned on that from childhood
it maybe feels more real than the real
reality I said the blue church a lot of
it is based upon that ability to invoke
an instinct and a habit of fantasy to
tell a story to everybody orient their
attention and choice-making based upon a
really well told story and it's kind of
you know the the the the king is
obviously not clothed the story no
longer has stickiness it's obviously a
story there's two obviously a narrative
this being created and forced down your
throats through channels that are no
longer even particularly effective at
doing it and someone's silly and it's
you know the best metaphor is actually
that awesome show I believe it was
Anderson Cooper but I'm not sure
and hurricane where you have an image of
him standing there like holding the
microphone and the wind's blowing and
he's like up to his chin in the water
and then you realize that it's all a
fake if the whole thing's a setup
there's like two people walking by and
rain boots the winds not even blowing
very hard right you're like holy to
set this is the news trying to show me
an actual event in reality over here and
they are boldface idli just creating a
movie set okay great
now I know where we stand what's reality
really looked like kind of like that so
that's the shift it's the consciousness
of that being the case and the instincts
that habit of okay every single time I
encounter anything vaguely churchly I
have to assume that it's an extremely
deliberate intent to manipulate and
probably coordinated in some fashion
you can obviously come up here so Eric
Weinstein called kayfabe yeah yeah
although it's not clear to me that it's
kayfabe in the sense then it's not
quitting me the blue church knows
they're faking
they may have you know they've been
drinking their own kool-aid they seem to
believe a lot of their own stories which
is weird because they're also clearly
you know making things up so hard to say
but somebody somewhere is playing
kayfabe on that side of the story so
then when you get to something like you
and on all right so what happens with
cue and on is that if you come at it
with a perspective particularly come up
with a blue church perspective it's
either gonna look like so just to just
to someone who maybe doesn't know what
cue and on is can we just recap exactly
what it is it's an alternative narrative
about so it's kind of a either a
conspiracy theory or an alternative
narrative about what's going on that is
being sort of generated by either
someone or some group of people on the
Internet yeah mr. Farrow circulation the
way I would say it is there's a place on
the internet called 4chan and it has a
characteristic of being both ephemeral
and anonymous meaning that posts are
made text images and they are attached
to have truly anonymous identity there's
no particular way of finding out who it
is and there's an ethos of having I'm
not trying to tell people that you are
somebody and
it's on these boards that have a finite
number of potential posts and and once
the board is done the board is done and
a whole new board has to be created so
there's a ephemeral and anonymous
character to this place what should you
say it's really close to the essence of
the kind of stuff that gives rise to
this religion or this decentralized
Network I'm talking about and October of
2018 I think you know 2017 supposed to
show that and that board has all kinds
of crazy on it all the time it's
sort of known for just being crazy
all the time
but some post showed up that claimed to
be having a particular inside knowledge
about what was going on and in time
frame by the way where what was going on
was quite confusing to a lot of people
and had a an aesthetic of asking
questions provocative questions as
opposed to giving answers and telling
stories and medically remember this idea
of the red religion identifies and up
regulates things from the bottom up this
kind of worked some attention was paid
some people seem to think that was cool
and it got disseminated and then some
more post showed up now of course you
can't ever prove that there's actually
the same person or a group of people
that's whole point synonymous but the
same aesthetic was used and so some
attention was paid to it and then it got
bigger and bigger and then it got kind
of big in that very small well in that
subcommittee this small portion of the
Internet and then there was some pair
all kinds of craziness hard to happen
and it began to percolate out more broad
they started getting called cue anon is
just a term that refers to the fact that
4chan the chants are anonymous and then
a layer a penumbra start gathering
around of interpreters and up regulators
and people who are trying to make their
own name on the basis of this meme and
try to turn themselves into internet
celebrities on the basis of something
else Twitter followers YouTube channels
been again to build around it and if you
look at the center of it the thing that
was going on in the chants there was in
fact in the center of the stream of
questions a narrative or set of Mario's
answers to questions that were begin to
form but notice the interesting invert
instead of it being built around answers
a narrative that was giving you the
answer to the question this is what
happened here it's actually built around
questions that opened up and generated
and
arbitrarily large like a vast panoply of
narratives that's a particularly for the
first six to nine months it was hard to
explain epistemologically unbound like
what could be true wasn't even centered
much less what was true right so the
number of stories are being created was
vast was a huge foam of narrative and
since then over the past six months
kind of like religions do is began to
become more orthodox is more of a here's
the story and has a counter near to feel
to it so that's cueing up so the place
that I think is most interesting is not
it's mature and one might say sort of
desiccated modern current form but
rather what was going on in that first
year or so the point where is exploding
and if you look at that first year so it
looks insane like almost schizophrenic
Lee insane the number of things that
were being proposed in the way they were
being proposed and the rate at which
change was happening was not the kind of
thing that happens in meritocratic
hierarchies and could never possibly
have been handled by a single mind but
it didn't flat part it actually held and
gathered a meaningful amount of people
who put their energy and time into it
and while the signal-to-noise ratio is
pretty low when the noise is high there
was in fact also meaningful signal like
real stuff was figured out and actually
real predictions about future conditions
that were more accurate than was coming
from CNN
we're also done not that hard and it's a
little bar but any of it it actually
happened now the proposition that I'm
making which could be wrong
but the thing that I found most
interesting is that in something like
you and on you're actually witnessing an
even more fundamental version of the
natural form of the collective
intelligence that is down to this new
media environment so if you look at the
IDW the IDW is a little bit like what
happens when the churchly structure
becomes a little like takes it puts it
lets his hair down you know
chill out and be a little bit more
flexible little more open-minded you
come down where's Kunal's coming up and
so if you look at both of them say okay
what's the distance between them that
distance that's the distance that needs
to be covered before the religious
function the new decentralized
collective intelligence to close the gap
all right when something like queuing on
something that's that much flat
spontaneous self-organizing capacity is
able to generate a level of coherent
thinking that Danny Debbie was produced
well then we're on to kind of the other
side of something and if if queuing on
is the first manifestation of a new
collective intelligence what do you
think the next one might look like I
should mention by the way I don't think
it's the first Bitcoin for example is
also a manifestation of the same basic
driver but it's a notable and obviously
very early so I'm what was the question
what's next yes if it's an early
collective intelligence what would what
do you think the next one would look
like and will it be even more virulent
than queuing on as being it will by
definition be more be able to queue it
on if it is not more valence in queue
knowledge not the next one now there's
going to be an intermezzo with lots of
experiments are going to be tried around
the horizon if you look at the queuing
on horizon there's lots of different
ways of thinking about like do you think
about it as a really powerful sigh out
do you think of as a really powerful
propaganda device do you think about as
a really powerful way to gather a lot of
people to do your bidding by
manipulating them or do you think about
it as a really interesting new way to do
collective intelligence and since me
there's lots of different versions of
what might happen inside that space and
I would actually be surprised if we
haven't already if called the children
of queuing on haven't already happened
in the call to bad side covertly there's
likely already been a number of
different experiments trying to figure
out how to extend whatever the hell
happen there into some new kind of
effective tool in the war on
sense-making so the war on sense-making
piece I'd be surprised we haven't seen
something that has learned from Cuba
on the sense-making side like how do we
actually make sense together piece the
most important part is going to be some
level of epistemological maturity that's
going to be the decisive factor and what
I mean by that is being aware of how
since making happens being conscious of
how your own sense making has happened
how you're showing up in terms of sense
making and then being mindful and
deliberate intentional about how one
might go about collaborating in a
decentralized bottoms up experimental
fashion that has a good epistemology
behind it
I think that's the decisive factor so
while there may be some it's quite funny
actually if you used the blockchain as
an example remember you had Bitcoin they
had this kind of cascade of light coins
alt coins there were more less Bitcoin
jr. variations on the theme but they
weren't that interesting if they had a
theorem which was actually a very like a
whole new kind of idea so there may be
kind of alt coins in the queue and on
space but the next thing the next real
decisive innovation that space is going
to be something of this sort something
that has a self-awareness to
epistemological capacity and is bringing
that into its design and do you think
that would emerge from the trans from
the same place that came from that's a
very good question it is not
particularly likely but it is not
impossible this is because the Chan's
are a highly chaotic and very open
environment an artifact capable of
absorbing novelty at a relatively high
rate the individuals who typically spend
time the chance have a relatively
immature epistemological found a
and so as a consequence will not
naturally be attracted in this direction
but if it does gain traction it can grow
because there has to be certain
characteristics of the space where a
collective intelligence could be created
and that doesn't feel like Twitter it
doesn't feel like Facebook it doesn't
feel like that what are the minimum what
what kind of space is required for that
collective intelligence to evolve I mean
the trans is a particularly is a
particularly interesting right petri
dish so you're provoking me indeed
having a little bit of a dialogue around
the nature of how the characteristics of
a medium give rise to certain kinds of
collective intelligence and a detailed
level so for example you can compare the
chance to tumblr and notice the
distinctions and notice how identity
forms in tumblr and notice how social
currency shows up in tumblr and there is
how dare deforms in a chance and how
social currency flows in the chance
they're different right their
characteristics at a low level are
different reddit different Facebook
different and there's the difference
between what happens when you have a
like button and you don't have a like
button even when you have a like button
that has the ability do hearts and
smiley faces and just a thumbs up for
there's these minor differences actually
make a difference in terms of how
collective intelligence naturally forms
in a space so the question you're asking
is actually quite profound what might be
a kind of space that is conducive to
this form of collective intelligence and
the first thing that comes to mind is it
will almost certainly not be purely
virtual because the kind of thing that
we're looking for is not available
intrinsically in the kind of ephemeral
virtual weak links connection that can
happen on the Internet in disembodied
communication
so plausibly at least we're looking at
something which is a are LVR combo
something where you actually have
embodied relationship real-life virtual
reality complex re it's a real live
person personal reality combo that's
able to have the bandwidth of
interaction to explore a piston
illogical novelty well and find ways to
achieve collaboration achieve effective
collective intelligence in a space of
extremely high epistemological
liminality then that can be extended
through virtual means but it seems to me
plausible but very unlikely the
something that this can be formed in a
highly virtual environment and certainly
unlikely for to be formed first they
might be copied once the basic notion
perhaps has been generated you might see
it copied to use software as a metaphor
if you think of let's just make queuing
on version 100 it's not that let's just
normalize there if you look at say
version 1.5 I can see something that's
that would happen in the domain of the
rationalist
epistemology which would have game
theory as a primary basis and therefore
would be allegiance with the the
blockchain community and that would be
able to achieve a very high level of
collective intelligence through virtual
channels you might even consider that it
would be a perfectly viable version to
and it would have a mature epistemology
that would be able to be reasonably
functional in the new place so wouldn't
have a evolving or novel epistemology
that would have a mature one that would
be effective in the context of
decentralized collective intelligence a
little bit like sesame credit if you
know what I'm talking about that the
Chinese social currency structure
topologically these two things would be
roughly identical and so what you would
end up seeing is a potentially very
rapid proliferation of a new form of
collective intelligence the combined a
bit quite quite intelligent and
effective but it would it has a finite
lifespan it would actually achieve a
closure and collapse event and probably
a relatively rapid time like maybe even
new years almost certainly decades and I
said by the way I feel exactly the same
thing about what's happening in China so
I think China is going in that direction
and you should expect to see a
significant increase in collective
intelligence followed by a collapse
difficult to recover from collapse
movement and so to the degree to which
you see something like that emerge in
the coffee analytic tradition the
blockchain crypto space decentralized
but trying to figure how to make sense
from that direction you would see
something of that scheme so it would
have an s-curve the ester would have
significant you'll be a hell of a lot
better than the blue Church so it would
win a lot of ground but it would have a
natural end and collapse in its
lifecycle for reasons that I can explain
if you'd like to that's sort of the
first sense you mentioned in passing the
other day that even in Hollywood there's
a scent I mean there's a look there's a
sense that a lot of us have that we're
kind of running out of either novelty or
running out of like all the
possibilities are being played out in
almost every single medium
simultaneously is that true I mean it
just seems like watching Hollywood films
now that they're increasingly derivative
that just seems to be we're going in
increasingly smaller circles it's
cooking it's very simple when you have a
system that is designed fundamentally to
maneuver people around by manipulating
them at a level of their incentive
structures particular there's no
chemical incentive structures then what
ends up happening is you have you get
more and more competition for for
controlling you buy your dopamine and
serotonin response curves
it gets pretty narrow and it has a
half-life to it and so I have to give
you more I have to give you more it has
to become more pure and more intense and
just run that across every dimension so
it's that curve which by the way is the
same more or less the same curves just
describing but a different domain they
were witnessing in these frameworks so
Hollywood you know every movie has to be
more visceral more melodramatic and more
intense in both of those dimensions you
know we can't just have conflict on
earth we have to accomplished in space
because if comfort especially if
comforts in space of time we have to act
the entire universe has to be up for
grabs and asked me up for grabs in the
loudest possible way imaginable over as
many hours as I can pin your ass to the
seat so that the effect that you used to
get by watching a guy on a table going
like this Lance it's just that it's the
cocaine effect or that's what I used to
call it and is that the same thing with
social media yes it's the same
fundamental dynamic and remember it's a
fundament that's happening two
dimensionally meaning it's happening in
a sense of my ongoing addiction to
Facebook and it's happening in snapchats
desire to move me from Facebook to
snapchat so it's a co-evolutionary
competitive dynamic to yank me around by
my limbic system and where does that go
that ends up playing itself out oh yes
absolutely it's terminal it's not that
big t terminal meaning that it leads
civilization to some sort of hard
collapse and reboot just take a drug
addict just use that as the metaphor you
hit rock bottom you either die or you
have a moment of clarity and you know
start moving in the direction that's
that's what goes in our case
as with a drug-addict it's quite
challenging because the tools that we
use just make sense of what's happening
are the tools that are in fact addicting
us so figuring out what's going on
is particularly challenging when the
things you use to figure out what's
going on are the things that's going on
and so this is why reboots liminality
unplugged is kind of the first step and
I mean unplug not just from like
Facebook
I mean unplug from thinking in the way
that you currently think at all like
reboot the whole thing all the way down
to just kind of sitting around staring
blankly and then very slowly it's fun of
the software metaphor it's perfect
you've ever had your computer system
really seriously jacked by hackers you
have to put things back very carefully
creakle if you actually have to put it
back right we can't just burn to the
ground to get a whole new system because
it's not quite clear whether you have
malware in a particular sub component so
you just have to be very careful just
takes things step back buy back now we
actually have a really nice opportunity
so we have a necessity to go through
this reboot process because they all
aforementioned hacking of our limbic
systems and the co-evolutionary game
theoretic dynamic that means that the
hacking is not going to stop on its own
either the pusher addict is a dynamic
that doesn't have its own like the
pushers never going to be in position as
soon as they give up is another pressure
and so that's that's got its own logic
to it so we've got that we have an
assessment and this is we have to get
off that train but then we have an
opportunity which is because the whole
 world is shifting from one
fundamental way of going about doing
collective intelligence to another it
turns out the entire structure that has
been hacked is obsolete anyhow so we can
move to the new one and the new one is
what the very least is different so a
lot of the old hacks aren't going to
work and this dudes in this new domain
so if you actually allow yourself to
really free your mind and settle into a
very what I call the bottom of the you
which for example Buddhist meditation
gets you into that level of just
emptiness
and then from that place begin to
recreate some new way of making sense in
yourself and then making sense together
with other people you have the advantage
that you are also almost completely
immune to most of the techniques that
come from this previous location it has
a sort of a downside which you can't
watch TV anymore but I guess that's
where it is but there's no point in
watching it anyway if it's all getting
played out and in ever decreasing loops
yeah it's true I mean it's sad it's kind
of like to find out what happened to
Captain America but it is what it is
cool Jordan thank you yeah
[Music]
you
[Music]