welcome to the stola the stoah is a
digital campfire where we go here and
dialogue about what matters most at the
night's edge what's happening now
hi everybody my name is Raven I'm based
in Portland Oregon where I'm involved in
a philosophy community called the
people's colloquium and today I'm super
excited to join with with Peter and the
stoah to bring this event the spirit of
this event and I don't know if other
people have been feeling this while
attending zoom calls where I'm seeing
these faces over and over again and I'm
super curious about the other people who
are attending like the snow events with
me and so this is an opportunity for us
to come together one-on-one and have an
opportunity to meet and connect
individually with people some people
that maybe you've seen and other and
other things at other events and maybe
some people who you've never seen before
I know that I have some family faces in
the audience here and I'm excited for
everybody to meet one another so the way
this is gonna go as Peter and I are
gonna do a demonstration of how the
Socratic dating is going to be there's
some things that we ask of you that we
have that you have your your video on
when you're meeting up with somebody so
that they can see your beautiful faces
and also that yeah you make sure that
your audio is is all set up as well so
we're gonna start by demonstrating a
question and how we're gonna move
through that as well who goes first and
I love all of that kind of etiquette
so so even might be a good time to kind
of provide the heuristics for the kind
of question that we're looking for
and if you're okay I can I can walk them
through it right now yeah that'd be
great
all right so we we created five
heuristics for four questions to keep in
mind about the questions to ask today so
the question that I think would be good
for for this event is to speak to the
mind and to the heart and I'm including
this in the chat box the other thing to
keep in mind is asked ask interested
questions rather than inch
in questions and what I mean by that
there's a term called conversational
narcissism and so an interesting
question is when you ask a question
that's genuinely about wanting to
understand something about the other
person's reality we're an interesting
question kind of shines the light back
on you to show you how smart you are how
clever you are so as a heuristic focus
on asking interested questions ask
open-ended questions instead of yes yes
no questions or questions that lead to
yes/no answers keep your language simple
and concise you know it's about the
person they'll go rambling on with a
question just kind of have a nice and
crisp and then the last thing ask a
question in the spirit of belonging and
connection and this might be a tall
order to get all these don't worry about
it but just kind of feel into those
heuristics and then try to ask a
question that spirit well shall we do a
demo so the way that we're gonna have
this go is the person who's going to act
as Socrates the first question you ask
her that person will choose will be
chosen based on if their name being
earlier in the alphabet so that's just a
really easy way of figuring out who's
gonna go first or second so Peter is P
and so he comes in the alphabet before
me so he's gonna ask questions and then
um we have four minutes per person so
the for the inquire gets to ask the
person for questions for four minutes so
that's uh so then we switch to either
four minutes so forcemeat for first four
minutes is and the balls in my court
right now and the question I'm going to
ask Raven is juicy it's gonna be juicy
 buckle up when was the last time
you really felt someone
okay so this is a this was a really
sweet moment that I had recently and it
was a really sweet zoom moment which
this whole situation is kind of bringing
up all of these interesting social
interactions the other night I was
getting into bed and had a book anti
Oedipus by Deleuze and Guattari that I'm
reading and I zoomed one of my one of my
good friends and we read together in bed
right before bed and it was this like
really beautiful sweet moment I haven't
like read like that with somebody in a
while and it was this blend of like this
kind of like strangeness of our
contemporary situation and also this
like sweet connection like even just
back into childhood of like being in bed
with a book on being abducted and
creating that kind of connection with
somebody so I felt very like very held
and like very much a sense of belonging
in that in that situation my good friend
hmm and um like you said held like like
what exact moment was about it at that
felt had that holding quality to it yeah
I think for me reading aloud is um a
really beautiful experience of like
bringing abstraction like letters into
sound and into my into my like voice and
into my throat and just share that
experience with somebody that I like
have a strong friendship with I was
really like sweet and endearing and it
also just reminded me of of past
experiences like being being with my mom
in bed and her reading books to me and
reading books to my younger brother and
having that alongside this kind of
strange situation of using zoom to for
every social interaction blended both
like the kind of scenario of social
distancing and and coronavirus with this
longstanding I think practice that we
engage in as people where we share our
voices with one another
chair works of literature and stories
that are powerful together so I just
think it was it was just really sweet
bonding moment nice nice so you see what
I did there ask the first question and I
did a follow-up question if there was
still time within the four minutes I
would asked another question yeah and so
now I'm going to reflect the question
back back to Peters so remember exactly
the wording last time you felt somewhere
something yeah when was the last time
you felt yeah and what was coming to
mind is the last intellectual dance
party we had here at the stoah and you I
think you came to the first one and the
second one was even better I thought
actually I said let it go on the dance
floor you know and for people who are
not familiar was like all these
different zoom to people you see people
dancing the zoom thing and then calling
the facilitators just playing a playlist
and telling us that like the
coronavirus and stuff like that so it
was really a nice experience and then
that the calm down at the end he played
this kind of like really soft sweet
music and you asked us to put our hands
on her heart and one hand on her gut and
then just stare into the zoom channel
and just watch everyone and I just felt
like so like incredibly tender in that
moment and just kind of like and
everyone I think some people like
Sarah's and it wasn't that call and it's
like these people were like my Twitter
friends like just abstract tweets at one
point but now we're like feeling
together you know why we're like dancing
during a pandemic I thought that was
quite beautiful what do you think about
like having that come alongside this
embodied experience do you think that
like brought something to the fore that
maybe other situations happen yeah yeah
because you know you're moving your body
and then you got it kind of like you're
worked up and you just kind of feel
yourself more and then I like the thing
that everyone was kind of feeling
something similar that I was feeling
because the music would listen to say
musics within though
the same emotions they're just dancing
doing their own thing they're just kind
of feeling embodied with other people
who are feeling a body just felt really
special amazing thank you for sharing
great so that's our demonstration
hopefully I think that probably made
good sense to people if there is any
questions you can go ahead and throw
them into the chat and we can address
them but unless something so does the
second person always ask the same
question back yes so for this first
round that's what we're gonna do but
things are gonna change up as we move
through different rounds and we'll
describe how the the forum is going to
change this first round so like um yeah
just uh there's going to be three
different rounds and every rounds gonna
have a different question and we're
gonna explain kind of how we're gonna
source that question before the round
begins and for the first round we're
going to give you a question yes the
second question in the chat is will you
be alerting us of time yes so that in
the breakout rooms they'll be a little
alert that will come that will tell you
when you're a minute into your your
section and then to switch over to the
second person so that will pop up and
then also the specific phrasing of the
question will be in the chat yes
so you either spontaneously came up with
that question for me which it's not the
case for the questions that we have for
you go ahead I'll just say you're
welcome
well the alphabetical order to keep
changing too so we're going to keep that
the same and if you come into a
situation where you have like Sally and
Sandra then you just move to the next
letter just so to make it easy for you
don't have to spend there's like this
precious like you know eight minute
period that you have and rather than
spending that time negotiating who is
the first person to go we just thought
we would use this simple heuristic of
whoever's name comes first at the
alphabet so let's stick with that each
round just to keep it simple
yeah I don't see any more questions
coming up and obviously if the first
round you find some hitches then you can
bring up those questions when we come
back to the main room and we'll work
through everything and yeah any feedback
or anything efficacious is super helpful
for us because we're exploring you know
providing this this kind of structure as
well
so yeah let's get started so the first
question for this round and I'm going to
bring it into the chat is what are the
signs that someone really understands
you
what are the signs that someone really
understands you
and we're gonna give everyone a second
to just sit with that question think of
something struggle through some stories
think about some friends
what are the signs that someone really
understands you