and so on a primal level we understand
that part of communicating who we are
and who we are not is based on how we
how we dress ourselves men at really in
any culture we have used appearance to
signal things like status like mastery
courage bravery honor
all these other things that very much
matter to us as men really what it does
is it makes in group or in tribe
communication easier and then it also
makes it easier to identify people who
are extra
[Music]
people are as resilient as you allow
them to be and there is fragile as you
force them to be you cannot have a life
free of hardship it's going to happen
[Music]
[Music]
all right hey Tanner how you doing man
it's jack I'm kind of excited to be here
Jack yeah I'm excited to have you too
you know we first met at the 21
convention I think it wasn't Orland I
wasn't right correct yeah obviously you
know I had heard of you I'm sure that I
had been on your radar but it was fun to
get an opportunity to actually meet face
to face for the first time this year oh
absolutely and that was one of the best
parts about the 21 convention was sort
of not only interacting and touching
base with all the attendees but also
than just meeting all the other speakers
I mean you definitely been on my radar
and I've seen your stuff around because
guys are really promoting you know
really like your work and so they're
promoting it and you know to get a
chance to sit down a person was awesome
and then thing about the 21 convention
that's funny is when people ask me about
it they're like oh well you know what
was a 21 convention about and I said
well it was about all the things you
know that go into being a guy today and
the first subject I always lead with
this you know we talk about fashion what
do you mean fashion I thought it was
gonna be all like you know pick up or
how to workout or how to make money or
whatever but you know fashion is a
essential part of being a self
actualized and sort of independent guy
today and so I always lead with you with
your story and speaking and speaking of
your story you know for people that may
not know you or know your backstory I
would love to hear a little bit about
how you got you know where you where you
are today and sort of how you got there
and what what led you up to this moment
right now where you're you know an
online fashion style and masculinity
expert cool so I've got there's a couple
different threads that all kind of wove
together in order to make this happen
and my appearance has been something
that's been on my radar for a while
especially when I was in the fourth
grade my parents put me in my siblings
into a private school we had to do like
the uniforms and everything and nobody
else in our neighborhood was wearing
uniforms and so I remember getting
severely picked on by my furniture in
the neighborhood or anything and and
then not only that but then it escalated
when I was at a junior high level that I
was very much involved in like the BMX
and the punk rock and the skate scene so
like the antithesis
like the the public or the private
school uniform and I hated praise and
all this kind of stuff and so there's
this crazy dissonance for me that I had
to dress one way and my identity was
routed entirely in a different aesthetic
and all these other ideals and all this
kind of stuff very early on I became
kind of hyper aware of the need to
outwardly project who you are inwardly
and that there needs to be some sort of
consistency and congruence there well
you know that's something that I see
happening with my teenage daughter okay
you know she's starting to sort of
figure out who she is on the inside and
then she's starting to project it to the
outside and you know she's 13 she's
thirteen and a half and up until just
maybe six or eight months ago she was
content wearing just like a leftover
elementary school participation day
t-shirt yeah some middle schools right
right like she didn't she didn't even
care she's just like it's something to
put on my back but right now I can see
when she's starting to develop her own
personal identity and she's starting to
see how her outward appearance also sort
of connects to that so yeah I mean
that's a very relatable story there yeah
one especially I mean anybody can think
back to where they were in high school
especially as a teenager when your
identity is really forming and it's
something that is finally separate from
your parents and your family but it's
who you are as an individual based on
your peers and your friends and high
school is one of those times where
everybody dresses very differently
because of their identity and there's
very intentionally little overlaps so
that you know the stoners that are
different from the jocks are different
from the mathletes who are different
from the choir kids and if they're very
different as sexes because of those very
niche tribes that everybody is involved
with and so on a primal level we
understand that part of communicating
who we are and who we are not is based
on how we are we dress ourselves brave
fascinating so continued Kenny Owens
continue on tell me some more I were at
the BMX punk rock right oh crap now
obviously as I get a little bit older
those though that identity stops
becoming my main and primary identity
you know and I was I was working at a
bank doing loans and it started to
affect my credibility that there's this
you know young early 20s kid who looks
like he's you know still like long
be hair and really baggy stuff and
wearing my belt sideways trying to be
different and unique this way and it
affected my ability to actually make
some progress and so I started to
realize it's like ah I got a dress like
an adult you know on the way is there an
interesting way to be able to do this
and so I started to experiment with
better suiting and things like that
well ventually it turned into writing a
blog especially because what I was
studying at the time was broadcast
journalism I wanted to do talk radio
honestly if I kind of look back on it my
aspiration was to be like the young more
libertarian version of somebody like
Rush Limbaugh or Glenn Beck you know
somebody who's not like old dead
conservative type guy but I very much
enjoy radio and communications and that
kind of stuff and so I had written
political blogs I got sick and I don't
know how you do it man I got sick
writing about political stuff and kind
of the heaviness of that all the time
and we're here talking about fashion
today right that's exactly the
transition that I made it's like well I
need to keep writing I need to keep my
boy sharp and so let's let's write about
something else that I'm interested in
and masculine style the site started
from that what year was that that was
2010 I think 2009 2010 and so it was
just a good kind of like side hobby for
a little while and then it first turned
into a job when I was having trouble
finding something that was really good
as far as a career and my wife was
pregnant with our with our oldest with
her daughter and we both knew that we
wanted her to be able to stay home
full-time and be a full-time mom and so
I had to step up my game as far as being
able to provide and I'd recognized that
I was answering emails again and again
and again answering the same questions
from all these readers and so I thought
well maybe I could turn this into a
business and a side hustle and so I
started doing some very like low-level
kind of now I look back at embarrassing
types of coaching very basic stuff but
it it started to turn into something and
then from there I was able to leverage
that into a position with the custom
suit company that I worked for them for
four years not only in the shop doing
measurements and getting really detailed
but also overseeing their out their
operations and being involved with
design and stuff like that so I got a
lot of kind of the technical background
with everything to you and then about
two years ago it'll be two years in
March that I finally made the job
this is now full-time that's incredible
so there's a lot of good little nuggets
in there I mean the first one is just
get started right right like if you if
you sitting around waiting for something
to be perfect all the time you're never
gonna you never gonna take any progress
no you got to do the action it's the
ready fire aim philosophy I'm sort of
I'm sort of taking that approach here
with the podcast I mean like every every
time I do one I try to like improve the
technical elements of it maybe the
editing is better it may be the sound is
better maybe the music intro was better
you know maybe there's a cut or you know
you know who knows like but the first
one I was like I'll just get this thing
out the door you should be able to look
back in a year and kind of cringe at
what you were producing now because that
means that you're actually you took
action at the right time and you started
to make progress right right and that's
and that's clearly what you did and and
you've parlayed that into an actual real
world job and so just a curiosity like I
have gotten a few custom suits made but
not not was like a tailor like with the
full measurements like I did it with one
of these were you getting this like pod
thing oh and it like scans your body and
then they sent it off to Thailand and
then it comes back and it's totally
screwed up and it right really working
we didn't really work out that well what
just out of for curiosity's sake what
kind of system was the custom suits that
you were doing was that like tailor and
shop like live thing or what so we were
doing a more advanced version of
made-to-measure where we would use try
on garments and then we would kind of
work backwards from there so we would
take full-body measurements but then
we'd use these these fit samples and the
big advantage for that is something that
you actually experience because if all
you're doing is taking measurements
measurements are great for getting
lengths and forgetting circumference
--is but they can't get things like the
slope of your shoulders or the angle at
which your arms hang or what your
posture is like or all these other
variables that are really crucial in
getting a solid fit on something and a
tape measure isn't going to be able to
tell you that whereas if you've got
something that's either pre-built or you
go the full like bespoke where they're
actually building the garment on you in
there multiple for multiple fittings
doing it multiple times that's when you
can account for all those other details
oh nice well no wonder it didn't really
work they're built like yours you know
because you've got
you've got definition and you've got
based on your size and all these other
variables and so the measurements are
only telling like a third of the actual
story and so yeah it's not gonna it's
not gonna hang on you very well it's not
gonna look as flattering as it could be
when you can account for all those other
details right and I was getting to the
point where like the drop from my chest
to my waist size was it was just like
right at that point where like the
jacket and the pants
there was just no no way to tailor right
with him I was gonna have to start doing
like mix and matches or whatnot but
luckily I've gotten a little fatter
since then so so problem solved probably
good there's like a standard drop I
guess between a Oh for industry standard
I don't know what it wasn't remember
what it was but like it the way that
they make it so that when you buy when
you pick out a jacket that the pants are
like somewhere with the right realm of
tailor ability there's like a standard
drop between your chest measurement and
your waist measurement and like big
bodybuilders I imagine like Alexander
Cortez he's not necessarily a
bodybuilder but he's got a pretty pretty
steep drop I mean right he might have
some problem doing something like that
absolutely but that's a that's a good
problem to have right right exactly
exactly so you parlayed your your your
just your side hobby into a new job and
then you then continued and involved
evolved it into a full-time online
business and that's where you are right
now right correct so what can you tell
us a little bit about sort of like the
breaths of the the stuff that you're
doing because I've got guys that listen
people that listen that are just
interested in like just online commerce
and online activity as well because
we're all looking we're all looking for
that that independence right we're all
looking for that security we're all
looking to only be our own bosses or you
know have us as our own boss and and
only have to serve clients right that's
right that's the way that that's the way
that it works and so I think that
there's people myself and interested as
well as or like where have you evolved
you and what has all this effort you
know sort of produced for you
cool so I've got a couple different
sources of revenue with it
the main one is I do private one-on-one
coaching and I'll work with guys I'll
run them through like a seven step
program
and depending on how much they want to
spend and how much help they need for me
most of my guys end up doing it just
virtually where we do video calls and I
kind of help them through we come up
with a game plan and do stuff like that
together but I do have other guys who
will fly out to me or even fly I'll fly
out to them and we'll go out and we'll
do you know I'll go through their closet
with them and then we'll go through the
full program and then I'll come out
again and we'll do a day of shopping and
then I'll come out of third time and
we'll do another day of shopping six
months later or something like that and
so that's kind of the main bread and
butter and for me that's not only the
most enjoyable from obviously the
financial component of it because it's
high ticket but the biggest thing that
I've learned over the years of doing
this especially you know being able to
kind of just geek out about the
e-commerce level of it is man going high
ticket just the caliber of the guys that
you work with is fantastic because I
have some real skin in the game and they
also are usually at a point in their
lives and in their careers where they
actually have the mental capacity to be
able to actually invest in making some
progress and so if I bumping up from you
know when I first started it was
literally 25 bucks and ten percent of
whatever you told me your budget was and
I would come up with like ten items for
you to go bond it hated it because it
was so mundane and they didn't even know
if the guys liked the stuff and and now
it's you know it's anywhere from four to
twenty thousand dollars to work with me
one-on-one with these guys and the
caliber that I get with them is
fantastic right I must be very
fulfilling but at the same time I mean
from what I understand there's also like
easier access points absolute system
absolutely that's the main bread and
butter but I do have other ways to be
able to get in the most basic one is I
assure a book last year and what's cool
is that the book itself outlines every
Sunday my book so the book is called the
appearance of power and it's it's kind
of a two-part thing the first thing that
it does is they I go through and I
demonstrate why men have always cared
about how the way we look and how we use
our our appearance actually demonstrate
in communicate our masculinity so I use
historic examples and we talk about
things like you know I know we'll get a
little bit deeper into this later we
talked about archetypes and kind of all
these different variables of how our
appearance is actually really reflective
of what I masculinity is especially if
we do it right but then in the latter
half of the book I actually walked the
reader through that if
strategies that I take my one-on-one
guys through or even the guys in kind of
my other different courses through to be
able to help them come up with an idea
of what should I actually be buying
because a suit is not the best option
for everybody it may be the great option
for some guys but if you're in a
blue-collar environment or you're in the
tech industry or something else like a
suits not gonna do you any good
regardless of what some fashion blogger
or youtuber is gonna say that you have
to have a suit in order to be stylish
right right well you know for me I
remember suits were aspirational in the
sense that when I was an entrepreneur
and I still am but I was like full-time
entrepreneur real estate developer and
we did all these all this work and I
remember I put on a suit so I felt like
I could fit in so that people would
people would take me seriously like when
I went to the bank or when I met with
investors or city officials or whatever
and I remember that putting on a suit
was like my way of displaying a level of
status but then but then I realized
later that I looked at I went to a
meeting once with this guy and a guy who
was my partner on a project and he was
older than me and more successful than
me at the time and I we were sitting
around at the the boardroom table with
like the bankers the lawyers the you
know the accountants and the like
construction professional types and
everybody was in his suit but him okay
right and I looked I was looking to him
and he was wearing jeans and like a polo
and a jean shirt like he didn't look
good right he was totally relaxed and
totally calm and totally cashed out
because you're there's like a spectrum
too it's like you put on a suit so that
you feel like you have status so that
you get accepted but then once you're in
the status and then you get accomplished
and then you can sort of peel start to
peel yourself back to see where you were
and like the in the most powerful guy in
the room isn't always the guy in the
suit so I'm great sometimes it's the guy
wearing a pair of jeans and that opened
my eyes to like all the varying levels
of signaling and the reputation and the
image and the energy that you want to
put out by by your clothing and so you
know that sort of brings us to one of
the questions that I have for you right
off the
which is like how do you how do you
approach a new a new client or a new
experience like and what what are those
guys really looking for when they come
to you because you're solving this is
not just about finding the right belt to
go with your shoes right this is about
answering sort of a deep question for
people right exactly answering an urge
for them so so tell me what what do
people come to you with and how do you
get them started and how do you get them
along this journey and we're gonna dig
into the various elements here cuz I
find this stuff really fascinating I
think one of the funnest things and one
of the biggest challenges for me is that
even before a guy recognizes that I
offer a service that he's interested in
unlike a lot of businesses where they're
their potential clients or customers are
kind of thirsty for what they're
offering I feel like the majority of my
marketing is helping guys understand
that this stuff even matters okay right
helping them even understand that oh I
should be thinking about this and then
when they do start thinking about it
then it's helping them avoid a lot of
the same problems kind of the stuff that
you experience and thankfully a lot of
guys they do that whether it's you know
when you make the transition from
college and your first career or you
make some other major change in your
life you go from one industry to another
and the dress code changes most of us
have made that that transition and we
kind of flounder in there for a little
bit and so we kind of recognize like I
don't know what to do here at this
matters I hate that this matters it
sucks my dad didn't teach me how to do
this nobody else is really helping me
out I'm just gonna try and not embarrass
myself right and that's a that's a key
you brought up a key thing that a lot of
people are facing right now which is my
dad my dad never taught me how to do
this right especially because what the
thing that's so funny to me about all of
this is that at any point in history men
at really in any culture we have used
appearance to signal things like status
like mastery courage bravery honor all
these other things that very much matter
to us as men and particularly how we
relate to each other as men that's
another kind of fallacy as a lot of guys
think that the only reason that they
should be caring about their style is
because of how women relate to it but
that's secondary that's an easy thing to
pick up on it's how we as men relate to
each other because of things like
and hierarchy and all that kind of stuff
but then the baby boomers who ruined
everything anyway
right now part of the the sexual
revolution yeah exactly
my parents are great they're baby
boomers and they know that I knock on
that generation all the time but one of
the things that they did is they decided
that as a way to reject everything about
the way the world was was that they were
not going to care about the way that
they looked but ironically there was a
very specific aesthetic when it came
right caring about the way that you look
and so there's this this fault signaling
of I don't care but I also look like
everybody else who doesn't care which
really means that I do care but the only
acceptable way to care is an antipathy
for style as opposed to an affinity for
it or an embrace of it and then
generationally it just gets passed down
where your dad says I don't care I've
just wear jeans and a polo because
that's what I can get away with wearing
at work because that's the most
comfortable you figure it out on your
own right
one of the more memorable Seinfeld Clips
was him talking about how men older men
would they wear the same clothes that
they wore the last time their life was
like at its peak and like that it was
like their best time it was their best
experience that's how they remember
their like favorite version of
themselves yes and then that's and then
that's what they wear for the rest of
their life it's aesthetic inertia you're
you're trapped in this stage and that's
it and you could see that you could see
guys who peaked in the 90s and it's like
I'm sorry that the best stage of your
life was 25 years ago that sucks man
that the 90s are almost 30 almost 30
years ago
you know I'm 42 I'm a gen Xer for sure I
don't know I'm not sure how old you are
your property for so I'm the the
earliest of the Millennials whoo yeah
all right well you don't sound like no
no offense are my Millennials and
millennial people out there you know
that's basically who I'm talking to you
mostly but so you know you brought up an
interesting thing which is coding like
coding with your clothing so I'm coding
when you're speaking is like you know
adopting the vernacular and
the colloquialisms of the people that
you're speaking to so that you can
engage with them on a way that's
relatable and you know working in
education we talked about like code
switching all the time it's like kids
talk to they talk to each other at a
certain level and then you talk to your
teacher at a certain level and then you
talk to the principal at a certain level
and you talk to like an outsider talk to
your parents and you have to learn how
to code switch and I was just thinking
about this code that's like expression
of your identity when it related to the
you know I don't know if you're
specifically talking about the hippies
the the in you know in the 60s kind of
the allusions but yeah yeah but you know
the the the fact that I don't care there
was like a the phrase that came to my
mind was a coded rebellion it was like
I'm very specific it's good very puttin
a targeted expression of rebellion which
in it of itself is it like a totally
contradictory thing is that so far
that's alright that's that was the
recognition I came to as being part of
the punk rock culture where it's like we
all look the same
we're also individual with our Liberty
spikes and our patches on our backpacks
and our combat boots and we all look the
same
so nonconformist we're just conforming
to a counterculture right well I you
know I had the same thing we're not in
the 90s I was part of the you know back
then we called it the rave thit and the
rave scene is like the underground house
music and underground dance music scene
and back then it was cool I don't know
this toke a lot more back then we used
to like break into warehouses and do
parties underneath bridges and import
music from all over the world and it was
like it was the future I mean it was
also the past is like 20 but but but
there - there - we all wore the same
vert like these giant baggy jeans and
very colorful horizontally striped
shirts and like you know baggy like hats
and knit hats and it was all we were we
were rubella we were rebels when you
dropped this at the mall all right just
well going to school but when we all got
together into our tribe we were all very
much wearing the uniform right so do you
see people sort of signaling membership
in a specific tribe through the way that
they they dress today like in sort of as
adults and like modern cultures it's not
just like a subculture thing right no
not at all especially because
we don't live in a homogenized culture
in the West anymore
you know it used to be a hundred years
ago that kind of the West was this this
hegemony and and everybody wore suits
when they were going into formal places
and even blue-collar work all looked the
same but as society becomes more and
more diverse and we become more
tribalistic
in how we see ourselves related to
everybody else then our clothing becomes
even more that way anyway which is why
the tech industry looks different than
the finance industry as far as the way
that guys dress or you've got I mean
even look at the Jim CrossFitters
dressed very differently from body
builders who dress very differently from
power lifters like talk about really
ridiculous sub-tribes but they're very
trans exactly but there are very
distinct aesthetics separations there so
that you can signal it's like no no no
I'm not one of those guys this is the
way that I like to work out right
exactly and I've been guilty of that
myself I'm a I'm a proud crossfitter for
many many years I'm sorry I have to
leave now you didn't but you didn't you
didn't know that right because I'm not
like those other guys I don't cross but
it's great but it's that identity right
yeah exactly yeah and I and I remember
the one the first day that I wore the
the tall socks were done I was like oh
these are pretty sweet and then I found
myself wearing them like on mom deadlift
days and before you know it I had like
three pairs and then I had like the
compression sock I'm like like sweet
like and then they're bright green
because that's the way you signal even
more and there there's nothing right
not only is there nothing wrong with it
it's a good thing to be able to because
really what it does is it makes em
grouper in in tribe communication easier
and then it also makes it easier to
identify people who are extra and we do
the same thing with our etiquette we do
the same thing in their language and the
jargon they're going to use it's a
natural thing and it's it's a good thing
right right that's interesting that's
interesting
so one guys come to you and they want to
and they want your help like I know
you're saying that you need to educate
them internal awareness of all these
things but there's there's got to be
something something that they feel like
they want to have have help with when
they when they reach out to you yeah so
most of the time the pain points that
they're after
usually either that they want to be able
to have more confidence when they're in
kind of any situation because they maybe
have their style good enough to not be
embarrassing at work but they don't they
suck everywhere else or they can't quite
take it to the next level so they
recognize that there's this this kind of
glaring gap the other thing that I get
is a lot of guys are kind of the way
that I am too and I think obviously you
know the way that I market or you
attract people who are like you is
they're kind of self optimization minded
where they're interesting the best
versions of themselves and what fun is
with these guys it's more of an internal
thing with with other guys it's just you
know I want to be able to navigate
social situations better whether that's
with women or at work or anything else
like that but with these other guys they
recognize it's like okay I got my
finances dialed in I've got my fitness
styled in I'm good on my relationships
but the guy who stares back at me in the
mirror looks like me that he has for the
last 20 years and I'm not seeing visual
evidence of the fact that I'm actually
better than I was and so it's this kind
of nagging feeling and it's coupled with
the idea that they have no idea how to
do it and so they finally recognize that
of all the things that they need to
adjust this is a glaring gap and it's
one that needs to be brought up to par
with everything that's right that you
know it's interesting the way you framed
it too it's not so much that they feel
like it's hurting hurting them maybe I
mean maybe it is right because there's
obvious benefits to getting this dialed
in but it's really about self
actualization and it's really it's
really about becoming the person that
you want to be and I love the term that
you use is self optimizing I've been
using the phrase Auto regulating cool
like that that's that's sort of the
hallmark I think of our of our sort of
online community and the guys that we
know from 21 and and sort of the dudes
that we roll with online like I think
that's pretty much the unifying factors
right like so focusing Auto regulating
sort of independent male in America
today and you have to you have to also
become a self teacher and then seek out
people that are experts in your field
right and one thing I wanted to circle
back on and sort of open this up a
little bit more broadly is you mentioned
that
guys dress for other guys mm-hmm is that
what you said yep and it made me think
of women right I think women women also
dress for other women oh this is another
man yeah right
right way more than other men right so I
mean it's a matter of being attractive
to everybody but at the same time it's
like you're communicating to your
intrasexual competitors whether they're
male competitors or you're female and
your female competitors right it's sort
of like all the competitors and
collaborators oh yeah that's right cuz
yeah in a try but it's not all
internally right right so I wanted to
bring that up because I want people to
understand that this is not necessarily
just a guy thing right
you've taken the perspective because of
who you are and who you want to serve of
focusing on masculine identities and
masculine power through your through
your appearance but every human being
sort of does some version of this
whether they're old or young or male or
female and the dynamics are all sort of
kind of the same it's not right
absolutely so I see really huge evidence
of that in in my community being in Salt
Lake City Utah and being a member of the
Church of Jesus Christ of latter-day
saints
most people know us as Mormons one of
the things that's really popular here as
far as like social media is the mommy
bloggers where you know we've got these
girls out here who have these Instagram
followings in the millions so you know
the high hundreds of thousands and I
mean obviously with like the thoughts
and the fitness chicks they're there
trolling for thirsty dudes and that's
the bull their audience comes from but
with these mommy bloggers it's not a
bunch of dudes who are really interested
in this latest Pinterest thing or
where's that cute outfit that you got
her it's it's all status signaling
amongst the women and they're buying the
latest outfits and they're being as cues
they are yeah it's great that the men
benefit from it but for the most part I
don't care if what my wife is wearing is
on trend today as long as it's
attractive and attractive has this whole
spectrum but as far as that kind of
signaling that's very much done between
women and that's how they gauge each
other right
so this brothers reminded me of a
conversation that I've had
past about status and signaling and sort
of the opposite of a positive signals
and negative signal and that negative
signal is often sort of shame and I
remember in the old days of danger and
play few years ago there was a he did a
whole series of things on overcoming
shame in overcoming status and you know
at the time it seemed it seemed really
relevant and something that was useful
to a lot of people which was you know
forget about shame forget about status
just do what you want to do now that
that that's a certain conversation that
we can have about like whether or not
you're gonna spend $10,000 on a watch
just to show off right and that's but
that's sort of that's not what we're
talking about here right not talking
about we're not talking about muting
shame we're not talking about overcoming
like shame what we're talking about is
is presenting the image that you have in
your mind's eye and in your heart and
like who you are as a person on what
your story is and expressing that
through through your appearance is that
about this is not about like I have the
not the dog on women but it's not I have
the fancy new bag right this race this
is about my total package presentation
and the expression of male archetypes
and so let's move on to that one because
that's next on my list here which is
what you know your book you went very
you went into detail in terms of the
expression of masculine archetypes and
identity it's it's also in one of your
courses that I have gone through so can
you talk to me maybe you mentioned a few
earlier in terms of expression of
experience and who we are but can you
talk a few about a few of the different
male archetypes that you see commonly
and that sort of guys you know my
demographic of people that I reach is
like basically like 25 to 45 mostly men
but there's a lot of women you know that
can relate to that sort of thing so what
are some of the more common ones and how
do you see them manifested so the way
that I've broken it down both within the
book within the courses and it's
actually even something for for you
listeners once we're done if you want to
go learn about which of these three
archetypes is most applicable to you
it's actually a free quiz that you can
do on my site
so you just go to masculine style calm
and you can take the archetype quiz the
three archetypes as far as the way that
they're broken down especially related
to aesthetics or rugged refined and
rakish and I think before we even dive
in and I explained what those three are
one of the things that's so crucial to
understand about this is one it's you
who you are internally it's not
necessarily this is who I'm supposed to
be but it's who you actually are in the
way that you interact with the world and
then to the other thing that's important
to understand is that you may be
primarily within one but you will have
elements of all three and you actually
may even shift which of your which one
is primary which one is secondary based
on the different stage that you're in in
your life and so with that kind of as a
background I'll tell you what the three
are so rugged is you interact with the
world physically you are much more
interested in and engaged with the world
in a physical way and so that may be a
blue-collar worker that may be somebody
who's into camping and the outdoors and
kind of adventure stuff you're somebody
who tries to involve yourself with the
physical world as much as possible the
second is refined and this is for men
who are more interested in the world as
far as how we interact with each other
socially and especially when it comes to
status and hierarchies shame and
aspiration all those other things but
it's guys who not only enjoy the game
but they're good at the game they're
rule followers they like embracing that
kind of stuff and for them kind of
self-actualization is trying to climb
that ladder as high as they can and
being able to affect as much change as
they can through that and then the third
one is rakish and these are the guys who
they understand all those hierarchies
just as well as the refined guys but
rather than embracing them they thrive
in going against those rules so like
your last guest Goldman yeah very good
example of both a rakish and a rugged
combination because of how we interact
with other people
and how he interacts with the world
physically his love of nature how much
ease and now an adventurer that kind of
stuff and so a good combination of those
and everyone of us has a combination of
all three within there and when you can
find out what that is and be able to
incorporate different manifestations of
what those archetypes are into your
style then not only you become visually
interesting in a way that it's not just
like you know dad jeans and a polo shirt
because that does
communicate anything but you also feel
super authentic and self actualized in
what you're wearing because what a lot
of men struggle with especially as they
start off with some stylish Chicot
Nordstrom who's 22 and says you're gonna
look handsome in this is they put it on
and it feels like a costume and yes it
may aesthetically look better or it may
signal a certain thing of status but it
doesn't feel congruent with who they are
but when you start with those archetypes
and your understanding of where you fit
within them then you can create a sense
of style that not only looks awesome but
it feels like okay I finally am able to
actually express Who I am it's like
learning a language when are you been
able to do before is kind of give grunts
right well you know as you're talking
about this it got me thinking about
writing and voice being congruent with
who you are what you're talking about
and the words that you're using to do
that and and what comes out of having a
congruent voice is clarity yes and so
clarity in your writing doesn't mean you
know it definitely means the opposite of
like using fancy words using you know
trying to just find that although I'm
guilty or from time trying to find that
exact right four syllable word and so
everything you want to say here it's
about clarity it's about so that when
the words come off the page they just
flow right into the other person's brain
and they just have an understanding of
who you are and what you're talking
about
and as you're describing this congruence
with your out of your outward appearance
with who you are and what your
experiences have been to me that it was
like an expression of clarity and your
of your night of your identity it's not
it's not confusing for people there's
not like a conflict right like you're
not wearing something that tells me one
story but then when I hear you speak
you're telling me another story
it's like Marty McFly in Back to the
Future 3 is the example I always go back
to when he wears all the cowboy stuff
and it's like you clearly this is not a
you are right yeah we want to avoid that
yeah
right so that that clarity also then
just kind of makes me more interesting
right it's like it makes it makes the
conversation that you have with other
people and their ability to digest who
you are it makes it much simpler for
them right because you're no longer just
this safe neutral it's almost like but I
haven't thought about it this way before
but it's almost like most people
aesthetically or NPCs - you know what I
mean where there's nothing interesting
about them because trying to actually
engage is risky trying to actually
communicate who you are and risky
because that means that you have to say
this is who I am therefore this is who
I'm not there's there's opposition
created by any sort of identity and so
most people would say I just I want to
avoid not looking like an idiot so I'm
just gonna play a neutral and play it
safe and there's no clarity in that
there is none and let's just define NPC
for everybody who may not know so NPC
stands for a non-player character and it
comes from online gaming we're like if
you're like let's say you're playing
like some sort of like Old West game and
you're the you're on and horseback and
you come across like a guy standing on
the side of the road and you're like hey
how you doing and he's like I'm great I
hear there's some Indians outside of
town and you're like okay cool I'm gonna
go get those Indians but then the next
time you're like so what'd you have for
lunch and he goes I'm great I hear
there's some Indians outside of town
right they only have so many things
programmed into them and so when you
engage with them on anything beyond the
very most simple concepts all you get
back is just this you know repeated
lines over and over again like orange
man bad right so that's a that's a very
interesting way of putting it and it it
confuses your communication that we all
do with our body language with the way
that we walk with the wait let you wear
your hair with the way that you do just
move your arms and gesture and the way
you stand or whether you're sitting or
whether you're standing or if you're
standing in the middle of the room or
the corner of the room or the front of
the row or the back of the room these
are all ways that we transmit
information and your clothes are as much
of that as anything and I would argue
they're really really powerful for
so could you go a little bit deeper into
rakish because I think I got a really
good sense of rugged like I feel like I
can I could fall into the rugged
category because I'm very physical and
I'm very into you know things in nature
and and and exertion and such like that
but this rakish that one that one
doesn't necessarily you know makes too
much sense to me so I got you a little
bit yeah so the rakish nest is really
just based on the idea of rebellion
there's a lot of a lot of similarity
there and I would even argue you know
from the interactions that we've had the
fact that you had your nails painted
when we were 21 five there's there's an
element of rakish nests in that where
it's it's kind of challenging people to
to recognize that there's a there's a
difference there that you're going
against what something is considered to
be normal or abnormal and so there's
there's an element with that a lot of
times when guys think of rakish Nastase
rock stars or Street where you know the
guys or the hypebeast wearing the latest
Yeezys that the Kanye's dropped or
something else like that and those may
be really good manifestations of it but
then the irony of the rake and the
rakish archetype is as we get into kind
of a world of mediocrity in that that
npc world even just caring about your
style at all in kind of a meta context
does create some element of rakish ness
so yeah just by saying I'm willing to
care about this I'm willing to have some
risk is in and of itself a rejection of
the modern direction in which culture is
heading and so there's there's some
rakish 'no sin that that's fascinating
and for people that don't know so i did
go to the 21 convention with my
fingernails pains they were they were
shiny black with gold flecks in them and
it kind of looked like space rocks and i
had i had started doing that with my
daughter i took my daughter to get i was
trying to find ways to spend some time
with her and i like with my son until i
got banned from coaching Little League
you know I really created more time with
him by like going and and and coaching
baseball and spending time with him and
the kids and then when my daughter was
harder because she wasn't into team
sports we got her to try soccer she
didn't like that she tried t-ball she
was on my tooth
my team for a couple seasons but never
really never really stuck with her and
then she got into like horseback riding
and and chorus and singing and stuff and
so that I mean I love it I go to all of
our shows and whatnot but it's not or
something that we can like really do
together right so I was trying to find
ways to do stuff together with her and
one of the things that we do is we're
divorced and I don't live with her
full-time and so I like try to take her
out on a date one night every month or
two when she's like supposed to be at
her mom's house so I like I go over to
her mom's I pick her up I take her out
to dinner we go for a walk we get some
ice cream whatever and we just have like
a little date that's pretty awesome and
one of the other things that I did I
started taking her to the to the nail
salon then first we started getting
pedicures together and that's always
nice and every dude should get a
pedicure there's no question about that
um and then one day you know she's like
that won't you get your finger nails
painted I'm like all right let's give
this a shot so I got my fingernails
painted and the reaction that I got from
people was so intense oh yeah it was so
intense because I'm 6 foot 4 I'm 250
pounds I'm built out I've got a big
beard you know I walk around with a
certain image and then you see the the
fingernails and they're like whoa and
I'll tell you like man girls opened me
up like crazy over like everything every
curly random is your multi-dimensional
it's contrary yes yes that's interesting
way of putting it and you know what's
funny on my on my way you know one of
the last times I saw her before I went
to 21 convention I was like I'm probably
gonna probably gonna take the nail
polish off before I go if she goes don't
be a wimp dad there's that shame I was
like all right my 13 year old daughter
calling me out like alright I'll do it
I'll do it you know and and and you know
to be perfectly honest there was some a
little bit of apprehension about it I
mean I was going to meet like 350 Jews
who are all there like all about
masculinity everyone odd and I rolled in
with my you know with like a fresh mani
and and and you know it you know
obviously it went over it went over
fine and most everybody didn't even say
anything about it and whenever anybody
did ask me about it they said well you
know what's up with the fingernails and
I just said I like it and they were and
they just kind of looked at me like all
right I don't write so that I guess
you're right that is a little element of
rakish this but that wouldn't be my
primary mode and most people have a
primary mode like what do you what do
you see most commonly most commonly
probably refined yeah with rakish being
a pretty close second I don't see a ton
of rugged and I think one of the reasons
for that is because most rugged guys are
the ones most rooted in the the idea
that real men don't care how they look
all right let's talk about that for a
second real men don't care about how
they look that that strikes me as being
total and complete horseshit total
factor to do on Twitter is post up
examples of some pretty cool looking men
that are I posted one this morning it
was it was samurai armor that was right
intricately made and all the colors on
it were incredible and tell me that that
dude is not a real man because he cares
about how he looks right right
especially because most the time when
people say that they use it as a
disqualifier you care how you look
therefore you are not a real man
everything else about you though that's
good we threw out the window because you
care about your appearance
it's the ultimate disqualifier for a lot
of these guys and clearly that's not the
case well I think there's a little like
homophobia built into that right like
only gay men care about how they look
yeah and whether that's homophobia or
just a concern of I don't want to
project something that I'm not know I
mean like people being critical of guys
that follow their or that pay attention
to what they wear right that's and
that's what I'm saying is it's not
necessarily I don't think it's always
that people have a problem with gay
dudes so much as its I don't want
somebody to think that I'm gay
right so it's they're trying to avoid
any sort of like false advertising right
right right so therefore because I'm
straight I have to look like a bum
otherwise
I'm advertising falsely and I'm into
dudes or I'm effeminate and I'm much
more interested in being in the friend
zone or doing girls night or things like
that
ergo real men guys who are not
interested in dudes guys who don't want
to have girl time don't care about how
they look
I'll tell ya ever since I learned how to
dress and took started to take care of
my appearance I don't think there's ever
been one woman that said to me I don't
know you're just too stylish right and
help how much do you get approached
because of it all the time all the time
so I mean if you want to talk about
making pickup easy
you know I'm happily married I haven't
had to work but so I still get women who
approach me all the time and it's just
where'd you get those shoes or it's nice
to see somebody cool coat or something
else it makes life so much easier in
that regard
right the shoes the shoes are definitely
one that women notice like right off the
bat yeah so this notion that men don't
care about what they think is just a
bunch of horseshit and so so what's
missing then right and we see this so
much in so many aspects like you know my
dad never taught me how to workout the
only like exercise I ever saw my dad get
would be like in fits and starts he'd
start jogging for like a week or two I
thought he'd be done he'd be done with
that you know never taught me like how
to handle manage me to interact with
have a successful loving relationship
with another woman right they never
taught me about like how to go out there
and like be an autodidact and like teach
myself and like learn and like what's
the way to get become expert at things
and they certainly aren't teaching you
like how to express yourself with your
clothing and with your appearance and so
I think that that has opened up this you
know window this opportunity for you to
to really sort of fill and that's what
we're all doing is we're all filling
that missing thing that happened in our
childhood right and it's happening I
should have done right and and it's
gotten even worse like the guys you know
who are in their 20s that's the main
thing I hear and read all the time
online it's just like my dad never
taught me this
no one ever taught me that society
doesn't teach us this so like culturally
you know you may not have the answer to
this but like if men have always been
concerned with the way they look and
everybody is also concerned with the way
you look because don't forget that for
one second yeah right exactly then um
you know why aren't we teaching people
how to best present themselves in a way
that's congruent with their personal
identities I think it has a lot to do
with a lot of the other kind of blue
pill cognitive dissonance everything
else that we deal with where the mantra
that we have is don't judge a book by
it's by its cover or people should
people should treat me based on Who I am
on the inside and not who I am on the
outside and I agree with with a lot of
the kind of backing behind those ideas
but it's also wishful thinking and so we
have created an entire culture that's
built around wishful pie-in-the-sky
thinking and hoping that if we just have
enough faith which is ironic because
we're also becoming anti religious but
we have this faith in this utopia based
on human progression that if we're all
just granted to each other and love each
other enough somehow that's gonna work
and so it is it's based on this this
idea that if we just try hard enough and
we have enough faith in it then all of a
sudden everything about the way that
were wired everything about hierarchies
everything about human history and
animal history and everything else is
just gonna go out the window
and we're gonna and we're gonna treat
everybody like a blank slate and we're
gonna care about anything exactly so you
said that I learnt the point is blank
slate as of me it's blank slate as a man
isn't that ironic not ironic but isn't
that fascinating which is what most
people mean when they say ironic yeah
fascinating that like the blank slate
concepts are so pervasive in our society
and the complete discrediting of our
animal nature of our existence and
dominance and competence hierarchies and
like evolution and who we are as animals
and today you know advanced animals
obviously but still animals working in a
system we throw all that out and it's
like it's like damaging guys all the way
down to like
the most basic level of how they present
themselves well I'm not some totally
permeated everything yeah that's a
that's an angle that I had not
necessarily considered before which is
why I'm doing these podcasts awesome so
thank you very much Tim yeah that's
that's really fascinating I remember
very distinctly when I got divorced I
you know I was coming out of that with
like clothes at my my ex wife had bought
for me and when she was at Costco you
know she's like going grocery shopping
she comes like she's like I got you some
pants in the sweater and I'm like
nervous yeah you know and and it didn't
fit me and I didn't look good of course
she's not gonna buy me something that's
gonna make me look sexy and amazing and
appealing to other people and of course
my body type at the time also you know
was not gonna be well expressed in in
good clothing either and so it took me a
while to figure it out and one way that
I did start to figure it out is I went
to this boutique in Georgetown and DC
here it was called Lost Boys okay it's
not it isn't that interests at and it
was run by a woman blonde woman you know
sent me attractive late twenties and she
her whole thing was that there's the the
generation of Lost Boys out there that
don't know how to dress themselves and
so she basically built this whole
concept it's a great concept and she she
went out there and she like source the
independent designers mostly American
American designers and American work
where and you know like flew out to
Indiana to meet this guy and I'm
actually wearing one of his sweatshirts
right now and she she would take the
time to really like try a lot of clothes
on you and really give her best input
you know but again she also was selling
you right and I bought a sweater
from her and and I think about this
sweater often when I think about you
actually Tanner I had the sweater it's a
theory sweater I'm sure it's beautiful
on some people but it doesn't fit me
right it never looked right on me it was
$250 it's a beautiful piece of clothing
and I've only worn it one time
and it just smells like such a waste of
money to me right and so when I think
about you and the services that you
offer I think to myself well man if I
would have just spent that $250 on
getting expert advice or going through a
course to learning they learn about
myself and me and what I want to say and
what I want to look like what my body
type is like and what's gonna fit me
that would have saved me so much money
down probably thousands of dollars I
mean my closet is filled with stuff I
mean I only wear 10% of what I got right
yep yep is that is that common I mean
super common yeah in fact most of the
time when I'm starting with clients will
do the first thing we do is kind of a
closet evaluation and we do a purge and
I would say 80% of the time I say I need
you to take photos of everything that
you have and they say well I only wear
like 15 percent of the stuff ten percent
of the stuff that's in there so can we
just were bringing those photos yeah
right right yeah yeah and I think that
that goes to show the sort of haphazard
nature that we go about acquiring our
clothing and I think it becomes really
important especially when you're
relatively matured and you're not
growing as much and you know maybe your
waist grows and shrinks a little bit but
you know you can take the time to to buy
a piece that's gonna last you a long
time right like I'm bored jacket this
morning that I've had for like a year
yes you know and it's a classic it's a
classic cut it's a classic piece it's
never gonna go out of fashion and if you
take good care of it you know it's
actually net financial positive in this
one right your cost per wear is super
low on something like that right and
that I think that that's you know among
all the other value that people can get
from you I think that that's something
that really stands out to me yeah and
that's one of my favorite things to do
with these guys is to help them kind of
see the light on that and whether that's
the guys should work with me one on one
or the guys who go through the course
that you've gone through is it's helping
them realize that okay now I'm equipped
to actually go into this with a game
plan and I have the tools to filter the
things that I do look at so that I don't
just randomly in kind of in a
reactionary way go out and buy stuff and
think okay I like that shirt I'm gonna
buy that and then you get home and you
go well crap
I don't have anything else I can wear
this with because I didn't buy the pants
and the shoes that worked with that and
everything is just kind of random and
sporadic whereas if you know yourself
you know your tribes you know what
you're trying to signal well enough and
you know how to filter for all of that
then when you go out you can go I like
that
I can't really come up with a way that I
would wear that so I'm probably gonna
skip it or write or go the other
direction and so it does it's just it
saves so much energy it saves so much
inner kind of frustration especially
whether that's when you're shopping or
when you've got this kind of nagging
feeling though it's like I should look
better everybody else around me looks
better and I don't look that great it
saves money it's it the the amount of
what I do for men and that's one of the
hardest things again for me with my
marketing is helping guys recognize not
only is this a problem but it's a bigger
problem that you think it is and it's
not often upon guys come out of the back
end that they go holy crap this is way
bigger than I ever expected it to be way
bigger yeah it's gonna impact your life
on so many different levels it impacts
your first impressions that you make on
people it impacts the type of people
that are interested in talking to you it
impacts your relationships and impacts
your dating and mating opportunities it
impacts your business relationships it
impacts the service that you get at the
restaurant that you go to then it's also
going to impact your wallet it's gonna
save you money and then it creates this
like virtuous virtuous feedback sighs
yeah
right yeah where everything is going
really well and then things just keep
you know keep elevating and I got you
know I can just totally remember times
where and seemingly it goes hand-in-hand
was like how well I'm maintaining my
fitness at the same time oh yeah where
where I just know when I go out in
public and it's just poppin right and it
and like I do have some sort of
statement pieces but mostly mostly I'm
just going for like clean classic
updated classics and I can just tell
when it's poppin because people are just
more polite I mean it's it may be
up in this world of you know people
talking about privilege and this and
that but this is a privilege that you
can create for yourself exactly people
people like to interact with people that
look good yeah and that's the most fun
to know we've my wife and I were talking
about that the other day because she
went to a baby shower and my youngest
daughter who's 2 is
she's like most two year old girls she's
very shy around people that she doesn't
know you know she's a total bundle of
energy around people that she does so
they go to this baby shower for my
sister-in-law and she's surrounded by
all these gorgeous women in pretty
clothes in this nice well-designed home
and every day and she just opened up
right away and you find that even on
this very small level we interact better
with people that are attractive and
again whether that's fair or not is
irrelevant because you can't do much
about your face but you can control your
fitness and you can't control your
grooming and your style and other things
and so you can make yourself more
attractive and therefore improve the way
you interact with other people and
improve the way that you perceive
yourself because not only do you like
other people who are more attractive you
like yourself more when you're more
attractive right and your head is held
higher your eyes are more open you're
making on eye contact more often yeah
but like a world of new opportunities
just opens up to you because you're not
closed off to the world you're open to
the world yeah because you feel because
you feel confident and secure but
speaking of fitness you know you're
you're a pretty fit guy wait what's that
what's that shirt you're wearing right
now this is I literally was at the gym
before we before it came this fact in
boxing so that's the name of the gym
that I go to and I've I've been doing
some boxing no wait no tell me about
that you've been boxing no for real tell
me yeah so I had my first bout my first
amateur bouts
I was about a month you're not you're
not you're not just like doing the get
hit get fit without getting hit thing no
no no I've been I my gym is an awesome
legit fight gym I've been going for
about two years and I realized that's
one of the things that makes me
uncomfortable especially cuz I never
engaged I never got in a fight in high
school or anything else like that and
for me as a dad I mean the whole reason
I even started going is I don't want the
real rep of anything related to violence
to be my first rep and I had no
familiarity with violence whatsoever no
does that mean that because I've been
doing boxing that all of a sudden I'm
like some master defender of my family
absolutely not
but I'm better prepared than I was
before I started doing it and I can keep
making incremental steps so that I
become better with it I also think one
of the other side benefits was not any
things I ever expected because I've been
in the gym for a few years
before I started boxing but what it does
for my body language what it does for my
posture what it does for my my level of
confidence and comfort around other
people because you know I played some
games with my friends where we're out in
public and it's just like okay who in
this restaurant you think could actually
beat you up and now it's not that many
people anymore because as the standard
continues to go down if you put it in
any sort of effort it goes up and it
does a lot for your confidence but
anyway I realized that just training
mitts and doing some like half hazard
20% sparring it wasn't good enough and
so one of my one of my challenges for
myself in 2018 was to take an actual
fight was to have a real fight so we did
it man that's awesome what was it like
getting hit in the face oh my gosh so
when I was doing it sparring I was
surprised by how much it didn't hurt it
felt like getting hit in the head with a
basketball you know like you're just
like oh that sucks I certainly don't
want that to happen again but I can keep
going yeah we're using like a 16 ounce
gloves gloves to spark yeah and I mean
even with the guys most of the guys in
my gym so I'm in the 175 pound weight
class and most of the guys in my gym are
220 plus and so they hit hard you know
yeah but even then you know it's still
just like that sucks you know I've had
one of them like mess up my jaw one time
after we were going a little bit harder
than we should have been because that
happens but anyway you're just like I
can I can deal with this and so I go
into my bout feeling really confident
and the guy was he was younger than I
was he was faster than iOS he had two
inches on me and height he probably had
three inches on me and reached like he
was just a better fighter all-around
and about 30 seconds in he comes across
with this with this right cross and just
hits me square in between the eyes and
the first thing I thought was wow that
really really hurts anything I
experienced sparring or anything that I
expected it was bad enough that it made
me dizzy
and so I was dizzy throughout the the
duration of the bout and for amateurs
it's only 3 1 minute rounds especially
when it's like your first fight and so I
mean it sucks I was tired I couldn't get
in and out you know all of my strategies
about head movement and pivots not it
just it all went to crap but man it was
so cool and so I'm gonna do it
I'm gonna do it again in a few months
here yeah that's awesome that's awesome
I I too have some rare experience but my
game was more sweet yeah yeah so I did
I trained more time for a number of
years and I finally made it on to the
fight team and then finally made it into
the ring and I got four fights four
fights undefeated never lost and I
realized you know what after sort of in
the amateur ranks like you have the or
like the novice levels and then there's
like I don't I don't remember what they
called after that but it's like zero to
like three fights or something like that
and then after that you have to move up
into like the next one right you're like
an open fighter er yeah yeah Oh open
right exactly
so I was like after after I'd won all my
novice fights and the future in front of
me like the guy that will not open in
the super-heavy anyway it was like 35
and two or something I think that is
record so I was like okay so so alright
I've made it I've made it sort of like
up to like you know the the the 2/3 up
the pyramid and my cart that's uh yeah
that's probably that's probably good but
yeah it was funny about it is that
there's no I mean I'm Owen one and a lot
of people especially because I got I had
to crap kicked out of me I mean nobody
else that night was nearly as bloody as
I was my face bruising and everything
after the guys in the gym were laughing
at me there cuz I just I got I got
worked and I'm really glad that I did
because anything after that will be now
I kind of know what especially cuz
knockouts don't happen very often in
novice fights and so right now I know
kind of what worst-case scenario is but
it's funny because I if I were if I had
won that one then it's like well I can't
stop there because is this a fluke or
can I win more but if I lose that one
it's like well I can't stop there
because you can't go out Owen won like
you have to do more than that and so the
vacuum you actually found a good
stopping point is actually pretty crazy
because I think most of the time there's
this balance of like well I'm on this
winning streak can I keep it going or
it's like oh I'm so even I have to shift
the balance in my favor yeah it's it's
there's an interesting psychology with
all of those combat sports yeah well I
was I was a couple years older than you
and I when I was doing that so
the writing was on the wall the guys I
was fighting we're like you know they're
24 years old but right yeah I was never
the quickest and but I want to just
emphasize for everybody that like one of
the number-one benefits to participating
in the amateur combat sport and you
don't even have to get in the ring for
this is just knowing that you can get
hit in the head hit in the face and like
your whole world isn't gonna end you
were not as fragile as you think you are
right right and that's a message that's
we're sending like the exact opposite
message to everybody these days right
you see there was an article the other
day about an increase in parents going
to have lunch with their kids at school
because that's the only way they'll
really just gonna literally just gonna
bring that up oh my gosh oh my gosh that
is terrible parenting I can't imagine
doing that like enabling that well he's
not gonna eat if I'm not there okay see
what happens if he does that for three
days just do three days of a little bit
of discomfort and see what happens
oh my gosh I know it's crazy when when
when like the very rare is this is in
which like we didn't like somehow we're
out late or we didn't eat dinner I don't
know like you know one time a year right
we don't feed the kids dinner and we're
like as you allow them to be and there
is gradual as you force them to be right
right and I think that you know the the
message that we're getting in culture
today is that everybody's fragile and
everybody everybody needs as much so not
only do they need as much support as
they can get but they also need every
obstacle in front of them cleared out
totally removed and there's no
opportunity to let your children or
other people sort of just fall down in
the dirt and combat sports are a way for
us to like to combat to fight against to
fight against you know what we
experienced in that growing up which was
was far far far less prevalent than it
is today and far less severe
you know I was a latchkey kid so like I
was like the original sort of free-range
child and so I learned some independence
very early on when it comes to that but
these days man you know there's there's
none of that if you if you're not there
when your kids get home from school year
somehow like a bad person in and if your
kids reach an obstacle that they can't
surmount on their own and somehow you
feel as a parent and you've got to do it
yourself and when I saw that article and
of course the picture that they eat the
picture that they use speaking of
masculine identity is right the picture
that they use like you and I both have
beers but like it's I don't feel very I
feel very strong and this is saying
they're like our beards are basking in
and look good and project strength but
like this dude you know you know what it
is this dude with the beard was just bad
you know right soft and he had like a
ponytail and he had like a frumpy shirt
and suspenders on and look like it was
just it was like the epitome of the sort
of SOI weak man generation and there he
was at his kids school elementary school
basically like helping his you know what
7 year old or something yeah lunch
because he hadn't well prepared his own
son enough to be able to eat lunch on
his own it's failed parenting it really
is I mean what you're doing to your kids
and what they're gonna have because you
cannot have a life free of hardship it's
going to happen and so the less you
prepare them to be able to handle it the
worse off they're going to be right and
how many kids do you have three with the
fourth the due in a month Oh congrats
and what is the what's the age range on
this so my oldest is so we've got six
five four two or sorry six four two and
then and then this other one so we're
basically every two years
Wow Wow Wow there you go
fruitful and multiplying we have I have
a six twelve and thirteen year old and
I think I'm pretty much I think I'm done
yeah yeah yeah I can't imagine having
them all so close together like that
it's so fun it's so much fun and they're
so good to each other and they look out
for each other and they are I think
that's one of the reasons why we keep
doing why we keep having more and we
keep going at the pace we do because not
only do does the dynamic continue to get
better but we also love and enjoy
interacting with each one of them more
individually and so for us it just it
just keeps getting better yeah
well that's that's totally awesome
tanner and this this has just been a
tremendous conversation and you know I
love sort of tying it all together with
the sort of big picture that we're
talking about internationally and and
and in society and culture that had
spurred you know the creation of the 21
convention that got us all to go there
that got all these guys to go there and
we've seen out there this like very
forceful and and and ravenous hunger for
for mentorship and coaching and guidance
and information and community and it's
really community it's what it comes down
to is it's like wanting to feel like
you're part of something group that
understands you and all the various
elements that go into being a self
actualized auto regulating self
optimizing these are all great terms man
today we're on display at the 21
convention and you you had your talk and
and guys were loving everything about it
and I just want to just hammer home
against or like the positive effects
that getting getting your your physical
presentation can provide to guys so like
in your experience like what after after
people you've worked with people or
they've either and it's important to
point out like your book is like what 12
or 15 dollars or something on Amazon
yeah then there's also like a cheaper
version of the course which is like 40
something dollars and then you know you
can do like the custom coaches so
there's like all different kinds of ways
to like engage with your information and
your material but what-what is a what
order like the main positive
pieces of feedback that you get from
guys that that tell you that you're on
the right path and that you're doing
something good for everybody and that
people are growing when they when they
work with you so the best way I've had a
client tell me kind of what it did for
him was he said that it's it's like he's
been driving with his tires only like
halfway full his entire life and then by
being able to get this dialed in it
finally inflated them all the way it's
not the engine it's not the steering
it's not this like major component of
the vehicle but if your tires are
sluggish you're not going to be able to
optimize and maximize all of those other
finely tuned pieces of machinery that go
into that being the vehicle that it's
supposed to be right and then that that
translates into happier relationships
better work opportunities more more
business success better friendships
stronger community ties I mean it I'm
not I don't feel like I'm overstating
this because I've actually I've lived
all this myself
right exactly when when I figured out
what kind of jeans look good on me and
what kind of sweaters like for example I
don't like sweaters that have elastic
bands at the bottoms and so I've learned
that like sweaters that like hang loose
on me look way better and I can these
are just small little things and then it
just doubles into your confidence and
your eye contact and your presence and
then all of a sudden you're just sort of
like I'm necessarily a different person
but the person that you were meant to be
along the way turned up to 11 instead of
being a lower version of where where you
were yep right and then people treat you
that way and you're good at being able
to take it to level 12 in the level 13
because it's that that virtuous cycle
that you were talking about earlier
because all that momentum now starts to
feed for you instead of against you
right that's awesome man I you know I
love talking to guys like you guys
family guys husbands fathers businessmen
entrepreneurs you're a boxer you're a
speaker you know you you're a coach
you're a teacher you're a leader and you
know you're also just totally down earth
and like regular guy all at the same
time and these are these are the
conversations that I loved
have because you know this is not like
some forbidden knowledge that only kings
and Dukes and Earls are supposed to have
anymore and you know we all have access
to this now and God bless the internet
for that right and god bless it God
bless the e-commerce and like and just
the the way that we were all able to
come together I mean you're in Utah I'm
in Washington DC we're using this
technology to share this information and
the thousands of guys are gonna and
women are gonna listen to this and
hopefully people are gonna take
something very positive away from it and
you know this is just we're living in
the future right now and and this this
sort of movement of people this self
regulating auto optimizing I mean that's
those are such great terms because it's
just really it really narrows down the
essence of we're just trying to get
better right we're not trying all just
trying to get better well in thankful
Janice I mean we're at a time where it's
optional and so being surrounded with
men who want to take advantage of that
option
there's just even more of that community
that you're talking about that
Brotherhood there right well because
we're we're like it's like a double
opt-in email thing that's like when you
do it two times yes yes I want in and
then you confirm that you want it I mean
you really want to be in there and your
everybody everybody that you come across
it's got the same sentiment and it's
just uh you know it's a very uplifting
and you know I'm not I'm not religious
so I don't go to church so I don't have
that community but I can see how it's
caught the the energy may be comparable
in the sense that like we're all after
something we're all after some answers
and we're all eager to be there together
and we're all striving for some sort of
improvement and actualization and and
comfort you know in this world that
we're living in that can be confusing
terrifying you know dark raining like
and to find and to find a group of
people that are motivated and centered
around the same concepts and values is
really uplifting yep and I think the
community aspect has just been something
that I really love and that's also why
the the literally thing really bummed me
out because I saw it
so I lost that community but you know
I'm working to build new communities now
and we're doing these meetups you know
the one in Orlando was obviously way
more in a meet-up does a convention but
we did a meetup Brooklyn we did one
Seattle we're doing one in DC you know
it's all just about reaching out and
making connections like we've made here
man and exactly you know I just want to
thank you very much for your time thanks
very much for sharing your story and for
letting people get to know you a little
bit better and and talking about you
know it's not just fashion man it's like
everything it's everything about you and
it's about it's about who what story you
want to tell and you know how can people
find you Tanner like what's the best way
to engage with with your work and engage
with you so like a lot of the guys that
you are and you have on Twitter's
definitely my biggest medium of choice
and so you guys can follow me there it's
at Tanner Guzzi that's tienen ER g uz y
i'm also on instagram under that handle
and then go check out masculine style
calm you can go in there and take the
archetype quiz so it'll tell you rugged
refined a rakish which one is your
primary one and then i send out a daily
email to my guys as well giving you good
insight about why this matters how this
stuff matters how you can understand the
strategies related to style and how to
actually start improving your style game
rather than telling you it's like well
you got to put on brown shoes or here's
how to go buy the right kind of suit
it's it's much deeper than that like I'm
sure you guys can glean based on the
conversation we've had today yeah and
really the conversation has been an
elevated one that I've really
appreciated and and I know there's a
couple of things that we still didn't
get into and we can say for another time
like how to tell a story with your
around to at some point yeah I think
we'll do a round two so also we talked
you are offering a special discount on
for people if they go to your website
and sign up for their courses what's the
what's the code and what's a discount
correct so I have two different courses
that we're doing this on one of them is
dressed like a man it's a really good
entry-level one and it'll teach you some
of the basics and then also give you 35
staples that are really good items that
you should have in your wardrobe and
then the other one is my main course
it's called Project your power and so if
you want to jump into either one of
I'll give you a 20% discount just use
the code Murphy and yeah well we'll
knock that down for you guys awesome I
love those names project your power
that's awesome awesome that's awesome
all right well tanner thank you so much
man I'll let you go this has been a this
has been a great time hopefully it won't
be until next fall that I see you again
in Florida but yeah we'll definitely do
another one of these in a couple months
and you know good luck to you man and I
appreciate you sharing your story thanks
jack it's been a blast being on really
good conversation I'm excited to see not
only where this goes you know and in
front of the in front of the audio but
even just our growing friendship behind
the scenes so I appreciate you having me
on Mia all right thanks a lot man
bye-bye
[Music]
you