this is Lama tantrapur with the secrets
of Qigong masters the talk show brought
to you by Academy of Chi Dow the first
and only school in the world
offering professional education in de
Chi and Qigong coaching to find out
about the programs at Academy Chow and
to learn how you too can become a
certified tai chi or Qigong coach please
visit chi gong coaching that calm this
shows also brought to you by mastery
magazine sponsoring the summit of chi
gong masters that brings to you some of
the top experts in chi gong in north
america turns your watching the video
interviews with them please go to chi
gong master calm today I am delighted to
introduce to you my old friend
Bonita Roy who is an award-winning
scholar and internal Tosa philosophy she
served as the president of national
Qigong Association and now she's an
associate editor of the internationally
acclaimed integral Review Journal her
rural home called elder Laura is
surrounded by old-growth forests in the
hillsides of the Berkshire Mountains in
Northwest Connecticut elder lore is also
a retreat center that offers two
educational programs
the first one is she going wood horses
includes workshops so that where the
courses teach people about energy body
language emotional balance and how to
engage the natural world in a deeper
level the second program focuses on the
inside training helping people to tap
into the transformational power of the
mind in its natural state inside
training workshops activate intuitive
awareness by cultivating the ability to
perceive the world directly and the
capacity to experience equanimity when
mind is in its natural state we can
discover what it's possible that has
never been possible before
on November 14th through 17th of this
year but either ROI is hosting a
symposium to explore collective insight
which will allow people to work
collaboratively across the wide range of
values and competing worldviews our
vision is that only collective and
has the power to change the complexity
and scale of 21st century challenges she
believes that the time is right to learn
how to cultivate the power of collective
insight but that will need to learn more
about the energy flows that are
magnified in relationships dynamics and
how that affect our own authentic
contribution to the collective process
welcome to our show Bonita it's really
great to have you on the secrets of
Chico masters well thank you llamas it's
a real treat to be on the call with you
it reminds me of the long coming yeah
how many years I known each other for
quite a few years and I finally got an
opportunity to interview on our show
it's really a treat yeah and you know I
was listening to the introduction and
and I was thinking of this notion of a
path you know how how we knew each other
in the National Qigong Association and
and then our lives take on these
different paths and I thought I would
just start by talking a little bit about
how I got from there to here and giving
that as an orientation I would love to
hear your story it's definitely a
fascinating path that you're in yeah so
so you know for me it's all about it's
been both an inquiry like an
investigation and an experiment you know
I'm always trying to explore new
territory and one of the things that was
interesting to me when I was deep inside
the Qigong community was how how people
could come together and do Qigong and
get into really see president doing
practices like Chaney son or you don't
deep organ alchemy all these practices
were very extraordinary
and and very intimate I mean you could
get people into a room and become really
intimate with them in an embodied and
resonant way and and yet when when
people got together to do collaborative
work let's say as board members or on
projects something funny would happen
when we'd start to talk to each other
you know like like there was this deep
embodied residence in Qigong itself but
then when we all got together to solve a
problem or talk about real-world issues
there was just too much dissonance and
too much cognitive dissonance and and I
thought that was very interesting you
know that that the embodied work didn't
solve these other problems you know so I
remember that some occasions we would
actually have this amazing breakthroughs
I remember for example the springboard
retreat I think it was 2005 when we went
to North Carolina
yes and stayed at the retreat center
there with several members of the board
of directors all coming together from
all over the United States and we
actually had some really interesting
breakthroughs there I think and also
some other board meetings when like
after 10 years of bickering for example
about the designation of what does it
mean to practice Qigong you know we
would actually like MRAP
the definition of Qigong or even I think
agreed on what certificate certification
levels would be that the MQA we're doing
we're pada sunders yeah yes
so those things but those things really
shined right so when you have
breakthrough I call it insight now and
when it with a group can have an insight
any like really break through that wall
or those were tough relational dynamics
something interesting is happening right
so I started really try to pay attention
to that and
and study it you know you can look at it
as a type of Qigong you know with a
different type of energy you know so you
have the relational dynamics between
people is is relational flow and like
push hands OMA
it's like push hands exactly it seems
like push hands there's can be pushing
is the art of push hands right when it
becomes really beautiful it's like a
dance
versus an amateur version of push hands
where it just looks like competitive
battling you know it doesn't it's not
there's no beauty in it right so the
question is how to get the beauty in the
actual collaborative work that when we
start to need to talk to each other and
work in with ideas and and in that in
that realm and what are the principles
that we can utilize to make that work
more like flow and and to really release
the creativity so one of the things I
say is most groups look for they either
interact in terms of competition like
our Congress does or consensus which is
very difficult to work toward consensus
or compromise and the problem with those
three is they don't really tap into
creativity right so right so if you
think of push hands you know when people
are doing push hands and there's certain
there's certain skills that create the
dance that is so creative and
spontaneous as opposed to you know just
the same old same old so I read the
choreographies there's a choreography
but it's spontaneous but it's not like a
bit it's not pre-primed you know and I
started working with groups I worked
with a core group on a biodynamic farm
and and some educational groups and I
and I kept getting this feeling that the
there was more creativity in the people
than in the group as a whole and you
would think the opposite you know that
the
group would would have more creativity
like the total is greater than the sum
of its parts and so that's I started to
look at it and in in those kinds of
questions I certainly would love to ask
you more about that let me remind our
listeners that you're listening to the
interview with Bonita Roy on the talk
show the secrets of sugar masters and if
you have any questions about the subject
of our interview today please call in at
three four seven three two seven nine
six three five once again the : number
is 3 4 7 3 2 7 9 6 3 5 so neither let me
ask you about the path that perhaps you
took from being deeply involved in the
chi-gong world obviously you were a
president of the National Chicken
Association at some point and to where
you are at right now what were the
milestones so to speak or the landmarks
that perhaps were the turning points
along your path that's a good question I
started to use what I would feel would
call Qigong practices and principles in
my work as a I was operations manager of
a large landscape contracting firm and I
started to become very aware of
relational dynamics not as words going
back and forth or or the actual content
of words but as as flow as you know I
started to feel for example the
push-pull of relational dynamics as you
had a big board meeting or a big
business meeting we have clients in
there I started to become very sensitive
to the energy flow
and started to work or with the the
quality of the energy then with a
specific intention about the outcome so
I started practicing that at work and
then we moved to this farm and I ended
up being able to live with my horses and
had a couple of horses born here and
started to work with the horses in a
herd situation from the horses that were
not conventionally trained in a herd
situation and started to really watch
and feel and become sensitive to the
relational flows there and so I would
say that was the turning point for me is
to be sensitive to what was going on is
a total dynamic rather than this person
said this and then this person said that
and and now and the whole in inquiry
opened up opened up for me so actually
I'm wondering if that's something
similar to what someone like yourself
who teaches people in groups it's that
is that's part of a technique that is
important to your work well absolutely I
work with people both in group context
as well as individually one-on-one my
favorite actually is to work with two
people at the same time and this is kind
of an unusual almost unique form of
Qigong coaching that I developed because
I discovered that it works more
efficiently to work with two people as
practice partners who kind of
consistently practice with each other
and I can provide them an opportunity to
improve not only on their own but also
they start collaborating in helping each
other improve is only in their skill
level but also in their communication
style and their quality of life in
general and the dead essentially creates
the totally different dynamics between
people they're not just benefiting from
knowing each other
or from knowing me but there is a a
energy shield that we enter together is
this something similar to what you
experienced when you teach the
collective insight yeah so there's that
aspect of it and I find there's kind of
two levels going on
I find it relatively easy for people to
become resonant as you're describing to
be wanted to be helpful with each other
to settle into a field where everyone is
very present and people are sensitive to
each other and the you know the field
feels very intense the the second level
though is if you is when you introduce a
question or a problem where people hold
diverse sometimes very competing
opinions then what happens is is
something something disrupt you know it
gets very disruptive very fast and so
are you talking about the board of
directors of nqa
oh I'm talking about many groups that I
work and so you know instead of our
climate change in this climate change
skeptics and climate change you know so
the same people that just spent two days
together in nature doing Qigong feeling
really cooking together feeling good
about each other and then you sit down
to have some what I call you know some
deliberate speech around problems or
issues then you find that the situation
gets complicated really fast and so what
I try to teach and collective insight is
what capacities we need to maintain this
kind of being present with each other
similar to what you said that breaks or
we had in the National Qigong
Association it took you know three or
four days going in or two or three days
going in to keep setting the field and
setting it and keeping me awesome yeah
and there was okay together in hot tubs
you know getting to know each other
a little bit better so we don't look at
each other like what kind of freak
person is this exactly but then even
then there are these really tough times
you know and whether whether the groups
hold together or whether it's going to
collapse there there's a hole to me
there's a hole genius or skill set in
groups that learn to really work
together and create insight you know the
idea of collective insight is that if
you have five people that come together
and everybody has their own way of
thinking about something in collective
excite you don't want any of those five
people to leave with one of the ideas
that they came in with you know
everybody is going to go away with a new
idea it's not like three people can
convince the other two people or two
people are going to convince the other
three people it's warm chocolate knowing
that they want to get beyond everything
they know and and and that creates a lot
of creativity right well and that
definitely is something that probably
helps people involved in this type of
creative collaborative group dynamics to
only have insights but also there to
step up to the next higher level of
creativity so you know just having a
high experience perhaps to say oh that's
how oh that's why this person believes
this way now I understand up but kind of
go beyond what's easy one of them
understood anything together and and and
and in order to do that there's the
relational dynamics you know and as as
you described especially if you can get
people helping each other and moving
each other along and not being in a
competitive type of situation and and
there's you know people have triggers
and they have defense mechanisms all of
this everything that you can think of
doing Qigong to get people to open up
and be grounded and opened up and be
confident without being aggressive these
are all embodied ways to sustain the
kind of challenge that it is to really
work through differences and diverse
opinions into a new new insight
wonderful let me ask you exactly what is
the meaning of the words insight from
your report I mean by insight that's a
really good question so what I mean by
insight is an insight could be small or
could be significant but one of the
aspects of an insight is that if we ate
a whole new way of looking at things so
it solves a lot of problems at the same
time so for example let's say you know
I'm always fighting with my boss and
there's always you know I've been
working there for a while but there's
always some kind of irritation you know
I know yeah I know Aidan and then one
day something happens you know just I
may be relaxed or you might say
something all of a sudden something
switches and I realized that the problem
I have with my boss is the same problem
I have with my husband and it's the same
problem that I have with my father it's
like you have an insight that just shows
you that all you know it shows you more
than one thing it shows this if there's
a switch in perception and the way you
see things and out of that cascades many
many different understandings right so
then that's there in other words there
you're connected dots you see certain
connections between things that
previously appear to be disconnected
yeah and you feel almost almost like the
antithesis of ignorance ignorance
basically is not knowing the connections
the karmic connections that cause and
effect and insight is almost the
a reversal of ignorance it's it's yet
and an insight is I liked what you said
about connecting the dots because it
usually comes out as a pattern you know
like it tells you a lot all at the same
time and so it creates one of the best
stories of insights I ever heard was on
National Public Radio and it was the
story of this man who's grown up in that
Inn in South LA and he was always a gang
member you know his brother was and he
was ever since he was young and he was
about 16 or 17 and he really wanted out
but he couldn't get out because it was
like if he left and they were torturers
you know it was there was there was he
was so he could he was so locked in and
then something shifted and he realized
he could just walk away they just left
la he left his whole life all of a
sudden the whole thing just shifted and
he realized that there was nothing
really he wasn't really locked in except
by his own perception you know so this
is an insane he just he just walked away
and it says it's something that actually
allowed him to experience freedom and
freedom was not because he was
incarcerated or he was chained down but
he was actually the basically
orchestrating his own incarceration of
sorts or lack of freedom when he was I
can perspective right it exactly
probably associated with fear
most people get stuck in perspectives
because they're afraid that what's
outside of this perspective is going to
be scary unknown or worse than what they
experiencing now exactly and and because
you never because you're so afraid you
can't look outside your perspective and
if you could you would find that it's
not that scary anyways but in once as
long as you're inside your perspective
then it becomes a real
challenging thing to get outside of it
is the reason why collective insight is
easier to have done insight by yourself
is because you're connected with people
who have different perspectives I mean
obviously some people may have similar
perspectives to yours but by and large
there's going to be some diversity among
a group of people and the more you
develop a relationship with these people
the more you realize that well they're
not stupid so their perspectives are not
really that bad and even though they
hold those perspective they don't suffer
from scary things that I thought I would
have to experience if I switch to some
other perspective from my old one
exactly so there's a two-fold thing here
the more diverse the group is in it when
when you don't have the skillset in the
collective the more difficult it is
because people will start holding on to
their perspective as the only one that's
right
but once the group starts to trust and
open up then there's actually more
possibility for insight because you have
more perspectives on the problems you
have more views and you have more
intelligence so that the insight that
you drive becomes more significant and
and so it's it's a little tricky because
you have when you know at first if
people are not skilled in this then they
tend it tends to have you have you know
instead of one person that's obstructing
themselves you have five people
obstructing themselves and their
interpersonal exchange but once you can
crack that then then the kind of
possibility and the collective insight
is is it can be truly remarkable well
and I don't know what exactly I mean by
cracking to me it's more like a melting
ice so to speak rather than trying to
break through it
how do you crack how do you facilitate
this melting of the boundaries that
people hold you know the walls that they
erect around themselves and around their
perspectives yeah I would say that the
relational dynamics are more like the
word melting your melting them so that
they're there they're not bump you know
so that they're fluid they become much
more fluid and I use the word crack in
terms of like crack the problem or crack
the you know more of the the obstacle
look that you're working on a certain
problem or certain come on wonder if I
can contribute another insight into this
conversation I don't know if even
problem is the most helpful term within
this particular dynamics or context
because when people think that they have
a problem they relate to it in such a
way that they want to crack it or they
want to get rid of it or they want to
break through but once you actually get
beyond the perception of problem as such
you start actually pursuing it as a
learning opportunity
I guess you ever experience the problem
in the past and then he looks back maybe
years later or even decades later you
realize oh wow that was actually a
profound learning opportunity from which
I grew great deal and it made me
stronger wiser or somehow well better
off that's exactly right and we talked
about in two ways one is at first you
know from on this side of the situation
you're looking for solutions on the
other side you don't really find
solutions you find that the problems
actually dissolved you know you don't
get your whole orientation to what what
you started out has also shifted so
exactly so that's exactly true and then
and then the the second thing is once
you get the hang of it you you actually
start enjoying those groups where there
is a lot of quote unquote relational
difficulty
because you know that that that that is
where that difficulty is is where the
insight is going to come from you know
you actually start like you said you
actually start to understand that the
difficult areas are the ones that are
really interesting you get curious about
what seems like discomfort to the naive
person seems like oh there's were dares
where we need to go you know this is
what's really curious and in your home
orientation toward the work starts to
shift well probably both of us know some
friends and colleagues who seem to be
troublemakers who actually would stir up
some kind of challenging conversations
or push buttons as it work because look
because they are just thrive on
button-pushing as far as I understand at
least some people that both of us now we
have a few friends like this and
actually do this because they realized
that when the button gets pushed that's
when the real juicy insights happen
that's when the real new levels of
understanding and the personal
development occur that's when we are
sitting comfortably in our comfort zone
but actually when we are operating on
the edge of the comfort zone but of
course that's also crucial not to push
over the edge because then you will push
people into the zone of discomfort and
pain where they're going to be freaking
out or or suffering so nobody is going
to be grateful for that right right I
mean you don't want to do it so so push
that they become over reactive or
overwhelmed or overwhelmed I mean
sometimes people really you know are
dealing was right at the edge of insight
sometimes a lot of significant trauma
comes up and and and that can be more
difficult to deal with but but yeah you
know and there's there's people who are
button pushers who are
not that genuine in the sense that they
themselves are reactive you know so that
can be kind of crazy territory to be in
but that may be just sheer abuse but
there is the aspect of you know in and I
think the most important thing is is
that when groups get together and
they're unwilling to work through that
territory then they're not creative you
know they settle for compromise or the
person that's most aggressive everybody
just is okay well we'll just do that or
you know they they they work out a
solution that carries every agreement
but the reason why everyone is agreeing
about it is because it's not really that
interesting and people walk away feeling
frustrated although they hadn't
expressed that in the group itself and
so to be able to and to be able to go
there requires both a skill in terms of
understanding what like what you just
said what insight is and it also
requires the ability to remain grounded
you know so you're not running from fear
of being overly aggressive or feeling
attacked all the time you know I mean
you have to be able to really slow with
the relational dynamic as I would
require actual skill and being
responsive is that are reactive and
probably it has to be somebody at least
one person in the group who would
provide the role model of responsiveness
rather than reactivity and fight a
flight right yeah one or more than one
the more the merrier the more than that
Mary you know it's interesting because
this group I have coming in November all
of us have been practicing this kind of
work with with groups ourselves but all
of us have different concepts of what
this work actually is so it will
be it'll be a surprise to see if we can
now come together you know as the people
who spend all their time facilitating
groups if we can come together as peers
and do to work again with each other and
answer some questions yeah have some
insight you know so you can always keep
upping the ante you know you have a
bunch of Qigong masters or who are
really good now at teaching their
students and now you have all the Qigong
masters come and teach each other right
so you've kind of Runyan they're right
well that's exactly what I did when I
created the first as far as I know the
first in the history of Qi going on
history of human time she long
mastermind group yeah when basically
that's exactly what we did together a
number of high-level Qigong
practitioners and professionals and
literally just created this interesting
cold rod amazing coalition of people
coming not just from one country but
actually from three different countries
from three different continents and
integrating the different ideas and
approaches in a way that we weren't
trying to just solve that one problem
and all agreeing to how its salt but
actually help each other step up to the
next level of mastery and the next level
and successfulness as Qigong
professionals so there has to be some
high level motivation for people to
engage in this type of insight seeking
process because if they don't feel like
the benefits of getting the insight are
going to be great enough to offset the
pain or the just struggle of actually
getting there then they won't be
motivated enough to get involved right
or they will just run away
exactly I think the motivation for this
group is the world for the motivation
for me is that you know one of the
things that
uh we are faced with in our modern world
is that a lot of the big situaion
situations were in require
collaborations or a lot of a lot of
projects need a physicist and an
ambassador and a politician and a
sociologist you know we're working with
very large complex issues and it is not
often if we look at our quote unquote
leaders these people come together and
they they don't have highly you know
functional conversations right so the
just one of the things that's important
about this work is whether or not we can
derive principles just like principles
of practices and Qigong that can create
greater capacity in people for working
in a different way so people are looking
for compromise or consensus but to
actually understand that they can come
together from all these diverse
backgrounds and do a different process
well let me clarify or maybe you can
clarify it for us what is it that the
participants in the symposium hoping or
aspiring to realize as a benefit that
would come as a result of participating
in this oppose it well I think that one
of the first things we're going to do in
the first day is everyone's going to
articulate what they're in you know what
they've come with what expectation what
part of their work is at the edge of
their own knowing where do they want to
move their work so that will give us an
idea of the range of intentions that
people will have and from that we are
going to we will try to collectively
figure out what what the edge of the
collective work is you know what is what
is the common principle or common is not
a good words we will find out
what the significant you know why is
this a significant passing there's
people all over the world doing this
practice in many different ways and from
spiritual communities that have been
together for 14 or 15 years so women's
groups that have been together for years
a woman that has worked with the shamans
in South America represents that type of
tradition so we all I think what we all
would have will have already have our
unique intention and we wanted we want
to use the practice to say why is this
work emerging right now what is its
capacity how can we get together and
like you said with your group and really
push ourselves individually and
collectively to the next the next step
the next phase
I'd like to brought in I'd like to bring
the work into much broader community so
right now there's a lot of small
community practices that are doing the
work I'd like to bring it into a much
larger community so let me ask you what
would be your vision of where you would
like to see this work taking you
personally in the next year if you
getting the benefits that you aspire to
gain from this symposium and similar I
would love to like I have it I have a
really clear vision of children in
school learning through collective
insight practice I mean one of the
things is we see that that machine
handle most of the information and most
of our knowledge we don't need to be
teaching people content but but if you
know if children have the experience of
learning through collective insight
practice helping each other learn and
being playful and spontaneous and coming
up with new ideas and creative
imaginaries and reinventing their
futures from early on you know I can see
this practice as starting very early I
can see
judicial systems and Parliament's and
instead of working in an adversarial way
coming together in adjudicating human
human problems and concerns through
collective insight so you have your
defendant your plaintiff and the
families and the JIT and their
facilitators and the judges doing
collective insight around a problem
instead of this crazy adversarial system
we have you know I can see the practice
in forming any kind of engagement where
people have to work with each other in a
collaborative way so my primary
enthusiasm is for education wonderful
but I can see it happening and you know
the problem with with with older people
is that were already so stuck in our old
ways you know so if we can if we can
bring it into younger and younger
situations for the younger people
then people will just know how to relate
to each other in that kind of a form you
know what what do we get I mean I got
taught you go to you go to college and
you get taught how to debate and how to
be competitive debaters you know and so
that has its function but it's not as
creative as working in a more
collaborative way so you're trying to
convince people instead of integrating
your insight with their insight and
perhaps coming up with a unified
integral view of reality exactly which
includes more of reality I mean just
think about it we're we're taught from
very early on that when people have two
answers to the question one is right and
one is wrong right this this is how
we're taught from grade one and great
you know all the way through and and the
problem with one answer to the question
is that it includes less of reality and
so if you if you to over simplistic
thing because there are right answers
and wrong answers in certain contexts
but if you if you understood the
complexity of the wrong answer of the
context of the wrong answer and those
two kids worked with each other
collectively and collaboratively than
they would both learn something more
than they had learned before and they
would learn a way to be together that I
think is really beneficial for all of us
wonderful well I'm sure that some of our
listeners would love to be able to
contribute to your crowdfunding campaign
on IndieGoGo com
the link to your campaign is in your bio
on the webpage dedicated to your
interview so I invite you listeners to
check it out and go to IndieGoGo comm
slash project slash explore the power of
collective insight + X + 4 1 0 5 2 7 8
now this is certainly a good question
why did you decide to do crowdfunding
what is it for and why is there supposed
to be any kind of crowdfunding for this
effort of it that's a good question it's
the first time that I've tried and used
this model for raising funds and part of
the reason why I did it was because I
was curious about the process and wanted
to answer some questions about what
groups of people would be interested in
this kind of work I'm not charging the
participants who are coming from all
around the world they they're donating
their time and their travel expenses but
I do have expenses to full room and
board here and supplies and then we're
going to do live-streaming and some
video taping so I was hoping to raise
enough money to offset those costs but
also then to raise money so that we
could do some post-production materials
like a handbook and some workshops and
presentations that we could take out to
a
brought a community and start to really
create a community of practice so at
different levels of support we'll be
able to do more work after the symposium
Oh wonderful I'm actually visiting your
IndieGoGo campaign web page and it says
that you had a goal of $22,000 and you
have collected almost 20 grand so the
only three thousand and four hundred
dollars away from your goal with ten
days actually it's the opposite I've
only collected three thousand four
hundred and ten dollars so it's been a
very good well yeah it's been very very
slow so um
okay well so then perhaps we need some
insight as to how to make this campaign
more successful
exactly perhaps so if somebody who is
listening to us right now has an idea or
question or insight about how to make
this crowdfunding campaign even more
successful you are welcome to call it
with any questions or suggestions and
the phone number to call is three four
seven three two seven nine six three
five once again three four seven three
two seven nine six three five money let
me ask you a little bit about your
involvement with integral philosophy and
whole community I'm sure that some of
our listeners that would need to be
brought up to speed about what this
whole integral things about the
community is pretty broadly defined so
we share some common interests
and we also disagree on a lot of
different fine points but basically the
integral community is a community that
is practicing a level of
understanding that is called post
conventional so that we are
for example aware of many different
perspectives and that they can be
integrated in we've been talking about
we're aware of multi-dimensional
thinking different at ways of looking at
time different spatial our perceptions
were aware that the human condition is
an evolutionary trajectory so what was
true you know a hundred years ago is
just a limiting a limited view of what
we understand today so that we can use
this understanding about the
evolutionary trajectory of the human
condition to really be curious about
where can we go next the integral
community is interested in integrating
body mind and spirit so that we don't
chop up our experience as something
that's either mental or embodied or
spiritual pursue or you know this is
science versus religion and so a lot of
the philosophy is geared toward
articulating a more holistic view of
reality so we would call it more
integral or integrated view well it's
interesting what you just said that what
used to be acceptable and to be right on
the money hundred years ago appears to
no longer cut the mustard now why is it
specifically to science and perhaps to
some other social sciences and and
understanding of things but how about
some traditional schools of thought for
example we can talk about religion or we
can talk about Qigong schools and styles
or how do you relate or how do you deal
with the notion that perhaps there are
some cools of thought that despite the
fact that they're pretty old
they actually have a greater grasp on
the true nature of reality then the more
modern schools that emerged maybe just
in the last few hundreds of years was
that it yeah this is something that we
don't all agree on I tend to be a much
much more inclined to think that even
some core spiritual understanding
evolved and that they you know in in
many cases they're in desperate need of
an and upgrade and I think what you if
you look closely someone like I would
say someone like yourself who is
actually can follow perhaps your core
teaching to an old lineage I would say
that even still that you've made quite a
lot of updates upgrades to the way it's
presented or the way it makes itself out
into the world or the kinds of practices
that you incorporate with your school
you know I think it's that it may be in
some sense the same core teaching but it
certainly has been expanded into the
modern world and I would argue that it
includes more reality in its current for
a minute than it did in its in its past
form I think we hang on to some of these
traditions way longer than we should and
I think that we actually it's kind of
like we remember the past as being
better than than it actually was in self
exam pillai been working a lot with the
anthropological roots of animism and
shamanism and really trying to
understand what early what what what
these early man was like what early
humans were like and and you really get
a different picture then the narratives
that sometimes you hear about some of
these early practices well for example
people what if you're talking about
collective insight some people mistake
some of this work for what I would say
is not a modern version and that is
people will say well people used to sit
in circle and understood themselves as
one people but they didn't really have
the experience of being singular
individuals so that was a different type
of collective because there was no
diversity you know so that it wasn't
like we have so much more diversity now
that that doing collective insight has a
lot more challenging and it includes
more of reality and so there's this
tendency to think oh we just have to be
like early man was when everybody got
along or you know the tribe sat around
and they were all thought of themselves
as one people but that was a totally
different situation well it's
interesting that even in Taoism for
example in daodejing and other canonical
books of dollars there are numerous
references to the sages of the old date
when apparently the men of all the world
wiser somehow more in tune with nature
and even back 2500 years ago when those
who purportedly
wrote thousands inc they were lamenting
that and nowadays things are not sort of
smooth and we're no longer in harmony so
in other words the paradise is lost
they're no longer living in the Golden
Age this type of thing well for example
here is a mistake that people make when
the anthropologist first studied the
early totemic peoples in some of the
indigenous tribes that are still based
on totemism today they were confused
because the totemic people would say
well this animal is a person's part of
our tribe and this plant is a they call
them persons part of our tribe and so
this this stone or this rock or this
landscape is a person also so they
started to think of animism is that the
ability to think of everything as being
animated which is I think a really cool
thing right to have this concept of all
of creation being actually alive and
animated but what was happening in the
totemic societies was yes this plant was
a person and this animal was a person
but not that plant and not that animal
and only some people humans were persons
and not those humans so it was actually
more exclusive than inclusive okay it's
just that they included some plants some
animals and some humans and not others
and we actually interesting I found
another apologist by training myself so
I'm curious as to which Satanic nations
or tribes you're referring to so for
example did they not have the attitude
of the rock people or the four-legged
people or the wing people in other words
birds or four-legged creatures who would
basically be referred to as people in
general rather than this is one bird
that I relate to as the person but no
other birds are included in this type of
relationship well they did they did
understand that from if you were another
people that those people are looking at
you as not persons you know like a
person so what's a person if you had
personhood you could not be eaten right
so those could be the rabbit people but
they weren't persons because you could
eat them and and and there were other
humans that this particular tribe would
understand that they had their own kind
of clan but they were not given
personhood a personhood all it all had
to do about with who you you know who
and what you could eat versus what who
is on top of the food chain
really and you know we have that
culturally we have that still in our in
our cultural taboos today you know some
people eat horse and some people don't
some people eat dogs and some cultures
don't we still have that
kind of inclusivity and exclusivity in
our cultural taboos today of this
relatively simplistic understanding of
personhood then we definitely need to
regard bears and cougars as persons a
lot more than say horses right because
well they're but seriously on on top of
the food chain so they can eat oh can
you force us on pretty much anybody else
yeah little are the different totally
totemic tribes they they categorized it
these beings in different ways you know
depending upon how they were evolving so
I mean we're talking about this because
we're talking about whether or not the
popular story is that way back when we
were all very in tune with nature and
with the animals and much more
respectful it and that's not necessarily
the real story of the whole story I mean
I think that I think that it needs an
upgrade and you could argue that we're
actually starting to include well we
certainly include more of all the humans
now almost every culture will include
all humans as persons and some some
cultures are starting to include certain
animals to give them certain rights and
and I think that that you could argue
that we're actually moving in the
direction toward which we think we were
in the past you know it were actually
not completed those steps yet I know he
talks about the old sages and I'm not
sure if that's metaphorical or not well
I'm pretty sure that there is some
degree of metaphor in there because when
we're talking about some things that
happened in the past and greater harmony
with nature well it was easier to be in
harmony with nature because well for one
there were fewer people and Earth's so
there was just less artificial landscape
it was less the urban build-up there was
less and
structure and pollution even back then
China probably was relatively more
polluted than any other place on earth
and of course now it is the most
polluted place on earth as far as I'm
concerned is all thanks to just the
sheer number of people and of course if
we look at how back you know thousands
or several thousand years it was less
pollution and organization well it was
easier to be in harmony with nature how
you were functioning in that harmony
that's a different story yeah you know
uh one of the things that I would say
and you know I'm not sure this is really
what Lao Tzu was talking about but I'd
like to make the distinction between
culture I think that culture as we know
it you know in terms of if you identify
as Chinese or if you identify as
American or if you identities little
these little identifications I think
that in general they you know they have
they come with a lot of problems you
know I mean Western society and
Industrial Revolution all this cultural
development that has taken us away from
nature is not necessarily all good and I
would argue that in many cases it's on a
ranch wrong trajectory and this is where
I make the distinction between working
as a culture because you kind of been
born into a culture and indoctrinated
into a culture versus working as a
collective which is participatory so I
meet you and we all meet at a conference
and there's five or six of us we come
from different cultures and instead of
interacting to each other as if we were
inside our own cultures we just start
participating in this really kind of
being present with each other and this
participatory collective that is outside
of culture and and I would say that's
more like the vision that the early
sages had they weren't that thrill
old with the momentum of you know these
big cultural and state and Empire organ
you know kind of organization of
humanity well that requires a certain
level of individuation nor do you
actually have to depart enough from your
native culture in order to be able to
see the relevant there they'd be
relativity of all cultural values and
attachments because if you don't depart
enough from the culture you will be too
engrossed too indoctrinated too much
under the just programmed robotic
repetition of certain steps and
procedures that are standard in your
culture and then you will know you
interest you can't meet me we can't meet
each other if if we are defined by these
programs exactly we will also be a
threatened to depart from our
stereotypical worldviews or standard
operating procedures that are culturally
dependent but if we feel like our
identity is so hinged on our
participation in the culture that if we
quit being members of this culture we
won't know who we are anymore exactly
and and so to me there's a lot of
culture that is is an obstacle in that
way and just to tie it back into
collective insight yeah I use the term
collective as as it's kind of an
antidote to culture so culture is an
indoctrination process you're born into
it whereas collective Insider
participatory collective it's
spontaneous it's in the moment you meet
each other right where you're at in a
very creative kind of way and for me
it's it's it's transcultural it's a
transcultural practice and has the
ability to solve some of some of those
obstacles well this is fantastic
I also imagine that our next mastermind
group
Chico masters will definitely benefit
from this type of approach because this
is essentially why we would do this type
of gathering on your consistent in a
month after month basis and one of the
things that I would imagine is that you
would be able to even instigator or be a
catalyst for this type of collective
insight and long
that young masters yeah I think that
you've already established a really good
beginning you know it sounds like it has
momentum and it's been successful the
question is is how far can we can we
really intentionally use a different
kind of capacity to see what might arise
I think it's a I think it's really
exciting well and if you allow your
excitement to come to paint a picture of
where this might take us what do you
think the world that you go would be in
just a few years from now if this type
of a more integral and more collective
insightful approach prevailed or has
become more accepted among to run
petitioners well I have a big idea there
and it's kind of a fantasy so I'll just
give it a like that I don't see I
actually see a very Taoist at heart and
I actually see it as realizing some of
the expectations of the of the DAO
teaching because I one of the things in
Taoism and correct me if I'm wrong but
we have the microcosmic orbit right so
that which is which is kind of a little
model of the macrocosmic orbit right the
way the individuals flow is the same in
it fractal of the macro cosmic order and
in all spiritual traditions what you see
is is this kind of pattern you go from
the individual so like a Buddhist can
meditate and work on themselves and then
he goes from the
individual work to a cosmological
understanding so the in Taoism you go
from the microcosmic order to the
macrocosmic order which if the heavens
and the manege envisioned as the link
between the macrocosmic and the
microcosmic order and I think that there
is actually a missing link and that's
what I would call the miso cosmic order
something in between being an individual
and an understanding and then being part
of the greatest Universal cosmological
story I think there's a Me's or cosmic
story and I think that we've been
looking at culture to be that story but
culture is problematic because what
primarily will we see in human cultures
is that they're not integrated with
nature they've defined themselves
primarily exclusion to nature and I
think this concept of collective
participation is the mezzo story so we
can start participating not only with
each other in this real kind of active
spontaneous way but we can start again
to invite other creatures the animals
back in the plants back so we're going
to take back all of the you know
exclusions that we made when we started
naming what was a person what wasn't and
we can start doing this participatory
collective enactment first with all of
the humans and then we can start adding
back all the beings in nature and this
would be the Meisel level that the story
of the earth itself which stands between
the microcosmic and the macrocosmic so
that's my big idea I really thing
because I hear also whenever you talk
about the exclusion from nature and the
men basically creating a cosmos as an
organized structure of a reality it's
actually also echoing the aims
Griet philosophy and cosmology because
essentially it's the great ancient Greek
word cosmos right which arose when the
chaos the universe of this was pretty
chaotic and so the Greek gods or the
Greek philosophers have both put their
heads together and basically figure it
out how to create cosmos out of chaos
like for example you know looking at the
firmament as it stars up on the sky and
organizing them in certain patterns that
can be divided them into the
constellations of course nowadays we
know that those constellations don't
exist because the stars and
constellations are not really close to
each other whatever it's just from this
particular perspective where we are and
we see them relatively close together
and of course the pattern that makes no
sense whatsoever if you're not
indoctrinated in a particular culture
that was associated with these devil
patterns but they formed the cosmos out
of chaos to make their lives a little
bit more organized and little bit easier
to indoctrinate others into this way of
living it's actually the children well
you know telling the cosmology and the
children story of creation is an easy
way to indoctrinate a child into
believing in cosmos rather than
perceiving life as it is as a chaos
right but then every culture had its own
cosmology and there was another part of
this separation of you know different
peoples into different
cosmologies and different eschatology
which is like how you get saved and
other people don't get saved and so
there's a yeah so those stories go from
the individual to the cosmological
through this cultural lens so I think
that there is the potential for a
different type of story a mezzo story in
the middle one that is you know doesn't
have these
legionary problems and can actually
begin to build more inclusion with all
all the beings well exactly and of
course both of us probably adhere to the
understanding that even if anybody is
going to get saved it's not because
somebody is going to come and save us
specifically are responsible for our own
salvation and the salvation if from this
point of view of course is essentially
setting ourselves free of this
stereotypes of thinking and having this
type of insight and if we experience it
collectively well then it's going to be
a collective enlightenment rather than
an individual enlightenment examination
of your go ahead yeah and we're all in
it together and I think that this is
what modern life has really keeps
telling us that we're all individuals
but we're the sum total of our activity
we're all in it together
you know what the human race as a whole
has a huge impact and so to work or be
everywhere together at that level is
really important human race has a
horrendous impact it's oh my god I
personally view the way that humans
exist on the face of planet Earth as a
form of cancer because just like cancer
cells we just keep propagating for the
sake of multiplication in the road seems
to be no stopping it doesn't make sense
for one human to be enlightened or have
insight and just then be happy with
their own salvation because it doesn't
stop the problem you know everybody
needs to be yeah we're all in the soup
together here even every one of the
whole planets in the same soup the same
predicament yeah absolutely well and the
funny thing is that again referring back
to the old spiritual school of thought
and Buddhism especially my
I on abuddin there is a tradition of
bodhisattva and bodhisattva is not
somebody who's the savior who's going to
come and save everyone but in a sense an
individual or being that as attained a
level of spiritual awakening and realize
that we can't really be awake in this
dream that we call our lives if there
are some dream characters some other
beings that are not awake because
essentially if you run into any dream
characters in your dream who tell you no
this is not a dream this is happening
for real
they are simply trying to convince you
not to be awake and apparently they
reflect that aspect of your dreaming
mind that doesn't believe it you're
awake so in other words there are still
some aspects of your consciousness that
have room for improvement that can still
be awakened right exactly and once
you're awakened you realize that the
other is not other anyways so only part
of you is is actually awake or the
philosopher Roy Bhaskar talks about
building a society where the full
development and flourishing of the
individual the conditions for the full
development and flourishing of the
individual are the conditions for the
full development and the flourishing of
all and when I read that I thought to
myself well that's not that's not the
situation we're trying to build that is
the situation we're in
we simply cannot fully flourish and
thrive unless everyone does it's just
it's just not it's not the way it works
that includes the only other human but
also all beings all the means and
otherwise exactly in culture that level
of culture is not doing the job of being
inclusive the levels culture seems to me
to still be the you know started in the
trajectory of early animism and it's
still in
collusion anything and and I think this
is what the daodejing
and a lot of these ancient texts and
many spiritual dish traditions have
rejected what we normally think as
culture and this whole concept of
participatory collective as the emerging
Meisel structure for human potential is
very exciting to me if you know in that
that's the perspective of my wildest
dreams here well it's very exciting to
me to I hope that our listeners are
excited and to around our conversation
on this exciting ouch
let me remind our listeners that you are
listening to the interview with Bonita
Roy the former president of national
children association and award-winning
philosopher and who is organizing as the
symposium on November 14 through 17
dedicated to exploring collective
insight as she is doing a crowdfunding
campaign on IndieGoGo Tom and you're
welcome to click on a link at the bottom
of her bio to contribute or at least to
find out about that crowdfunding
campaign and the perhaps also to
contribute to it as well let's not let
me ask you Bonnie
would you share with us a little bit
about your next events or ideas or plans
beyond this symposium where are you
going to take us next after the
symposium one of the projects the work
we're working on here at the home farm
called all the lore is I'm organising
I'm developing what's called a Sol e a
self-organized learning environment for
kids post high school who are not
interested in going through conventional
college and you know there's a lot of
problems with the fact that it's so
expensive and it doesn't guarantee you a
job and
a lot of young people who want to take
advantage of degrees or certificates
that can get online so I'm organizing a
school called all the lower Seoul and it
will have a summer and a spring in a
summer session and two young people that
are going to be mentors and we're going
to try to start using collective insight
practice for for young people who are
looking for an alternative to
conventional college so that's really
where we're headed with this whole thing
and as I said the educational part of it
is is really where I'm interested in you
can go on the IndieGoGo site and I have
a lot of videos and a lot of information
and then you will be able to find a link
to the website which will get you to the
information on the courses that will be
upcoming in 2014 it's got really excited
about it we're going to have it'll be
the only sole facility that has a neck
line program and a sustainable design
nature program in addition to all the
other features of a soul program and now
I'm thinking we need we need a guest
Qigong teacher too so maybe we can talk
about that after the color that sounds
great well I certainly want to thank you
so much for sharing with us about your
insights and your path and I wish you
all the best in your endeavors thank you
very much and it was really nice talking
to you and it was nice to be on the call
here with you you have listened to
another episode of the secrets of Qigong
masters the talk show brought to you by
cad amici davao the first and only
school in the world
offering professional education in Tai
Chi and Qigong coaching to find out
about the programs at academy of Judo
and to learn how you too can become a
certified chi gong or Tai Chi coach
please go to chi gong coaching does
this shows also brought to you by
mastery magazine the international
easing dedicated to mastery and Qigong
coaching and life that sponsors the
summit of Qigong masters bringing to you
some of the top experts in Qigong in
North America to enjoy watching video
interviews with them please go to Qigong
masters that come