[Music]
heart
[Music]
so hello there welcome to my video
podcast this is called we need a
renaissance not another revolution
jean-jacques rousseau got it backwards
when he said man is born free and
everywhere he is in Chains on the
contrary all men and women too are born
into a state of radical dependence we
come into this world attached to the
mother to the family to the tribe only
after a great struggle can we dream of
any kind of relative freedom freedom or
individuality could only exist in a web
of responsibilities hierarchy and
interdependence when John Lennon wrote
the song imagine he was similarily off
the mark
imagine is a sort of ultimate him to
Romanticism that is its endemic power
but also its tragic insufficiency do we
really want to imagine the world that
Lennon sings about with no he'll blow us
and above us only sky is that not a
world without depth or mythology and
ironically without imagination perhaps
we need to imagine heavens and hills and
perhaps there is more existential
realism and imagination for that matter
in the song I am The Walrus don't get me
wrong there is something great in
romantic movements they rip out the dead
roots of tradition when such traditions
have become empty and formal they
regenerate the culture and yet
revolutions become the aura bor√•s a
snake eating its own tail today it seems
obvious that the romantic counterculture
is this serpent eating itself that it
has become its own oppressor
intersectionality safe spaces
microaggression these are not the big
themes of real revolution but academic
quackery a sound and fury signifying
nothing the activity of masked anti-fog
groups who do not engage in debate but
various forms of primal scream therapy
an actual fascist behavior making them
the ultimate hypocrites and right-wing
enablers should be evidence enough for
the impotence of radical revolutionary
movements in the early part of the 21st
century revolutionary movements such as
those which took place in the Sylvia
Union have failed miserably in their
totalizing goal of absolute equality
they have proved again and again that
some people are more equal than others
as George Orwell once joked and even if
we succeed in replacing Kings with uber
administrators the dynamics of power
remain the same today the Russian
president is richer and more
inaccessible than any medieval Tsar had
ever been when the spring of giddy
political freedom is over the
revolutionary workers will invariably
clamor for new and sometimes more
repressive monsters hierarchies have
proved themselves to be deep and
intractable they invade every aspect of
our lives and the most violent
revolutions cannot overturn them so what
to do perhaps we need a renaissance and
not a revolution maybe the answer to the
neol ism of The Times is to integrate
and renewed traditions rather than to
just do away with them we could go deep
into our origins study the great
traditions as deeply as we can find out
what our motivations are beyond ideology
the age of ideology is over and even if
the ghosts of ideology still hold
massive sway the good news is that they
are committing suicide everywhere
in the past we needed walled cities to
keep out plagues and strangers as well
as strict hierarchies to regulate
relationships an equality and degree
were embedded into every individual
family an institution an Troilus and
Cressida Shakespeare wrote Oh
when degree is shaken which is the
ladder to all high designs the
enterprise is sick
take degree away untuned that string and
hard what discord follows when degree is
shaken in other words when people lose
their sense of identity and distinction
there's sure to be chaos in the past
peace depended not on equality except in
that everybody was equally different but
on place certainly few would want to
return to such a fixed cosmos most of us
would agree that human rights universal
access to adjust the system education
health care all of these are desirable
furthermore we believe we should be
judged on our skills and talents rather
than our social position and gender
these are some of the unquestioned
foundational principles of the modern
secular world and they seem to be pretty
solid still it is interesting to
consider that these truths related to
equality are not always self-evident to
illustrate the danger of equality Rene
Girard has used the example of twins
according to him twins were once
universally feared and they were often
abandoned or killed they represented an
uncanny replication a double that
inspired genuine horror why Girard
suggests that if there was too much
sameness or equality in the hierarchy
there was a danger of rivalry and
contagious violence in the past one
situated oneself on a vertical hierarchy
with God on the top and the devil below
distinction and rank was everything our
distinctive place in the cosmic order
was not the least bit arbitrary and
maintaining it kept society from
collapsing pointing this out it's just
to show that hierarchies are so embedded
in the human experience and perhaps our
TAS should be to make them more healthy
conscious and fair rather than trying to
remove them wholesale we need an up and
a down a good and an evil a big and a
small we need vertical death not just
horizontal universal rights and good
hierarchies actually allow us to express
our virtue in relation to others today
we believe we are too enlightened to
serve God's and yet we serve movie stars
and ideologies we go to stadiums and
worship rock stars and yet we believe
ourselves to be beyond religion we might
not believe in religion but we enact it
regardless despite ourselves and truth
we want godly beings to rule over us
maybe even more than we want equal
rights we may believe in equality but
still we tremble and bow to a person of
greater rank even if that person is a
particularly terrible politician whom we
loathe the mystical aura still hangs
over those in power moreover even the
most empirical scientists worships his
data and the miracles of nature and
dreams of a greater universe to which he
cannot possibly be equal to in that
sense the atheist may still retain a
salutary fear of God which he just calls
the universe as an illustration of the
intractable nature of religion some of
my students worship in the Church of
heavy metal music they engage in a
series of communal exercises going to
concerts and contemplations of heavy
metal music listening to songs they wear
costumes and esoteric signs of
membership tattoos for instance
and even if they consider themselves to
be non conformists they can form
strictly to the dogmatic rules of the
Church of heavy-metal music with its
temples or concert halls and its
theological principles they have a
history as well there is an official
hierarchy of great bands as well as a
multitude of heretical subgroups as a
young songwriter I tried to emulate Bob
Dylan Bob Dylan in turn learned from
Woody Guthrie who also had his
traditional sources I was absorbing the
informal lineage and hierarchy of folk
musicians which updates itself
throughout time I couldn't even have
begun to write a song before studying
that tradition before copying its norms
and assimilating the rules and axioms
which meant listening to records and
imitating the masters every tradition
has its canon of Heroes the Romantic era
I made as a young person in the
revolutionary spirit of Rousseau and
Lenin was not to embrace the limitations
of a tradition which turn out to be
freeing I would have been a better
guitar player if I had more formal
musical training but I was blinkered by
that whole 60s notion of spontaneous
freedom individual expression is really
nothing but an illusion without lineage
and we cannot create anything without
knowing our artistic and spiritual
lineages still every tradition becomes
heartless and tyrannical if it is not
renewed constantly popular song included
it doesn't follow however that every
tradition is by nature something
oppressive that needs to be transcended
I'm not a Catholic but every time I walk
by notre-dame Cathedral in Paris where I
live I feel crushed by the weight of
something so much greater than it could
be conceived of in my own puny
imagination it's fashionable to talk
about the corruption of the Catholic
Church and yet the greatness of Catholic
culture is an evidence all around
especially in Europe churches provide a
shelter for contemplation in a busy
world you
for atheists or tourists how ugly our
modern cities would be without their
temples churches or temples are the
original institutions for human worship
aren't they proof enough that human
beings are made to worship what is great
religious or otherwise traditions can be
as much about wisdom and competence as
they are about maintaining power
traditions are good for one thing
because the heroes of our tradition can
give us something to aspire to
there are conscious ways of regulating
hierarchies which seem to be intractable
even in our biological nature
hierarchies will always exist in any
case just as there will always be an up
and a down we can consciously embrace
traditions or be unconsciously animated
by them the romantics were right to say
that emancipation does lie in the
individual but the individual also
contains the tradition within him or
herself only the individual can renew
that tradition which will be dead and
mechanical without his or her
participation the individual is key as a
romantics understood but we actually
forfeit our individuality when we
neglect or abandon our ancestral wisdom
traditions just as when we adhere to
them blindly there is a delicate balance
between dogma and freedom to uphold in
other words the individual stands
between tradition and nature at the very
center he or she becomes a hero not by
overturning or burning down the temples
of tradition but by creatively and
humbly renewing them constantly recently
I asked a classroom the students if they
had any heroes they seemed almost
insulted by the very idea I've noticed
that young people these days who tend to
be cynical about hierarchy are
dismissive of having heroes but this is
a mistake kids and adults need their
heroes we need to worship to bow down to
something greater than ourselves the
traditions contain keys to a library
that is inexhaustibly rich
we can't find our individual voice
without them the narcissist doesn't
acknowledge this he or she can only see
the mirror again there is wisdom and
laying ourselves down at the feet of the
gods whoever they may be the great
Leonard Cohen in my case maybe it is
even more important to worship than it
is to be free or equal to somebody in
any case equality is not the whole story
it provides no inspiration for aiming
high in any case people are religious
whether they want to be or not we may
never worship the Sun God or fear
damnation with the same intensity as we
did in the past and yet there are still
higher and lower principles to serve Bob
Dylan put it best in his song gotta
serve somebody you're gonna have to
serve somebody you're gonna have to
serve somebody it may be the devil or it
may be the Lord but you're gonna have to
serve somebody thank you