hello everybody welcome and I'm glad
that you're tuning in and thank you for
that so I'm really pleased I to
introduce you to Hugh Woodson in this
dialogue I had read a book his one of
his most recent books it's called real
ones called Vegas a hiding theologians
approach to Heidegger and loved it and
and thought that he had a unique voice
and perspective on Heidegger and
theology that brought the two and
revealed some of and spoke spoke a lot
to what we've been talking about on this
channel and all the dialogues that I've
been having
speaking directly to nihilism to the
meaning crisis and and possible ways to
one find kind of disclose more where we
are at in this particular time and how
to most intelligently and humanely
respond to this time with everything
that's happening and no doubt the the
shift
what's going on with theology and
particularly religion and what that
shift means where it's headed and what
kind of pertinence it has for our
understanding of our own lives on all on
every level really is I think what we're
all Oh what what all the conversations
seem to to be circumambulating around
it's come as it's revealing itself to me
anyways and so it was really great to
reach out to him and have him so
enthusiastically
and warmly agree to have a conversation
with me and we I think we both found it
really enlightening in fact after the
after after our conversation he had
texted me and he said he said you got me
you got me working on my own channel and
I'm working on ideas to make videos so
so that was really delightful and I'm
just glad to have him part of this
conversation a definitely a creative
thoughtful unique voice in this so I'm
just gonna go ahead and read
I'll just read what he wrote introducing
himself on his website and I'll include
the link to that you would s'en is an
assistant professor of English at
Tarrant County College in Fort Worth
Texas he has a PhD or sorry he's a PhD
candidate in English at the University
of Texas at Arlington
and he is currently writing his
dissertation on Heidegger post humanism
and rhetoric he holds a theological
master's in history and theology and a
master's in theological studies from
write Divinity School at Texas Christian
University an MA in English from the
University of North Texas a master's in
education and curriculum instruction
from the University of Texas at
Arlington he is the author of high
daguerreian theologies and a theologian
if the theologians guide to Heidegger
his research specializes in contemporary
critical and literary theory Shakespeare
rhetoric Heidegger continental
philosophy theological and philosophical
hermeneutics systematic theology and
existential theology his works include
articles on bell hooks Slavs eASIC
Richard Wright
and Lacan he has written 14 entries for
form four for volume race and ethnicity
in America pre-contact to the present he
is also author of more than 30 books
including novels poetry poetry
collections and short story collections
he lives in Dallas Fort Worth area with
his wife Samantha so as you can see I
could barely articulate everything all
the studying that he's done and all the
degrees that he has and all of the work
that he's done he's obviously
impressively prolific and what's really
interesting to me is you can feel at
least I could feel and getting to know
him the spirit out of which all that
arises from right I think I think
usually when I at least for me when I
think of theology or theologians I get
this kind of picture of these kind of
old dudes you know in libraries or
something you know were you know don't
talk much and I don't know this is some
kind of stodgy heavy you know medieval
pictures come into my mind here though
is like he's he's got a spark an
aliveness to him and a curiosity and a
playfulness that really I would imagine
speaks to what he refers to himself is
primarily um a an artist
[Music]
in fact he characterizes a lot of the
people that he studies as artists and
and a big part is is what will reveal
especially in this first half of the
conversation I'm breaking you up in two
parts the first half is is mostly about
him and where he's coming from and his
writing and who he's interested in and
why and so he sees himself it and kind
of found himself just following his
interest having carving out a pretty
unique perspective on Heidegger and
theology I would say that he you could
say he writes he's written in a way that
is kind of like you could say from a
theological theologians perspective what
can they get out of Heidegger and I
would say also that you know implicitly
and probably explicitly what what if we
look at theology from a Haida garyun
perspective how do those two things when
they talk to each other
what what's possible and I think that is
you could imagine how that would that
possibility those two things talking to
each other deeply reveal and shed light
on our current time so my understanding
is that on one level you know we are
talking about philosophy and we're
talking about theology yet what those
categories articulate is something
that's actually not abstract but
fundamental in our concrete experience
in other words how is it that everything
on every level in our concrete life by
virtue of what does it show presents
itself as intelligible at all right when
you start to ask that
question then you start to get into
fundamental understandings of the
innermost sense of something and the the
uppermost sense of something the Theo's
the gods I view the on toast the
innermost if you bring those two things
together those intimately sit under and
above as horizons of what makes anything
intelligible as it is at all right how
we can even perceive the difference
between where a town ends and a force
begins that that it just closes itself
as in that way at all that we can
discern those things right and build
towns based on that discernment is the
movement of intelligibility which are
given by these deep deep pre thematic
understanding of being so as we're
listening as you're listening to this I
what I want to encourage you to do is is
is is to tune into that that these
authors and the people that we're
talking about in Heidegger are really
addressing that level of things not just
abstract ideas right but that which
animates our perceptions our pre
cognitions right as for Miki would say
our relevance realization alright enjoy
this first half is mostly us getting to
know him and what he's up to
and and what it's like being him and
then unfortunately he had some technical
difficulties so it cuts off and that's
where I cut off that's where I end this
the first section and then the second
part will be in in video in this next
video and I'll make another video kind
of pre you know giving giving some
pretext for that and in fortune
when he came back on I forgot to hit the
record button for like 10 minutes so I
will I will fill I'll try to backtrack
and fill those 10 minutes and in the
next before the next video where it
really starts to go into dialogue OSes
as I like to say or we start to not just
going in dialectics and understanding in
orienting but we're actually the
conversation becomes almost like an
entity in itself and me we begin to be
thunk breathed by by it and so I'll
really set in in a couple days or so
alright thanks for tuning in I look
forward to hearing your comments and
much love all right welcome so this is
first this is the first time we've met
so I I have how I came across you as I
got your um I bought your book is it
heidegger's theologians your I think
it's your most recent book oh the most
recent one is theologians God yes yes
yeah there's two of them maybe that's
the one I'm reading currently I read the
first one okay that was hot
yeah and I was uh it it resonated on on
a bunch of different levels like one is
I don't think that I personally and I've
scoured everything on Heidegger's as far
as I can tell and I've never seen
somebody really zero in on this
perspective of theology and Heidegger
like the like though there was one book
it's like well what as a theology if I
read Heidegger like I'm like that's a
very different way of looking and in it
how it speaks to me and how it links to
kind of like what I'm doing and like a
lot of the conversations and dialogues
like
having as it seems to be what's emerging
is really dealing with I think what
Heidegger called nihilism all of its
forms in all of its nothingness and all
of its concealment right and I mean I'm
in I live in the Bay Area which is where
tech like technology I I'm I'm right at
the point where I'm looking at the
future for the whole world happening
quicker and quicker and quicker and
there's a lot of people I've been
talking to you that are trying to make
sense of this right feel a sense of
urgency about it but it's not obvious
how to respond and in a big conversation
in that has been well what is it is it
possible for people to find meaning mmm
through Christianity right then one of
the conversations and it's been a really
productive dialogue oh I would say the
conversation that we had hasn't been
about like it's it's not been about
gotten bogged down into the like is
there a god and I do you believe in God
and in any of those kind of new feet
like atheist debates it's more like it's
a pop is it even it is it even possible
to have a religion in that sense right
if you are religious and you go to
church is does that actually is it
possible to not be in the age of
nihilism and so even if you do that all
the time like you know I think you it's
all you can still say it's like yeah
there's something going on that our time
seems to be um this kind of loss of
being as hider who would talk about and
so a lot of conversations have been been
circling around that so when I I read
your your your books I'm like would this
is this is you have a perspective on
this and an angle in a place that you're
looking from that has me wonder what is
it that's caught what's what's speaking
to you such that then you're drawn to
write about
like are you I have all kinds of
curiosities is like are you hello Jen
are you like are you like are you a
Christian are you like how did woody but
what are you listening to says have you
feel of attackers right so we can't I
can't let that one slide like being kind
of uniquely kind of calibrated in those
lives so so uniquely calibrated in those
lines because I think um I mean I study
theology so I went to seminary still
have two degrees in theology and then i
studied english and literature
shakespeare a UNT and then i was a high
school teacher for some time for i
became a professor at TCC Tarrant County
College Fort Worth so a lot of my
mentors I had initially when I studied
theology were church historian that's
one of my mentors right his talk to you
and the other one was a person who
specialized in crippled guard but that
one seems made bigger and so both of
them knew how to go really well
typically and so I came to Heidegger by
way of Sartre learning um who's this
Archer person who is he doing right oh
but I've always kind of kept myself kind
of between these two roads Heidegger and
philosophy and then what for their role
goes but also hydras contributions to
theology and theologians in particular
and how they take their road so I'd be
kind of a philosopher theologian or
theologian philosopher sort of thing
kind of bridging both of these roads the
same time you currently you have you're
married do you have kids
okay yes they give me more time also
also just one of the things Isis what I
actually clicked on your authored page
and
look I wanted it I knew that you'd you
approached me and then I looked like you
don't write poetry you have like 20
books I'm like which one I picked
because I wanted to read it before up to
you but I couldn't download cuz it was
you know still in the mail we got help
you have a going sort of dialogue about
all these things yeah that's yeah I
started writing novels I'm first novel I
was like in a sixth grade my first novel
you're in the sixth grade when you've
worked ready yeah sixth grade was like a
hundred and fifty pages front him back
uh-huh cursive and I look on it now I
have no idea what that stop it seems
like it's some kind of time travel or
doing something I don't know with Ingo
woods but I just got a break working and
working then I put aside for a while and
then I start writing again and I started
writing novels and writing poetry short
stories all those things and I've always
got me I'm always I will always be a
novelist it's now part of who I am
created wise you know yeah I used to
paint I was a painter at one point when
I was younger younger younger person I
used to study the grete sonic impression
so I have those artistic streak in me I
think and I think that I'm always kind
of thought that that's probably how I
see Heidegger as a sort of an artist in
a lot of ways I mean he's presenting
things and artistic approach even this
idea of being is a very aesthetic so
theologians typically are artists I
think as well yeah and they calibrate
things in certain ways based on how they
see the systematic theology working
because because the first book are the
four theologians that are influenced by
a group particularly and each of them
use Heidegger different ways and so I
take these four paths as times that
begin with Heidegger but then they
become themselves what I call Heidegger
in theology which of course is a
blasphemous thing to say
with that let's see what I will go with
that that's what I feel you know what
they're doing
yeah I thought that that became kind of
I think a good inroads to this ongoing
conversation about what is higher degree
have to say to theology and what places
how to grab which i think is are you
kind of come to the fold one more now I
think but as you mentioned I mean
there's not a whole lot know about that
I mean I know there's Judith wolf who I
know is right and but there's a lot
there's a lot the French the French
theologians great now monologist but
they're they seem to be a lot about
defining themselves and how they're not
yes there they are but they're pushing
against Heidegger at the same time
exactly saying exactly truly I think
there's a tension there I think and I
think a lot of it is I think a lot of us
like that ignorant or maybe even a
forgetfulness about what Heidegger's
early career was like he was a previous
study to be a a priest in school that
was kind of get it you know and then he
moved away from that but yeah the
processor roots are always there you
know you do the wolf is talk about that
you know cross roots are still there and
his first his first teaching position
was out of school he worked hand in hand
with a lot of the allusions to me
working with he worked with boatman
boatman was gets their started he worked
for Tillich when you're testing started
so these shared ideas he and both my did
a lot of work together you know that
Mitch and seminars they would conduct
together they were gonna write a book
the other so they always are walking
hand-in-hand I think they realize that
the ology of philosophy can inform each
other about being in such just changed
that's something there you go back to
Aquinas or Agustin they they recognize
that lastly you contributed to what
we're doing I mean you're Plato's or
Dustin and yeah you know finest
Aristotle and it's always there but yeah
over time it's become kind of he because
of his not because there's not see you
know that's the affiliation in the third
it's become really tricky to figure out
what can he say
so theology having been involved yeah
totally
you know not that the more I read about
that the more the sense that actually
strange assay but I just get this sense
it he was more irritated with with the
Nazis because it was it wasn't the Nazi
Party that he thought was gonna happen
right he was actually in a certain sense
and actually we just read something
about about that somebody who wrote a
book about played Plato and and
Heidegger and where he was weaving it
together he's like I think that
Heidegger actually miss read Plato
thank you Miss he's an artist yeah he's
not concerned with staying true to the
Greek as he translated the Greek so he
plays with that a little bit I mean he
can take me there are dogs of course you
know he's only that right we take like a
citizen and we say this sentence
represents the whole the same thing yes
certain aspects of Plato certain aspects
yeah its amici for sure advance his own
philosophy right so so often what was
been said a lot about he does with a lot
of those speakers is that he what they
call Heidegger eyes as those thinkers
which is the term that God may use he he
uses them for his own purposes without
really being true to what they're dogs
you can easily look at his readings of
Plato and say well there's good stuff
there but also this translation of this
Greek word is not actually there's a
playful playful approach to what are you
doing that and that and that playfulness
and that that that link that you
actually made yourself of like what I
heard you say is like yeah these are the
past that I've taken like the middle the
middle way between it like theology and
the philosophy then he said this thing
but really like I'll always be a
I'll always and then there's a way where
you you you kind of like you said that
about Heidegger and and other
theologians so when you like I guess I'm
at all is kind of asking with the high
daguerreian kind of question which is
when you say artists now I'm not asking
you necessarily what an artist is but
what do you mean right when you say
artists what is the the difference that
makes the difference that makes
Heidegger an artist in you and artists
whatever it is because I just get this
sense with you of like reading your work
and talking to you now of like this
there's something callin to you that has
you do this right you're listening to
something yeah I think I think that
there's an aesthetic approach that these
thinkers are doing aesthetically so yeah
I mean you could I mean if you look at
well you know take Rahner or Chile or
different was they had high degree in a
certain in a certain window of time
there so like with runners in the 30s
when he's a fry board while he is
negotiating these Nazi affiliations
you've got Tillich in the early career
writers or writers is he he's a German I
just bought one of his books you brought
yeah yeah Robert is German roots he was
calculating yeah and I'm like ooh this
is dangerous and this is a whole world
I'm like I don't know if I'm gonna fight
yeah yeah yeah thing about Rogers is his
dissertation was on I agree and the
dissertation actually failed like his uh
his chairperson failed his dissertation
he thought it was too I basically kind
of pushed aside and that book got
published later he became one of his
famous early works the spirit in the
world which used Heidegger very
explicitly as well as a another Catholic
Baker that he's kind of leaving together
but he he he would not have been what he
had been
as a theologian not right with his
contribute to cook speeches to Vatican 2
and how he was involved in hashing out
these issues with the Pope during that
period in 60s and 70s he became probably
is try to make that piston forest far as
say I think probably the most
influential and most theological of
theologians not just Catholic but I
would say in German his body of work is
master yes wrote all the time
everything's huge he's considered
systematically but he's also influenced
I think about phenomenology which I
think it's party yeah the whole side of
it of the 30s now meet you the other was
like Chilean Tillich is a he kind of
falls a lab with an existential theology
which I which I've written yeah he's
concerned with being in a very
specialized way how if you read any he
released yeah I know
really yeah when I was in I think I was
like right out of high school I was
reading Tillich and
but the thing you know because because
John considers Killick one of the
prophets of the of the addressing the
meaning crisis right and he in like he
makes his distinction because one of the
things where John's kind of coming from
me saying that you know I don't know if
it's actually possible right for for us
to have for it to be viable today given
the age that we're in and given like how
deeply embedded in science in ways that
fashioned us that we don't even have to
know about it
right can we can we can we have a
religion that's theist
mmm he's not saying like he's not
arguing whether or not we're it's more
like is it viable will it will it turn
in relief being in a cent in a sensible
way and that's what a big question that
he has an in his work and he Tillich is
is one of the few people that he thinks
that Tillich is actually not a theist
yeah I think that's a good critique it's
a bit tricky because he is he is so
influenced by philosophy that he is a
bit hesitant to think of God in a
theistic metaphysical you know way that
goes traditional in terms of how a
tradition we just same Heidegger same 42
that well you should look at things in a
traditional way metaphysics becomes
something that gets in the way right
what you do right so you want to get
beyond that so that's why I think and
often this is a boutique of Hagar's
being a time it looks like he's talking
about God certainly capital B being but
he's trying to stay away from the term
altogether like the traps you're going
to be sort of metaphysical sort of
things that you can't get out right yeah
you know that best of excellent or
tedium that babies makes him someone
that gets champion that they've a lot
hmm or I think more Postma
theologians but then he gets looked at
kind of kind of a standoffish sort of
way by those that like you know wood
bark are martyrs like you know thinkers
that are uplifting the games God the way
that's the centerpiece of everything
right right so there's some camps here
you know they quit boat motors County
between what he's talking about t
mythologizing baby which is given to the
same thing taken out of these
metaphysical assumptions we have right
give it something more pure right trying
to as well yeah but they're but they
think that these this thing this the
thing is very tricky because to do
theology you have to take up the deals
but to think of the deals requires you
to go back to the root word of POS and
be able to think of it in a in a non
humanistic way hmm right so all those
pieces are all up and dealing with
things that way it becomes treatment
right feels what if you can't take me
into take me into what what is it that
makes Theo's feels right what what is
that what is the thing that makes
gathers you know and as theology and
everything around that like shine forth
it's it depends on it depends on how you
sit or heõs within a systematic theology
structure so like I mentioned I
mentioned bar bars concerned with the
word logos yeah everything that makes
the O's manifest
yeah he's Energon in a way that yeah
bolsters the deals yeah do you have
other thinkers that might look at in
terms of history so the trajectory are
tired with the deals so when does
history or time began the deals is
something is there first everything
spins off of that thinkers like Tillich
Tillich is more concerned with the beam
of bees like what what is it that's the
underpin
Theo's yeah yeah we can relate to at a
level of both not yeah it's gotta be
their personal thing you know comes kind
of a I don't say either subjectivity but
it becomes kind of something that you
can see it deals that they projects back
to you like in the model day daddy of
the image of God coming back but it's
the thing that if you think back to like
maybe clay dough and everstyle on how
they look at deals they're looking at
deals in a way that is somewhat these
things but also not these you know so it
play those things right says like see us
and Greek sense
extreme sense is more of like that the
God's eye view right like they create
something that creates but there I mean
this is something that means something
traits but in itself is not created you
know it's like the the unmoved mover
it's something that moves but it does
not move itself it's the centerpiece of
all the things that are connected to it
so you're looking at in a very logical
way
so in something so that Theo's internal
theology is concerned with the logic the
logos are a bit more so yeah the
Heidegger thing kind of gets to later in
his career trying to figure out right
play more of the logos theological yeah
gathering that that sense of just again
that's just it's interesting like a lot
of well I I think this is just the case
with theologians and mystical writings
is the sense of just the word logos it's
so that sense of like a hand that's GAD
or it together like I know that like I
think was aware that he that's what he
stars going to the Greek and looking at
the Greek word even if the Greek word
logo says is a it's an anomaly of term
and then but you have different version
of logos to terrible you know there's
five there's five you taste and logos
nominally is a term then used to be a
centerpiece but you have logos that
could be low gaan which is of of logos
yeah you know or you have
logu which is generating of local see
different versions he's looking at in
terms of the purest form that hasn't
been corrupted by tradition and
corrupted by the human the humanization
of that - where he can point to truth
which becomes for him as you know this
idea about consumer focus silver then
becomes a form of Theo's or form of I
think and then the thing with ilithyia
Alethea
that sense see for the longest time this
is this is um you know I I started
reading for me I I start broke into
philosophy when I was actually in art
school San Francisco I'm a Turner
sculptor and my hero is Michelangelo oh
yeah my hero - oh yeah totally like that
so I don't know if you can see this but
there's a here's my house that's called
this desire you can kind of oh yeah okay
can you see it so it's like a tree right
what tree and this is actually like an
image it this is the logos right disease
of the tool right the emerge you know
logo says oh me coming out is coming out
yeah there's some emergent quality in it
it seems like it seems one of the things
that I know that um in in conversations
with John and in person with everybody
but really what John is been talking
about that but it seems like what's
viable is what he's saying is east to
eat he makes a distinction between like
the divine right something that's divine
in the Fiat theistic right and sacred
and he makes that distinction I think I
think he gets actually I think that I
think till it gets at that too
he does yeah he does yeah those are
that's a key distinction theistic and
sacred there are different modes of
being different things exist right there
for different versions of a concealment
right right they cannot conceal yourself
and then the sacred they don't conceal
and then those two virgins they allow
for feels to be translated either in
terms of the person interpersonal
understand or the sacred in terms of
sacramental understanding feels like the
practice of ecclesiology the church
being something that allows the O's to
represent is still which are two
different views and they're two
different yeah
some people never some people never
understand
Theo's through ecclesiology or the
attackers they just never get there some
people need to have the personal
experience more so you know there's me
that sacrament as something to ground
and then touch and be able to feel the
presence of feels right which is very
different views well they use that you
have to have in terms of these two sides
right and there's a sense of like with
the divine right yeah shining like
shining through it right you have that
sense of like higher right here snake
RedHat can have this sense of where it's
more like that like the Anto right and
to the merchants of something good like
a complexity coming up that isn't is it
like created but here merges somehow and
it has that sense of like where you can
it's not necessarily like considering
you as a person you can't necessarily
have a conversation with it but it can
give you a felt sense of fullness
meaning the sense of secret right I'm
very tech very tactile or something you
can feel with the senses you know or
something that Heidegger uses a term
that big might relate to this idea of
existence EK standing out of something
yes but relationship you still have
something bad that has not stood out
from
there is something that is metaphysical
something that's beneath Wow
what you know I'm still I'm still quite
struck with like so were you born in
Texas yes yes I know that you live
closer you live close to my son which is
oh yeah okay live mainly in Arlington
yeah I've been here pretty much the
whole time I was waiting military for
about six years
I'm just struck by like I just read it's
a rare thing to have like Texas to grow
a Haida garyun true I mean there is a
there's a couple of really famous well I
am in the camps of hiding here there's
there's one person is kind of a old
elder statesman within Heidegger his
studies he teaches at University of
Texas at Dallas he's written a lot on
Heidegger and each earring and
Heidegger's Nazis Nazi roots
Charles Baumbach and then there's
another person that was his student I
think she's at University of Dallas
her name was a Cynthia Nielsen she's
also kind of you have a high degree
circle like Laura Texas high degree
circle that meets in this area where all
the people come down and they and they
interact and have conferences on
heidegger here just I think it's uh it's
north you like Ana Plano area like right
where you had mentioned you had
mentioned before we started recording
something about like yeah you wrote your
first book and it wasn't like I got the
sense of like it wasn't like you were
around a lot of hi to Gary ins or
something right as if there's a lot of
year-round but like and you talked about
like once you got out there
people are like who's this guy and that
yeah yeah good some of the heidegger
world there's these lineages that go on
it's like these generations so like when
someone comes along it's like they know
they are backing nobody study with and
who that person stay research like this
lately so like I I was somewhat I did
study initially with had a good person
at my school where I am now
not aware I teach for the school when
fishing my PhD and she is um kind of the
older statesman but I was kind of an
unknown quantity I guess when I came you
know I liked his book just kind of came
out over who this person what is he
why is he doing Heidegger in theology
was that it's not a common thing for
people get just right away so I got I
got a lot of a lot of I mean like a lot
of correspondence with people that were
asking me about it there were these
circles and I talked to other people so
these different edge salons you know
people that go up and so he said who you
study with and they did kind of did I
kind of realize that there's this sort
of real circle involved in terms of like
who's you studied with so you have like
people that either knew Heigl he was
alive they live on with these lineages
no he died in 76 so you have people that
study with your there are students and
then there's students students so these
these different generations that come
down so it becomes almost like a sacred
handling in a lot of ways in terms of
where you been and I think initially
there was a little bit of trepidation
regarding what I was knowing who I was
it's been interesting to kind of be you
know welcomed in whatever these circles
are that I never knew existed but you
know and being a voice to carve out
another path and hasn't really been
looked at as much as he could I
mentioned like dude or there's a couple
other people too but it hasn't really
been print you know Creveling along
those crafts you know the theology and
Heidegger often looked at me strange
bedfellows they don't really work
together I think but it takes a person
to their study theology I study I study
Luther history Christian that's what I
specialize in Paul and studied Heidegger
was something that was kind of naturally
went well all the theology I studied
initially
the thing and how did you did you come
in to see ology well what I'm hearing is
you came into the theology isn't like
you learn everything is an artist right
yeah and and the did you come though
into theology because out of being a
practicing Christian like art yeah okay
god I think I I wanted to learn more
about things because I think you kind of
realize over time that there's different
ways just like it was in the first
hundred years of Christian I and I think
now it becomes possible for you know a
person to go to a church and be in a
church for 40 50 years and constantly
get a sanitized diet version that's not
very robust and they don't know it and
they're you know it's kinda like being
in the bottom of the cave yeah so when I
decided to go to seminary TCU here's
what these things where they always tell
you initially when you go in then one or
two things can happen either your faith
can be broadened and expanded or your
faith is unravel that's thought both of
those things happen and me going in it
just made me have be more of a
clear-eyed in terms of one's the one who
the thinkers are dealing with in these
different things these different periods
of time or the big questions that are
going on what does Jesus ministry like
where's the Reformation and well you
know we're all these issues then that
make Russia and what is today not became
really fascinated ranked and informed me
becoming a theologian along those lines
and then of course the philosophy does
help me understand theology olive oil
correct
right so they mutually I have to say
like my understanding of theology when I
when I read theologians like their
philosophers it's really difficult to
draw the clear lines between the two
that's very true yeah you look at a look
at was awesome and acquired us yeah you
know the medieval Baker's during their
time all of them were looked at during
their time as philosophers but they're
clearly
this ya know and of course I mean tilaka
course is that way I mention a rider
Beaumont even McQuarrie who you know
who's one of the the the two they Trent
isolated hikers being at time in 62 he
was a Anglican terms of his background
but he was very much a philosopher in
terms of his dissertation is on
Heidegger in Beaumont really good yeah
so I think you can't get away from that
I mean I think it's a good deal Logan
has to be somewhat of a philosopher you
know I think probably I think probably
Carl Bart was probably ruled over his
grave and saying that's very true you
have to yeah look at it from a phyllo
sort of way in terms of what is what am
I doing here piece wise yeah it did but
I think but the reverses course is not
as true I mean philosophers typically
it's really true there's a distinction
for sure for example but I think it has
to go the theologians become lost
because I think that ease into howland
the systematic theology from a
philosophical point of view I think it
makes it more rich thanks first if you
can look at these I mean I mentioned
we're like like a goose and the Gustin
will never go with you yeah
bonus right yeah yeah I mean who knows
were Christian yeah 400 500 you know
seee or even Luther Luther had some
philosophy so it very much he's what
they do and it brings it to another
level in terms of asking these deeper
questions about field yeah if you're
doing it strictly from just a biblical
studies perspective you're always going
to be at a disadvantage
Ranko certainty there's gaps there
certain things aren't there yeah yeah a
billion with the philosophy you become
an artist you become someone that
they're how do i shape and mold this to
speak to a certain
concern or an issue that makes theology
live all prosper so you got that when
you got fascinated with with with with
the theology and how that works it's not
I'm not hearing that it was a
I'm not hearing at least I'm not getting
the sense from you as you're talking
about it where didn't seem like it like
unravels
and it sounds like it it like it just
didn't seem like that that was the
question that you were you didn't go in
or with that question yeah yeah what was
the thing like what were you harkening
to like or what was harkening to you
right about the theologians it's like
because I think when I'm getting about
being an artist so far just in the way
that kind of Herrmann ethically the felt
sense I have of when you speak it is is
is that there's something that Glatt
shines forth that that that it's it's it
doesn't it doesn't come as propositions
right we're it's more like a sense that
you just find your interest in it right
you kind of go through follow you follow
this horizon that keeps moving and you
look behind you near like you have a
whole body of work and eight books
you're still like you're if anything you
just articulate like you're more close
to the mystery you get that sense with
you it's like you're trying to solve
anything
you're trying to get close to something
is that I think I mean there's I think
that's my continental philosophy sort of
sensibilities there I think you're
always trying to figure out how to get
one step further toward to something
where that something is I mean that's
what Heidegger doing the Heidegger's
constantly concerned with you know on
concealment later in life he goes to
porridge really so he's getting to these
things that feed everybody's experiences
in the world in ways that speak to
humans in general going further what he
did in his early career you know and so
that's kind of what I think I try to do
is I try to figure out how how I make
these things you know relevant now and
then be able to speak to them now
I mean post humanism is something that I
work a lot that's what a big things with
it right you know you're not gonna be on
the humor they're going beyond those
issues and and lets us know how we
understand technology
right right materiality and those issues
like that those are all to exit our
cutting edge that constantly allow
philosophy to be dragged along I guess
you can say yeah way because he speaks
to now because it because think about
this something we think about philosophy
there's certain things that have been
discussed and written about that if I
write about those things now it's like
we're sort of good about that wiki add
to it only thing I can do is I can say
the world I'm in 2020 there's only that
gonna have new but what what nuances are
there to that speaking ways that you
know Sarkar's not speaking to or
Schopenhauer you know 18th century or
19th century and so that becomes
something that motivates me I think
trying to figure out how to keep high
degree at the table yeah and some of
these things where he influences
everybody he's considered you know
obviously one of the most important if
not we'll learn a few most important
philosophers yeah weird era Dom because
people they focus on their dot anyway
saying thank you go that way yeah these
thinkers constantly are sighted
constantly were read translated you know
they constantly have new generations
that are exposing them and finding
things for them so but with the problem
in Heidegger is that there's often this
time we want to prevent him from having
the voice the table because they're not
yeah the fact he wasn't a good person
right I think about it but most
philosophers aren't known for their
emotional you would never want to you
never want to like them have a talk with
everything all the bad guy you know so
it's kinda like you can't base it on
them and their personal background you
have to base it on what is it that
they're saying that constantly yeah
speak to us now you know it had to not
see something that's that's a bigger
goal I know there's camps within
Heidegger studies that refuse to look at
the Gnostic please don't yeah we you
know me my one of my one of my mentors
early when I stay high Oh mr. name but
she um just never wanted to accept or
read any of that once those black
notebooks came out you want to go there
she was just very interesting sanitizing
I'm going away was helpful for her but
wasn't helpful for I he was a complex
person they had a lot of you know yeah
complex issues that eita started