welcome to the stola the stoah is a
digital campfire where we go here and
dialogue about what matters most at the
night's edge what's happening now
[Music]
and people thank you very much Peter for
that handsome introduction so I'd like
to invite people to just close their
eyes
and I'm aware of my heart rates elevated
and as I said
starts.this slightly slow down when
we're ever tingling in my hands I'm
still aware of the heartbeat really
there yeah and a desire to say the right
thing to come across well I've been
feeling quite a lot of fear through my
system over the last couple of days and
watching is that kind of coming into
this space but as I'm speaking it part
of it fades away
so the lights invite you to open your
eyes and if they're know if anyone here
if you know what I mean if you can get a
sense for the coherence of the group
space and just track when is the grip
more in coherence and when is it fall
out of coherence
and what I seem to have found in my own
journey with truth trauma not so much
technology is there are trauma for
example that is causing the slight
performance anxiety in me the sense of
wanting to be good the way I'm kind of
holding myself that trauma stops us from
tapping into actual truth because trauma
leads to a suppression or a dissociation
from our current predicament
it's a fragmentation between thought and
emotion and yeah I just wanted to start
this way to really kind of experiment
with bringing a certain level of emotion
into the space on one level because I
feel that it is actually the most
important part for us to start building
collective coherence
so with that oh okay cool yeah so this
this is about a trauma trauma truth and
technology the three T's and I believe
that the first two are at the core of
what is going on or wrong in society I
want to speak about trauma I mean trauma
on the level of the individual trauma on
the level of the collective and trauma
intergeneric intergenerational two
and it's my belief that and maybe many
of you share lots of these beliefs that
the vast majority of negative or
militant actions we see in the world are
not the result of psychopathy much of
them are most of them are the
consequence of unresolved developmental
trauma
and I think what Peter is done with the
store this like invitation for us to
bring yeah almost like girls know if
you'd agree with us but it's like we're
almost like trying out a new way of
being it's like a new way of practicing
of doing things in and I strongly
strongly believe that a huge part of how
we're going to transcend our current
predicament is how we allow trauma into
our relational fields and realizing that
so much incoherence be it politically be
it socially yet just enter subjectively
is a consequence of us not having the
capacity to integrate thoughts feeling
an emotion because of undigested trauma
there's another piece that I think is
important too just so I'm just putting a
lot of little flags in the grounds here
this individual trauma as the basis of
many of our negative predicaments but
there is also collective trauma and we
could kind of go down a union pathway
here but I think it could be much more
simple than that which is that when you
have a predicament like the Holocaust
the trauma of that time embeds and
manifests itself both biologically and
culturally and so the stories and the
narratives that people tell post-war
they kind of linger in the energetic
cultural space and then there's
intergenerational trauma which as Laura
you know equal and sexual trauma is
really the the epigenetic we are
carrying the epigenetic residue of so
many of our ancestors and I think what a
lot of these could have met a modder and
sense making conversations lack is that
there's a hell of a lot of abstraction
right it's all meta it's all sense
making and though people often
speak to embodiments they don't speak
from embodiment and I can often also say
this in my own my own life right this is
why I wanted to get a try a little bit
more vulnerability than usual because I
can track in myself when I'm going meta
because I should really be going meta
visibly when I'm going meta because I've
learned a behavioral pattern to
dissociate and I just want to emphasize
and in the sense making community I'm
kind of like going in the warfighting
straight away but and this little sense
making community will there is I deeply
believe there is a lack of embodied
speech and I put myself in that category
of someone who struggles to them
articulate from that place and again
like I said the consequence of that the
consequence the result it is the symptom
of trauma and the consequence of that is
actually a lack of coherence in the
space I went to a sense-making party in
San Francisco
she months ago because we cool kids do
in the valley and they're almost talking
the theme of the night was coherent and
everyone was talking about coherence
every single person was talking about
coherence but it was literally it was
from the most abstract rational place
and
the grip shifted when people started
opening up from a more embodied place
and you can feel that when that happens
right can you guys like know it when you
can like feel when like a group coheres
so anyway I wanted to start with that I
feel that the related development of
trauma is the most under looked yet most
important aspect of us building
coherence building sense making and
building collective intelligence moving
forward and in order for us to do that
we have to come into the discomfort of
being embodied hmm I had no idea what
you were gonna talk about today but like
I'm pleasantly surprised because this
maps over to a lot of the discussions
I've been having personally with a lot
of people and at the stoah and and Raven
who's one of the star facilitators here
she knows I talked about sort of how I
almost get it's not really triggered but
just sort of like an annoyance with the
disembodied you know like galaxy brains
and the sense making space where they
speak in such a way where you don't do
not feel the words yeah you know like I
want out like this is why I think when
we first started talking I felt an
instant kinship and philia with you
because you have a great sensitivity and
there's like a natural embodiment I
think do your boxing background all type
of stuff where I can feel you not just
you know think you in a way and and it
is interesting with the I like this term
I don't know coined it but like the
trauma scene we're like in a trauma
scene you cuz we have all this like
trauma that happened to us you know
through our ancestors and whatnot and I
do have an appreciation for even though
there's criticism that rightfully could
be thrown on them extinction rebellion
they talk a lot about like how you have
to deal with your individual trauma in
order to deal with the collective trauma
and they actually like engage with a
dominant barters restorative circles
together as a group I don't how
effective they are with that that's sort
of like a practice to deal with trauma
that's going around and you know like I
feel it man it's like there's like a
desire to be a meshed like a measurement
issues come online when when certain
people you're interacting with certain
people they they may be project things
on to you you start projecting things
onto them and you know deep down it's
unhealthy if you want to engage in that
but it's tempting to
that seductive unit so I'm curious like
when you're in the wild and when you're
when we're not in these sort of like
wisely artificial constraints like
circling or you know empathy circles no
never how do you call attention to that
that trauma at play yeah no that's an
amazing question my name is something I
really struggle with the vast majority
of my social network isn't into this
kind of more conscious or clean
transparent communication space a lot of
my background like finance and I'm back
in Scotland just now for quarantine and
you know you guys might have school
friends or like rule in their eyes every
time you talk about consciousness or
things like that I think there's a
couple of things to say the first is I
believe that the the form of leadership
that has to and is trying to emerge is
the type of leader who is able to go
back to those more blue-collar
communities and actually try this stuff
on and almost be like okay I may get
ridiculed that may get shamed especially
if you're a dude but it's like what
happens if I am able to tap into that
but I want to make a distinction I've
lived in San Francisco for three years
with a fluffy bypass II like San Fran
scene of like Lester share our feelings
all the time
triggers the out of me it's really
not what I'm what I'm advocating for
here so I do believe there's a certain
synthesis between being embodied with a
certain sense of bringing to romance a
relation without being am naive and I
think on to the second point when we
speak about naive I think my initial
attempts to start to articulate this
stuff was quite naive and to some degree
may still be and this kind of links the
truth I believe trauma and truth are
deeply interconnected I thought that if
I were just to be able to bring into the
world me like telling the truthfulness
of my experience at all times people
would that would be like the cure but
I've learned you said like these wisdom
artificial spaces Peter the prerequisite
for true emotional vulnerability or true
trauma holding in relation is safety and
I wish it wasn't and so we're kind of
holding this paradox of okay yes how do
we actually embody these new ways of
being wherever we are while at the same
time realizing that to genuinely tap
into the depths of truth of your
experience that takes a very very safe
container um I don't know if you guys
have heard of a Thomas Huebel hu p EO
these are wisdom teacher trauma teacher
I'm part of his two-year training man
and it's been completely transformative
to be in a we space of 150 people right
at a Dunbar number we're for a two-year
process you're actually tapping in and
practicing these ways of being so I'm to
summarize I think we have to have the
courage to try it and day to day life
but at the same time being sensible that
there actually has to be safety and that
takes time a few thoughts come online
there so someone like my best friends
like actually my best friend who there's
an in Vancouver right now he's like a
 wild man and he has no idea
about any of this if I said the word
medicine he was like what were you
talking about like yes he's not plugged
into the scene in intellectual
philosophical way
and there's like a blue-collar kind of
energy about his natural thumos and we
just like just get drunk together laughs
you know it's great and you and I were
talking about like how you know my Bali
we're gonna get shit-faced together and
then that blue-collar kind of humor
comes online you never came I know I
know I got scared but even when I was
introducing you gushing about your
handsomeness I've got kind of like oh
little self-conscious because I was
going to that blue-collar humor and I
know sort of like I'm sensitive to all
these different perspectives in the
culture war and and and I'm friends with
a lot of the perspectives you know I'm a
believer in social justice all this type
of stuff and I'm I'm careful with my
words cuz I don't want to make certain
people feel unsafe let's put it that way
I don't want to go out of my way to make
them feel unsafe but I'm risk I'll risk
making people feel unsafe I think it's
the wise thing to do but I don't want to
go to my way so I try to speak at least
in the public format where I'm sensitive
to all the the reality tunnels that play
here right and like so I just wanted to
bookmark that for now and then I'm going
to back these artificial sort of wise
modalities that's put it that way like
circling and restorative circles empty
circles they're really good I find in
order to well how can you use the words
artificial it's an interesting one maybe
it's like consciously manufactured maybe
that's a better phrase to put it it's
like it's like consciously designed
maybe that's a better way to put it
instead artificial because what I what I
would suggest known is the thing that
we're currently doing in relation is the
thing that's artificial yep the thing
the complete suppression of what is true
feels more artificial to me then these
spaces where we um permission ourselves
to speak more freely yeah yeah I agree I
agree with that in spirit and and so
these these kind of spaces that are
consciously designed I noticed like this
is my sense of the two moves that are
needed and I want to I want to see what
you think there has to be like a minimal
viable sovereignty at play like the
individuals involved need to be
individuated enough
in order for this coherence or
communitas to come online in a very deep
felt sense way if if it's not if there's
there's more than one people that let's
say are not psychologically developed
not away in the keygen level or whatever
you want to call it then the group
collapses right yeah all it takes is one
so is that your experience is that your
sense of the correct movement as well
that's yeah that that seems right yeah
and so now like jumping to the wild you
know where you said the conversations
are artificial and the way I interpret
that is that people adopt
intersubjective games
that's our unconscious of yeah so they
like they say if you're like with a
disagreeable asshole and you disagrees
with you and then like okay I gotta play
with this game and then we're like the
gorilla comes in you start beating your
chest but you know if you're good at
meta communication you can kind of like
do some judo moves Aikido moves around
that you don't have to play that game if
you're skilled to that area but a lot of
people adopt certain frames of inter
social interactions that you know are
not to service of themselves or to
others they're not in service but I I
would I do I and I did believe that no
matter what kind of adult behavioral
game you see playing out it was one time
a very intelligent function at a much
younger age
yeah and so this goes back to the
development of trauma piece when you see
you're kind of like guerrilla Varma like
guy who's coming in and he's looking for
a fight and a Friday night in a bar you
know he's he's really his six or seven
year old is looking for a fight after he
was you know badly beaten or something
along those lines so I think one
important distinction to an important
way to frame this and I don't want to be
naive with it because there is
malevolence there is evil less less and
not pretend that that problem isn't
there yeah but a lot of it is I believe
that if we can do the development or
drama work and integrate the six seven
eight euro part of ourselves so that
that energy that is trying to express
itself in the nervous system is able to
come to rest and we don't need to
sistent Li compensate because we're
actually trying to avoid some of the
most primal emotions of sadness anger
and fear and so uh just for the people
in the room like Josh and I can go all
day about this type of stuff so if you
have any questions throw them in the
chat box and we'll take it in and so
your life work is pretty much this so
far or at least when you kind of made
that switch away from Finance and
there's a focus on technology
so maybe key tell us about like the
strategies that you're personally using
or advocating for yeah as it pertains to
what what exact or addressing addressing
trauma in an interpersonal context yeah
yeah so like I said I I believe that
from from my own experience that'll be
pretty pretty it's pretty clear to me
that being any persistent we space with
the same group of people rep a long
period of time that has a certain
transmission you can do the Luminess
Institute in California you can do Tomas
Cuba in Europe there's a few of these
things that are popping up and that's
been the most powerful for me personally
there's also obviously the realms of
psychedelics and contemplative practice
I feel like contemplatively work on the
trauma piece and I'll explain why I
thought that in order to transcend some
of these most deeply held issues it was
these were just expressions of a
dysfunctional mind and if I were to just
optimize the main go and 10-david
Pastner retreats that could somehow
solve for these kind of deeper childhood
issues what Thomas says is that we're
all trauma as fundamentally relational
and so trauma has to be healed in
relation so that's why if you guys have
seen a people who have done a hundred
ayahuasca ceremonies but they're no
 different right part of the
reason that in my sense is because
they're doing these inward journeys of
the subjective without the necessary
cultivation of the interest
objective I'm really seeing that more
and more in the psychedelic space I
cannae psychedelic narcissism which le
Boehner speaks about and we spoke about
pizza
it's like it's like once okay why don't
you see it you're like there we are
there we are a big interest for me with
them with technology so I've been
running a community called consciousness
hacking in the Bay Area for the last
year and a half
we're a global community but I hit H Q's
and is in SF and what makes me
particularly excited about this
intersection of consciousness and
technology is if we are able to start to
measure the objective data of trauma
from brain waves to heart rate
variability to physiological stress
responses to galvanic skin response to
just pure breath rate if we are able to
measure that objectively and get a
really good sense as to what is actually
going on in the body from a second
person from a third person perspective
when someone was traumatized or when
they're contracted we can theoretically
begin to build tools that could help
people titrate some of that trauma out
of their system so for example we I
believe that the consciousness hacking
space will soon be able to real to
realize tools that for example if
someone is holding a trauma contraction
in their belly and that contractions and
intelligent function because it's
stopping an overwhelming sensation that
was previously suppressed a lot of
people can access those areas right when
you say what do you feel you don't feel
anything
it can take people a long long time to
get in touch with those core wounds I
think that science and technology is
gonna be able to help us in the distant
future I don't know how long 10 15 20
years to begin to come into contact with
those contractions that begin to release
some of those deeply held emotions so
I'm not using even though I'm working in
the tech scene I'm I was working in the
tech scene I'm not using that from my
own trauma journey but I think it has a
ton of potential moving forward yeah so
much so much to go down there and you
I kinda want to inquire too about I'm
sure you're familiar with Ken Wilbur's
integral life practice framework and
then genre viki's ecology of practices
how we have to have a wise balance there
and I'm actually adjunct researcher at
Jon's consciousness of wisdom studies
lab and the whole idea is to emerge
bring a wisdom Jim forth that has an
ecology of practices that can address
all these areas so that kind of
spiritual psychedelic Gnosticism doesn't
come online so I'm wondering even any
thoughts about the cultivation of
ecology practices and then I'll turn to
the questions in the chat box well I'm
actually not from I'm not I knew I cared
where Becky see that as a theme I don't
know the precise specifics it's like so
you have a meditative spiritual practice
but also you do shadow work Trammell
work then you do like weight lifting you
know you then you do like journal
writing whatever so you have an ecology
that kind of a mixture of sovereign
individual that Prime's you for
communitas yes so the way I look at that
as Ken Weber's wake up grow up clean up
sure yeah I don't know if I'll just give
it a brief overview in case people
haven't heard of it Ken Wilber says
there are four stages to consciousness
evolution the first stage is waking up
I'm what waking up is it is the movement
from the gross and separate perception
of reality it's a more of an
interdependent unit of subtle
consciousness and if you are in the kind
of psychedelic or the tech circles how
you might perceive spiritual awakening
is focused on the waking up component of
consciousness evolution it's about
getting non-jew getting there quick
transcending suffering there you go and
I see a lot of that in Silicon Valley by
the way like that's a real
problem with building these tools like
it's a real problem now it's the waking
up but there's also growing up so
growing up refers to the vertical
development stages so you mentioned
Keegan before you go so go spiral
dynamics so 70% of the world are ethno
ego or ethnocentric stages of
development according to a total
development theory that means that 70%
of the world are most concerned with
themselves and/or their kin tribe
religion community and what are well
known theory suggests is that there are
stages above this
one is able to include more complexity
in more perspectives so green to you
whatever you want to call it and so that
I think is also really important to say
how are we moving along that vertical
trajectory and every wants to be higher
and stuff right and then there's just
sorry Pete just to finish off and then
this cleaning up which is healing trauma
and doing shadow work and then showing
up which is how are you actually showing
up in the world I was listening to a
podcast by a Dan Brown today and this
whole thing it was like the fruits is
it's like the fruits of awakening are
seen in their action something along
with that like if you're having an
interior experience of non-duality but
it isn't manifesting itself and more
benevolent behavior you haven't actually
moved up the path of awakened alright so
uh let's go to the questions for the
next thirty minutes
rain could you ask your question yeah
thanks I was just wondering if you could
articulate more precisely what that
relationship is between truth and drama
I got there's a part you're saying that
something about letting your truth come
out or trauma getting in the way of that
we just love to hear more about the
relationship between those two yes
leave trauma does to our nervous systems
as it leads to a fragmentation between
thoughts emotion and sensation so I
might be telling you hey I'm scared
right and I'm cognitively telling you
I'm scared but if I'm not actually
feeling my fear or feeling the physical
sensation of the heart beating in my
chest I'm not actually in truth with you
or I'm not actually being fully truthful
with you I'm being truthful from the
perspective of fragmentation and so when
we speak about like the word integrity
like integrity is us being able to speak
from what is true cognitively
emotionally and somatically at the same
time and I think that what trauma does
is because it fragments our nervous
system it bilko's us into the head maybe
a lot of us that's our pattern my
pattern is to go into my head we lose
touch with emotional and physical truth
and I think that is what creates
incoherence in our relational fields so
I hear in that that you value congruence
and truth like being able to speak be
embodied enough that you're speaking
your truth when you're interacting with
others yeah and to reframe if you are
not embodied enough you're not actually
transmitting what is deeply truthful it
is important to transmit what's deeply
truthful in order to build deep and this
is my experience that when I am able to
touch into those three layers of truth
in their line something seems to happen
in my relations like a much deeper
coherence called even and I think it's
interesting like even if you feel into
this group field right watch when our
attention goes away
and watch when it comes back like as a
group and we can kind of sense that and
I noticed that if we move into more
heady less embodied speech coherence
tends to diminish yeah totally
raven and you had a question hi thanks
Joshua for being here Weston was about
simply I've I've seen in in my world
like a lot of communities that were
centered around trauma practices and
sometimes they seem to kind of go off
the rails a little bit into this kind of
narcissistic cycle of everything
becoming trauma everything like becoming
about the process of dealing with trauma
and so I guess in some way like an over
application of that as a sense making
tool but then there also seems to be a
part of this that is when a group comes
together and like practitioners are
trauma oriented and that's what they do
they kind of have an incentive to find
trauma in places where maybe it may not
be the best thing best level of
engagement and I see that as being a
possible pitfall of communities coming
around coming together for the purpose
of dealing with trauma that it may
become an overly applied tool what do
you think about that
yeah yeah almost like it becomes the
wind since where you see everything
through the trauma lens right exactly
hammer yeah I get that and I also get
there's a kind of em not all negative
lips should be entertained like some of
them are negative loops because they're
negative lips not because they're
undigested emotion so yeah I really I
really hear you know I don't have them
did you know Roger wall she's a wisdom
teacher one of the kind of something
like classic like fixham spirituality
and he's just like far
this drama stuff he's like it's a bit
well being and you don't actually have
to digest drama to cultivate positive
night I think why I'm emphasizing it
here is because there's so much there's
and Peter speaks to this like the lemon
of war the culture war there's so much
fragmentation and our information
ecology like we're needing something to
actually bring us back into coherence
and I think that we're trying to come
back into coherence through reason but
you know the plan Demick youtube film
got halfway across the world before
anyone could even argue against it
rationally so I think it's just a
missing component of the sense making
conversation but it isn't the fuel
component and I totally agree that we
can get lost in it thank you cool
actually finally wash that plane Deming
from last night I fell asleep halfway
through so it's pretty good pretty good
too much a bit Maslow's hammer comes to
mind you know like if you if you have a
hammer everything's a nail and so if you
have some kind of epistemic Authority in
one domain sometimes it bleeds over to
other domains and you act like the
authority we really shouldn't and I was
writing the chat box it's like there's a
difference between an unconscious
hierarchy versus a conscious hierarchy
and when you can kind of have that meta
communicative abilities where you can
play with it not only the content but
with the agenda then you can say okay
right now we're listening to someone who
has legitimate expertise in this area
and we're going to defer to them during
this context during this moment it if
done right I don't say think there's
anything unhealthy about that it's only
when that becomes unconscious and it
carries over to different domains when
it shouldn't
that's when I think it gets pathological
so I'm curiously it was with what you
think about that
yeah I think part of the old version is
that kind of is a kind of like fit
so I don't know when I speak a bit
masculine feminine or masculine feminine
energy like I don't necessarily mean
them ontological II like there are these
real things that are operating those
principles but I but I kind of do and I
think the whole notion of like the rise
of the feminine we've all heard that
right like we need the feminine I think
part of that is is a quality of
leadership that doesn't try to impose
and really the quality of leadership
that tries to impose like the Pharaohs
all the way to CEOs all the way to mr.
Trump I just think that is not it's no
longer appropriate for our current
predicament which is so emergent so
uncertain so fragile so adaptive that if
we try to kind of do that thing it's not
gonna work so so I think if these like
hierarchies do get epistemic hierarchies
emerge but from this emergent place
rather than this idea what I'm going to
tell everyone else what to do I think
that is different I really do
look you have a question yeah I have a
question
and then I also have like offering to
all of this that I think is really
interesting if you're up for it so the
question is I don't know if people here
are familiar with the work of Iain
McGilchrist and the whole idea of you
know kind of the over reductionist world
that we live in because of the imbalance
into the like cortical structures of the
last hemisphere of the brain and that if
not there's like an 11-minute RSA video
that speeds through a 650 page book um
that to me in these conversations around
trauma what can be really complicated is
like semantically we can start to talk
about concepts and constructs that
because we may not have an understanding
of the complexity of them we'll overly
reduce them into like oh that's a thing
that's this thing and the question is
you know how to reconcile that and keep
you know on the other side of that this
idea there is lots of trauma that is
trauma operates neurobiologically below
the order of language and so now that we
use language kind of and try to top-down
into an understanding of it from
language how do we reconcile that with
the bottom of the body intelligence that
like we never will be able to put words
- yeah yeah I've read McGilchrist and
he's literally lives in Scotland so I
like him well one thing one thing I
don't necessarily agree with Luke is
that we're trying to penetrate trauma
through language
I think languages he shared it's a
shared communication tool for people
like us in these relationships we
haven't quite mastered the arc tool
apathy yet but in my own experience like
the integration of trauma in the
digestion of trauma is completely
nonverbal it is actually the capacity to
bring undigested sensation into presence
and this is where we lean a little bit
more esoterically that bringing it into
presence dissolves it and so I don't
actually think we're I mean I don't
think we're trying to get there through
language no I appreciate that and I feel
like for me the yeah the concern in this
space that I have just in its this is
more to like the SF burner crowd than to
learn our group here but is the like
there are people who will try to do that
and that there's this like like what you
mentioned at the beginning kind of in
that sense making space but like the
lack of coherence to embodied expression
and that that's something that
yeah for me I've had lots of
conversations similarly or it's like you
can rationalize on this very well this
is not a rational process and just if I
may so like I've been reading a lot of
Campbell recently the power of meth I
kind of see it is that the power of
minutes yeah and there's a great he
talks about metaphor and he talks about
like the internal experience which to me
kind of trauma as a stagnation and a
fraction of internal experience and he
talks about how right just talking about
like the comment of the commonality of
these myths and is like it's utterly
fascinating because they are speaking
about the deep mystery of yourself
and everything else it is a mysterium a
mystery tremendum at Fosse nods
tremendous horrific because it smashes
all your fixed notions of things and at
the same time utterly fascinating
because it's of your own nature and
being when you start thinking about
these things about the inner mystery
inner life the eternal life there aren't
too many images for you to loot use you
begin on your own to have the images
that are already present in some other
system of thought so I just thought that
was really relevant to our conversation
today over the like we may use somebody
else's system to try and get at what is
actually ours to reconcile with thanks
like I know so just to flag that's the
only book that I've ever read back to
cover and then started again on page one
even i synchronistic choice cool so Mary
you had a question is that me Mary yeah
Mary I believe you had a question oh
okay I think Ravens question addressed
it but I would say hearing the
description of the we space it it sounds
like we're sort of arbitrating between
cerebral robots and traumatized children
and trying to create safe space for it
and in my I don't know and what I'm
seeing we need in the world in terms of
embracing future is getting comfortable
with uncertainty and that requires not
safety and kind of letting go of the
rail and embracing what's coming and
that maybe there's something different
with what's emerging that can create
coherence and truth
looking forward if we let go of all
those rails that's a thought do you
think though that the fear of
uncertainties and adults is actually the
echo of the fear of the child it could
be I also think sort of evolutionary
biology we are pattern seekers and like
the comfort of existing patterns and
that could also be causing the trauma
discomfort with the new and yeah my
thing with this mirror is it's not as if
this is this is a magic bullet right
like if we just saw for this like we'd
suddenly would be you know we're gonna
have to come across like fearful in
certain situations from my own
experience with this as the digestion of
emotion that's such a deep layer from
such an early age increases our nervous
systems capacity to hold more intense
emotions that might come in as an adult
it's more like we're creating where we
have a cup here and rather the cup being
this size the trauma work in Laura
is the cop so you get this cup and so
then your vessel is a better conduit or
the transmission of a of a higher
emotion or energy and so that's when I
think that how trauma is playing out is
because we don't our nervous systems
haven't cultivated that capacity to hold
the fear that inevitably comes from
uncertainty in novelty totally agree I
guess it probably comes down to the
responsibility were the responsibility
lies and I could see like creating
spaces to have and see and explore how
the color div could address that I guess
I'd also like to see spaces that maybe
manage that in a different way maybe
that's my own trauma trying to avoid the
pain of dealing with tricky little
bugger thank you thank you for this talk
- it's been great so we're approaching
the art time a lot of times let's have
one more question many you had a
question going through this process for
the last two years of retraining myself
to feel the things our clock because of
trauma so a lot of this is resonating
because I've just lived it and I'm just
wondering because I am trying to look at
games and things that help but what do
you think in general to the group but
also to Joshua is I feel like we need we
need a way to integrate some sort of
trauma processing education at different
stages for people in general like what
do you think of that aspect I mean that
the potential of scaling what it means
to help people navigate trauma in the
way that we use you know history and
geography as an education in systems
what do you think of that yeah so that's
that's the very question they're going
into the consciousness hacking space
which is okay how do you scale higher
consciousness and then when you think of
the word scale well what do you think
about you think about technology low and
behold people are thinking about scaling
consciousness higher states and stages
of consciousness through technology so I
think I think there's a couple of things
of this the first is one potential
Avenue monique is through tech and a lot
of people have a hell of a resistance of
that right but if you want to
democratize and make universally
accessible tools for trauma you're not
gonna get people going in long retreats
longley spaces to your programs if they
get three kids and they live in a
developing country it's not gonna happen
I think that there's well and there are
a lot of people that's not fully true
there are some people who are curious
about technologies place in this
particular piece of the consciousness
puzzle and like I said initially like if
you're able to map what trauma looks
like in the body subjective lis you will
be able to create tools that can
actually bring people's nervous systems
into harmony and release some of the
undigested emotion but that's the bottom
up right and I've been bottom up for the
last few years and you know we're all in
this kind of emergent sense making space
and everyone doesn't like the idea a lot
of people don't like the idea of acting
top-down but that's one of the easiest
ways where I see us making an impact
here it's literally targeting 200 people
with this type of work that's one way to
scale this because of the trickle-down
effect of that
thank you just confirm that it's okay to
do what I'm doing I was actually trying
to build a game an emotional support
game that lab its people through some of
what i neva gated and some of what I
feel like kids Navi you know kids that I
worked with in my life seem to navigate
and I was just you know is looking
sometimes a validation because because
sometimes though most people don't get
it and you know you mentioned trauma
it's just just you know completely it's
too much so thanks for saying that I
think games have a lot of space players
a tech tool has this baby support doing
it consciously and not doing it you know
superficially thank you I don't want to
take any more time but yeah yeah I think
we do need a new language or in this
actually mmm bitter can I just say a
couple of things just to please I mean
the intention here was just to talk a
little bit more the Arapahoe became
about trauma which is super but i'm
there was also this thing around truth
and truthfulness and Jacob I'm gonna
coach mark timber as Jacobs here I'm
gonna coach Maxim burger just to tease
you and he makes this important
distinction being truthful truthfulness
and so let us not deny that if we're
speaking truthfully it does not
necessarily mean we're speaking the
tryst but um I think we're in the sense
making space together right and part of
my intention for coming in here is like
where do I see the highest input
the highest output for the minimal
inputs and I think it's two points it's
developing trauma healing trauma and
actually speaking truthfully in
relationships and if you look at the
mass of our information ecology and all
of this this the met all these competing
claims and narratives and illumina wars
I think part of that breathing ground is
a consequence of a cultural movement
away from truthfulness it's been said
the Asian cultures to shame at face over
truth and I think in a lot of our in our
kind of Western
century Western century of narcissism
we've also had this movement
away from truthfulness and towards what
makes our evils feel good and then
you've also got the whole the
Nietzschean postmodern slant right that
has definitely had a kind of
trickle-down effect on their being
completing competing claims for reality
right here here's my my more esoteric
thing which is that I've believed that
when we align ourselves subjectively
with a certain principle we'll be a
truthfulness be a discipline be it love
the that is how the universal ideal
manifests in the particular so that the
transpersonal Plutonian like ideals
reforms the way that they actually
manifest in the world is through using
the human individual as their expression
and so that when we lean into things
like truthfulness or love like we are
actually aligning with a deeper
transparent transpersonal force I don't
say this often because I don't think
many people like they think I'm not but
um this isn't just about information
ecology um coherency I do believe that
this is actually we've lost sight of a
deeper principle of reality and Jordan
pacers and speaks to this right like if
like she told the truth like reality is
on your side and you don't it's against
you and then it's all an uphill battle
from there yeah that's uh that should be
another sessional and so injustice just
exercising its truthfulness muscle and
how come it's so hard so before we close
out would you have any kind of final
words my friend
I can watch you being pensive all day
though that's okay if you don't actually
came up is like this is really like
I mean I've not participated in Storer
sessions before a bit like this is
really like a really quality coherent
group that's obviously like tapping into
something here that isn't the kind of
San Francisco stuff it's it's I don't
know it feels a certain yeah we're
getting that a lot and there's Mike sort
of like a biased against stoicism
there's only like two storks actually in
this space like me and Daniel everyone
else is not really stoic it's like he's
not here right now you think you you
like him but most people are not stoked
in this space so there's like a bait and
switch there with the title but that
being said I'm gonna utilize all my
charm game to seduce you back to the
stola as soon as possible so prepare for
that my friend and thank you so much for
for coming to the show today
it was lovely and we'll have this video
posted this evening for those who want
to watch it again
couple people said they would want to
wash again which is awesome
so off coming events we we just to make
some announcements we have one in 30
minutes
Raven I don't want to put you on the
spot but you probably can explain this
one better than I could relational
exegesis would you mind explaining that
one yeah sure so this is kind of an
experimental technique for engaging with
a text with a group of people and it's
combining like reading out loud with
like a commenting and editing process on
a Google document which allows for like
different channels of communication and
conversation to emerge from engaging
with the written word so today we're
going to be reading impro which is a
fantastic text and I think it will
inspire a lot of interesting
conversation you don't have to come with
any preparation we read there in the
session and last week it was really
amazing and generative so I would
definitely invite everybody to come it
was a good time yeah that's hosted by a
freesia or Jessica it's gonna be really
awesome and would you want to plug
tomorrow's event the speed-dating thing
static speed-dating
reiden sure yeah for those of you who
don't know I've been weekly doing a
psychotic speed-dating event and this
week we're going to have a lihue
basically designed a question game come
in right before the session to talk
about her inspiration for the game and
some of the some of the things that
she's learned through basically creating
and asking people controversial
questions for the last decade of her
life and then we're going to pivot to a
game playing this game ask coal which is
yeah it's a very interesting kind of
social boundary freakin game and
everyone should totally come and play it
yeah it's dangerous too because it's
like I'm really exercising my truth from
this muscle in a public way with the
journals and the stoah and they ask you
some dangerous questions so if you want
to plug into that it's really fun and
then tonight at 8:00 p.m. Eastern Time
Clyde Rathbone you'd like Clyde ja she's
like this former like he's like the
rugby player in Australia and he created
a leather leather platform he's coming
tonight and he's talking about my letter
writing exercise and how it's a
spiritual stoic practice and how we can
kind of make scale it up and what not so
far SP to that put a website check out
the events
Santa mailing list and check out the
gift economy that being said everyone
thanks so much for coming today thank
you very much thanks