so welcome to voices with reveille key
I'm joined by my guest are tighter
Paulette Paulette Paulette thank you
I've just met Tyler recently and I met
him through a discord server that has
been set up for people who are
interested in my work I wanted to talk
to tout her because he when I when I had
some conversations with them they're
saying some very insightful things about
you know this whole growing movement
around these communities that are taking
shape on this chord servers and networks
of them and so I think this is very
important phenomena and first of all if
we could educate some people on it who
might not know about it and I'm just
learning about it myself and also to
again trying explore maybe some of the
philosophical implications of this it's
not just a new technology it seems like
a new way of relating a new way of
community building anyways I'm saying
too much so Tyler why don't you say a
bit about yourself and you know stuck on
pack you know maybe in an introductory
manner but you know what what these
discord servers servers are and what you
see them doing it cetera yeah yeah no no
I think it's a great point there at the
end I even the fact that what we're
doing right now this kind of somewhat
long-form capacity to really get into
the details of what we want to discuss
and and and to not overly produce the
content right to dive immediately into
it kind of expose it and unfold it as as
we're doing it in the process you know
from like where you are University of
Toronto Marshall McLuhan writes right
any message it's this the the very form
of what we are doing here I think has an
impact on it and that all right so yeah
that how I intersecting this
historically let's say right I'm a
single father two boys I have I think
I've become that as the result of
some of the turbulence that is a part of
the meaning crisis hmm the dissolution
of the family as a result of a lack of a
kind of bedrock that produced a theology
of the family as a unit off of culture
as a unit of of being and and also some
ancillary problems with the way that we
process all of the difficulties in our
environment I think okay so personally
myself I'm I suffer from a series of
autoimmune diseases and it's well thank
you it's it's been both a blessing and a
curse though as I think all things are
if you if you look at them from the
right perspective they afford I think a
kind of chaos from which you can spin up
something new mm-hmm so um to that end
I've I think been in the mindset of
trying to uncover what it is that caused
this in my own life right and and during
that process I looked into a diet right
I looked into trying to understand what
would be the underlying nature the the
physical causation of my disease I
looked into some psychology and
cognitive science understand why it is
that men and women fight right and I
think where I ended up was a kind of
very holistic view that tried to take
into account all of the ways in which
these very complicated systems interact
in particular you know systems like when
I like my ex-wife and I right and that
that study led me directly to people
like Jordan Hall then Jordan green hall
in fact and I found much of what he said
in the tech sector quite relevant to my
own attempts to understand the world at
the time
yeah Jordan's very insightful incredibly
and and very kind as well yeah both he
and Daniel have been very kind and then
Austin Berger who you're referring to
correct yeah yeah
yeah and I think not to jump ahead too
quickly I suppose but in contact with
that world in contact with the work
that's being done that I was completely
unaware of people in the world that
we're moving about ways and
understanding in ways that I had never
even dreamed of you know the kinds of
dynamical systems thinking that you can
begin to analyze and understand the
motions in the world it's just
incredibly powerful mm-hmm so yeah I
came across this information I came
across these thinkers and I've reached
out to them at each case I think and
I've tried to have a deeper
understanding I really here to learn I
want to to learn how all this functions
right and try to influence it in a
positive manner I think that that's
that's like my deep Telos at the moment
so yeah that's my historical thread and
how I interjected here since that time
I've noticed that so it may be the
definition of discord it's a social
network it's a application that people
can gather on and discuss in real time
both video and audio and share
multimedia content in the stream form
kind of like a Facebook reading but the
possibilities that it's affording this
real time Community Development that is
quite ephemeral in fact where the the
bonds are not one of locality all right
they're not geographically defined
there's something more like
reputationally defined which is
Harrington's manner in which you
communicate so again the medium is the
message
role and so what's what we're all having
to learn is how to we're trying to level
up our communication capacity so that
really is right and Socratic ly and in
dialo goes right learn from each other
what we really are and what we're really
searching for so that process is of
being afforded by these platforms like
this chord it's also producing something
kind of tangential to another already
like very dominant hierarchical
structure which seems to be at the
present moment failing itself from the
very particular sets of ways mm-hmm
and you know we can talk about that too
but maybe maybe that ain't was the
question know that that answered the
question well I'm not actually intrigued
about the last thing you said because
you were implying that you think the
discord are restructuring they think as
opposed to a hierarchical structure or
some alternative kind of structuring of
society and community building is
forming and do you think does this mean
that something like a new culture is
emerging oh for sure
okay so you know that new cultures been
emerging for a long time there are
always several sets of cultures that are
integrating themselves kind of like
emotional sets well said yeah right
there they're you know passing between
each other there's at the very least is
very interesting high level separation
between child culture and adult culture
right and like very specific like
interesting things that only get passed
and one in the other right like
hopscotch no adults play hopscotch
anymore she's like it's a perfectly
distinct cultural element it's only
transmitted not player
likewise for something like gaming
culture which is where discord comes
from in fact but there's there's always
been a kind of distinct element of the
it's almost like in neoteny right it's
almost like a continuance of the desire
to continue playing games in the face of
what is almost like a just like a
salient rejection by the current
structure of the world all right
so and I think what what that does is it
it prevents the kind of crystallization
that usually occurs in the presence of a
culture that you agree with when I kind
of maintain this like childlike sense of
continually looking and searching it's
the you want to open up the search space
you can support of more wonder and more
ability to find something that may
actually work okay so that let's slow
down on that because that's a really
cool point I like this the metaphor of
neoteny kind of cognitive and community
neoteny that's really cool because I
thought of the importance of serious
play
um that used to be at work in religion
for example and and and tried to stay on
that sort of that staying you know our
continuity of contact with that
emergence I think that's that's really
powerful what I'm not quite clear on is
what your juxtaposing it where you're
contrasting to it you made a couple of
allusions to a crystallize and a
hierarchical structure so maybe if you
could nurse in a little bit more that
would be helpful yeah yeah yeah so so in
in your in your work like what we what
we understand about our relations in the
world is that in fact the best way to
look at being and moving in the world is
something like the inter relationships
that we have between self and other
right yeah it or thou or however you
want to describe it depending on our our
motive of being or framework right it's
that inter inter relationship that is
the define it and kind of science lee
what this has to represent is some some
locus in the mind right that referee
it's a representation of that attachment
right and i think that there's some set
of sub structures or processes that has
to instantiate that right this is it's
very akin to like the the aphorisms that
we have like you can't teach an old dog
new tricks right mm-hmm
it represents a kind of it's it's a it's
a I think what it represents is just you
finding your niche in the ecological
niche right and if you don't find your
ecological niche I think it's I think
what happens is you you are you're stuck
in a mode of searching right that's the
we know that there's a certain kind of
hormonal change that takes place around
like age 25 yeah yeah it corresponds
with like a final maturation of the
frontal lobe that represents like a
higher state of responsibility or
something right so it's something like
that I do think that there is a there's
a vast expanse of that in our dominant
culture right that's expanse of which of
the crystallization or rejection sorry
of the rejection of that crystallization
is this continual mode of wanting
play right right yeah and that's just
opposed to a culture I mean I'm thinking
of the work of Han and others that is
oriented almost and you know even prom
you know that our culture is dominantly
oriented around work and even burn out
around that right so I'm getting a good
sense of this now so this court is a
place in which people are doing this
serious play but it has a deep
developmental import is interesting at
the exact Stein would like this so it
has a deep developmental import and is
kind of because they are the illusion
you're making reference to of courses in
biological evolution neoteny what you
can see is one way in which species
emerge right is so you have like chimps
and then if you take that chimp and
they're an its childhood gets extended
much much longer you actually get
something more like a human being that
was an overly crude and overly
simplistic but just to get the basic
idea so this ability to adaptively
because there's lots of maladaptive ways
of for stalling adults with about put it
that way there's lots of maladaptive
ways but sometimes when so the Antony is
the term for when we extend childhood in
the period of serious play such that it
comes adaptive and one of the ideas
behind this is our extended childhood
allowed us to internalize much more
complex culture and that of course
affords human existence sorry I'm just
trying to unpack packed a lot into that
metaphor but did I treat your idea
fairly first of all no I think it's well
said yeah okay so then the idea is that
we might have a cultural cognitive and
cyber sort of constellation that's
creating an adaptive kind of neoteny for
us in which serious play is being
prolonged so that we can perhaps ramp up
the complexity of the enculturation
process the kind of you know software
that we have to it allow me that
metaphor that we have to internalize in
order to deal with an increasingly comp
world is that is that am i getting what
you're what you're saying yeah
absolutely and more than that it's
allowing I think as you're discovering a
potential place where you have you can
act as a note of resonance right yes or
since making is failing in general
because of the kind of well just some of
the systemic failures of the broadcast
nature of the medium it's much better
represented by this capacity to directly
interact with your audience and to make
it more local right yeah and to make it
more of a dialogue Osen that a Socratic
method it seems that that is how we
develop their kinds of trust networks
afford us a true sense making in the
social layer oh I saw this is very good
I like the connection just made there so
this this new neoteny will actually
afford us to restructure the cognitive
and interpersonal processes by which
were making sense and and that's that's
very adaptive because it's very needed
right now because the established
frameworks of information transmission
and knowledge generation are in many
ways failing us is that is also is that
also a fair way of putting what you say
yeah I think it's very fair I think a
lot of people noticing that yes they are
sifting towards the edges they're
finding either a kind of ever-increasing
madness right and an ability to rely
upon any any certain element right the
fake news trajectory of things or
they're you know they're they're fine
and the finding from that subsequently a
kind of nihilism right yeah very much
and that's that that's certainly the
element that you know the the whole
jordan peterson and IDW movement is kind
of scraping from right there's a huge
undercurrent of that right i think it
represents a liminal layer like there
there's definitely some transitional
element to this that we're moving
towards a kind of sense making apparatus
that we can rely upon and in direct
consequence of being integrated with
this technological layer i mean i i've
noted the fact to go
back to McLuhan I've noted the fact I
think I can't remember which one of the
Weinsteins introduced this idea but I
sort of picked it up and ran with it a
little bit independently you know that
the digital campfire that this medium is
really weird because it breaks a lot of
the standard sort of social grammar I
mean your face is very large for me
right now and it was it no no no no no
don't I'm not telling you to move back
that's the point the point is that if I
imagine mine is for you to or for the
viewers and normally this would if we
were actually physically present this
would convey all kinds of social meaning
about status and their right and it
would carry all this weird you know I
just met you this is inappropriate
intimacy and all that kind of crap right
what the thing about but the thing about
this medium is all of that it's just
sort of no it's thrown away it's
developing its own grammar fright of how
people are and I was thinking that it
reminded me of you know the idea of
mattress on oh that you know we spend a
lot of time through several species
around campfires and this is like I
can't fire experience and that people
are lit because they're electronically
there they're very intimate we're not
actually spatially located and it's sort
of approximates like what you have in a
circle all right and and so it goes back
to something very primordial but it so
it's tapping in some established
machinery I think but it's also using it
in this really novel way because like
you said and what's really interesting
for me is how this how this how it it's
you know symbol on to connect two things
together that previously weren't
connected together you know the way this
cuts across you know in the dialogues
Socrates is very critical of writing
because you know it's permanent and then
the person's that out there and you
can't talk to them and he wants to do
everything in person but of course the
problem with that is it's very you know
it's very impermanent and so that's why
so Plato is ironically writing the
dialogues down and there's the irony is
intended you're supposed to pay
attention to that but I was thinking
notice how that divide has been
transcended I mean this is this is one
on one you're talking multiple people
but it's also it's also recorded
and otherwise and then listen and so
these conversations have sort of a meta
conversation going on between them with
people moving between these
conversations and kind of a meta
conversation which is like it's beyond
that divide it joins them together and
it afford something really new and how
we can interact with each other right
right and it's a it's a really
interesting playground because it's it's
i think representing both kind of
postmodern tendencies with a kind of
trial-by-fire try try anything and and
everything goes and also a more meta
modern approach where people are
searching for the connective tissue
right that's kind of gathering and
making more sense of the whole process
and what you're describing there is is
very well said that's I I think just to
to speak emotionally from briefly being
embedded within it sure it's been quite
it's been quite wonderful to watch the
direct impact it's had on individual
lives the the meaning that they've
personally been able to make huh yeah at
the bonfire yeah it's an it's funny that
you you say that and it's we we have
several channels across several dis
cords that are actually titled bonfire
oh really
in the late night we can sit and play
music and talk with one another and
speak concerning the issues of our soul
and with this with this both top down
and bottom approach where you have you
have wonderful people who have done such
good work like yourself put it into the
medium right and it's filtered down
through the technology into the mines
and the mouths of the people that are
trying to make sense of it and then we
gather in small groups and speak about
this is wonderful and and people have
have at each moment recovered gems right
they they've found little moments where
they haha that's what they're saying
this is what it is and what I've been
doing my life now to your to your meta
modern point to this this meta
extractable point yeah there are people
working on tools right now people that
I've come into contact with where they
can
the content of this dialogue right here
right where maybe 13 minutes in one
person out of a hundred had an aha
moment right and if you can take the
transcript and somehow find a way to
extract that piece of an aha moment and
save it and transmit it in a way that
it's recoverable across time oh there
are ways to do this and people are
working on solving this problem and I
think that it's a it's a fascinating way
to level up the capacity that we each
have for finding insight yeah yeah I
mean that's a defining feature of dia
logos right as opposed to combative
adversarial where the point is to defeat
and gain victory the point of dialectic
is if you and I right can both get to
places that we couldn't get to on our
own right that that's that that's that
that's the really central feature if we
both said Wow because about I got
somewhere I couldn't have gone on my own
die and you say it to it and wait wait
wait and we don't even have to have the
same insight it just could be that
within that conversation we both come to
have those kinds of insights I think
that's the life breath of Delos maybe
it's akin to the reciprocal opening but
yeah when you experience even if you
don't experience the insight directly
but when you experience another person
experiencing insight there is a magnetic
transfer this immediately yep yeah
invoking that desire in yourself and and
then you become searching for it you say
Leah means yeah yeah yeah that's well
said that's well said that's really well
said so I really I want to go back is
that really it really sparked me when
you were and your gestures were quite
dramatic in the good sense of the word
dramatic you know the top down and
bottom up because I've been I've been
saying about how important that is if
we're gonna actually make any any sort
of cultural change that's needed to
address the meaning crisis so what is it
like what is your role in that like in
that sort of top-down bottom-up
convergence what are you doing like how
are you participating I mean because I
met you like you were making the rules
actually some way sure sure - no that's
perfect it's actually captured somewhat
in my
they can see the screen name there but
it's the blister crack um the the the
cognitive structures that we need to
engender are related to the languages
that we use right right it's a little
weakened Stein Ian perhaps but that
divides I think it's deeply true that we
when we develop these similar cognitive
languages use this kind of structures
that we don't have to fight over all the
time that we all it makes life more
meaningful and we can enter the flow
state more readily right right and and
so what we're doing is at the top down
bottom approach is where we're taking
elements of two different perspectives
and then at that middle ground there has
to be an exchange of the languages that
develop between those two places and
historically if you take a look at the
the the Hegelian ahead of us yeah looks
like say civilization and the collapse
of it right like those those cultural
elements which are conducive to
corruption and destruction I think a lot
of it has to do with the kinds of
separation the cultural separation
tendencies where language groups kind of
cluster around certain experiences so
you know in our modern times this is
more readily felt between something like
rural and urban living right male and
female living right but these language
groups and language clusters become ways
in which we battle with each other
I think the lingua Franca's space though
right the the middle ground where we
communicate the differences between
those is really dramatically important
it's a kind of cultural element that
hasn't been paid attention to it so it's
a little shamanic perhaps yeah yeah yeah
it's a little bit translational where
you take in all the cultural elements
and you're trying to find a way in which
they are Concilium right and so
plebiscito cred is that is the merger of
the plebeian and the aristocratic right
it's larger world isn't it to bring them
together so that's the role I think so
in addition to the serious play there's
poesis going on there because I mean
what you what you're saying is you're
trying to create a mediating language
that's like symbol on its gonna join
things together forms of discourse that
previously haven't been talking to each
other very much I do something analogous
in cognitive science trying to create a
bridging
language yes right the various
disciplines synoptic integration so so
I'm just trying to put these two
metaphors together because they feel
like they're very close to each other
and now I hope you be able to help me on
it we've got one we've got this metaphor
of the bottom-up top-down and then
there's the mediating realm and then
with I take it that what you're alluding
to is in that mediating realm was what
is what's also happening is this
integration between different languages
so it's acting as something that's
binding things together sort of
counteracting that centrifugal tendency
you were mentioning that tends to like
really put a stress on civilizations
yeah put those together yeah yeah it may
even be akin to something like how the
the radical enlargement of the middle
class prevented the ultimate outcome
that Marx predicted right right yeah
that's that's a nice a socio-economic
metaphor so what like what what do you
what are you doing I'm I can hear people
who are who are no experienced as you
know I'm novice to this I just got on
thanks to the help of Brett and meeting
you and your help so concretely like
specifically I know that you're on
several of these and like what is what
do you do like give it a quick like what
would you do if you're on there like
well what do you how are you helping so
these are very powerful and I and and
important ideas that we're talking about
here but I'm asking you how do you how
do you concretize them into specific
actions practices like what is it you're
doing well a lot of it is the
conversational approach right a lot of
it is directing people to a more
balanced approach to conversation right
right right yeah being the middle ground
is is the receiving and you know both
the positive and the negative it's it's
and it's it's quite an interesting clash
you can see certain clusters of cultural
elements like it previously described as
left brain and right brain things like
that when they come together in
conversation is quite interesting right
right and there's a really strange
mediating role that has to be played by
a language that it has to be it has to
make it
Aaron that the way that both groups are
seeing the world are similar and useful
right and there's a there's a kind of
representative element of that across
all sorts of language groups mm-hmm I
think the development of a language
represents you know some kind of
cultural niche which is yeah yes you
know affording something some value and
it's true that you can recover that
value so through some translational
process and yeah that so the I I think
it's it's like parts moderation
parts encouragement it's it's a hobby
for me I'm not getting paid to do it
yeah yeah yeah it's just a it's a
fascinating and really like I say a
wonderful thing to behold when people
dive into what is true and what is deep
and then recover a better way of seeing
the world it's I think a reward in and
of itself but I hope what it does is it
begins to allow people who represent
what should be the future of the
developing world a way to converse so
they can figure out how to do it right
right that that same thing is happening
in think tanks all over the place right
and a very regimented and highly ordered
away but I think there's an
extraordinary element of talent and
skill and time it's being lost and in
our in our current cultural space and
this place represents a huge pool of
talent a huge pool of interest I could
name two dozen names of fascinatingly
strange and interesting people that are
working on really cool things and they
could probably never hold a traditional
job and I mean I could I could go for
another hour or two at least on all the
really strange and interesting ways that
a platform like this court and others
could be spun up to to make ephemeral
ways of dealing with the world in terms
of new corporations and new ways of
viewing capitalism and all sorts of
fascinating little you know experiments
that could be produced in this cultural
space but in and of itself the this
represents a potential new educational
medium yeah it could represent I think
and
a very self-sustaining way a new
educational platform right where people
extract true education right yeah like
what what you're able to do here now
that the questioning and the answering
and this direct translation right there
is no inter exchange it's affording some
turbulence we get it directly yeah
that's that's new that's and that's
that's something I think that we need to
encourage and grow and these things are
quite large I know I may not pop by on
my my friend Paul vertically he has one
and I was in fest like we just started
one on was like two hundred and
something people on it and like or the
first day I imagine on some of the other
ones you're on like there's thousands of
people involved and things like that
right Eric Weinstein and Lex Friedman I
think are both over ten thousand people
now right of course and it's their it's
their presence than when they come in
and and they it affords everyone direct
close contact with a leading thinker in
an industry right and again this this
capacity to make sense of the world to
ask questions deep questions penetrating
questions need to do that on a human
level it's truly something else I mean
well I I mean I just I've done it the
first time right right and and the
questions were good and it was so
exciting and I was getting into the flow
state or just participating in it yeah
it was very very powerful um so I mean
that's interesting because it's both
quantitatively and qualitatively very
powerful I mean any of your reading
right thousand tens or thousands of
people and but each person is getting
you know you know potential access to
very high quality level of discussion
and interaction it's very very powerful
and we're working on ways to try to make
it more efficient right as you can
imagine like clustering reaction groups
into ways where people can monitor
reactions of you kind of sift the best
signal to the top there are lots of
really interesting ways that you can
integrate yourself with the the
distributed and select of the crowd
right and it's starting to develop its
nascent right you can see the edges of
it it's really fascinating the way that
people are reacting and I really think
there's a girl a lot of potential here
for for the early stages of what
everyone
keeps looking for this this dis this
description of how technology is
interwoven with the the collective
intelligence right is self-organizing
collective intelligence oh and what that
is demonstrating is is happening here on
a place like discord so this holds out
something for me this time it's very it
interested in very concerned about which
is trying to do something analogous with
analogous to individual cognition with
distributed cognition which is you know
to transform intelligence into
rationality which is a different thing
right sorry there's a very loud jet
passing by that's okay can't really hear
as much on my end so you know you know
intelligence is this various you said
there's self-organizing sense making
thing but it's also capable of a lot of
self-deception and a lot of you know
Dilla Tereus patterns yeah yeah yeah and
so what I'm interested in is again sort
of the emerge it you know one of the
virtual engines that are emerging what
are the sets of constraints that are
coming into play so that we get this
process to be more than just
self-organizing that it becomes
self-correcting and it becomes capable
right of you know noting and patterns
that are deceptive self-deceptive in
some way and things like that you know
some of the key elements are internal
structures so if you define everything
in terms of like boundary conditions
right I it's it quite clear that there's
an inside and outside there's a set of
rules that governs that which happens on
the inside and then there's a manner in
which you kind of translate resources in
risen outwards as you take in food and
you excrete waste out of it right in the
marketplace dynamics it's something like
the production of a product or waste but
yeah so what we're lacking here is is a
number of different things I think one
we're lacking a clear incentive
structure it's hard for people to
understand precisely what to work on and
how to govern themselves towards it so
the teleological elements missing a
little bit and part of that is because
of some one of the lack of integration
of the top-down approach right where the
nodes at expertise are acting as a way
to guide the kind of distributed
cognition that
doesn't have a clear structure that
represents that expertise right yeah and
the other thing is is that systemic
internal structure which allows you to
convey those resources in an efficient
manner now that's starting to develop
it's also in a nascent form we're
working on projects that are tangential
to a cryptographic element something
that's in that space called a
decentralized autonomous organizations
right and the way that these kind of
inform systems of voting and I don't
know exactly based on early testing how
functional that will be but it's at
least early foray into something that
will look like the way in which people
can kind of collectively organized their
sense making on the technical aspect
right on the infrastructure itself and
so that that may be starting to develop
too and I think third why's there there
is as yet a failure of ways to integrate
it with the actual marketplace of value
right right right right now there is
there's as yet an unknown way to take
that product which is made by this right
so what what is afforded by this in
other words all right let's say it's
recorded whatever the recording gets
demolished what you and I appreciate
from this now can no longer be
transmitted right but it exists the
value still exists it just can't be
multiplied right right and that's what
that's what we're trying to do if we can
because I think like you said that
self-deceptive element it represents a
friction right it represents the
turbulent elements of it attempt to
reach the flow State right right all
those distractive elements that you have
to keep sifting through before you find
the real thing and the ability to
distribute moments of insight moments of
value to true moments of value I think
is
is is to counter the presence of that
distant and disorganized thought and
kind of diseased elements that
pathological thinking that we see in our
cultural landscape
you need them more rapidly both convert
and diverging elements of thinking right
it needs both yeah I'm really impressed
by that that there's a there's already
well you're at least exemplifying it
there's already a degree of
self-reflection about how to bring in
you know ways in which the this whole
dynamical system can self correct and
improve and you know it's almost
something like a spire I was gonna say
it can grow now you know it can write
you can it can afford
well like I I think it's fair to say I
will seem you like you're trying to move
it towards collective rationality and
perhaps even collective wisdom and
because oh yes yeah I mean go ahead and
that that moving towards is more like a
calling to ah that's what I want that's
what I was looking for that's what I
there was something I wanted and you put
your finger on it right there there's
that you know that comes up encircling
yeah you know some of the conversations
I've had with guys sensed on its sense
of harkening the sense of the logos
that's emerging and that's calling you
and you're trying to be true to the
logos just different you know the sense
of you know maintaining that continuity
of faithfulness of contact to this thing
as its taking shape yes very very much
and it's a fascinating process and
difficult to describes difficult to
articulate yeah yeah yeah that's you
know that inability to name at the
inability to put your finger on it for
the two graphs grasp it is what's I
think your attempt to grasp is what's so
fascinating about it right the way it's
just yeah it moves out of the way right
and and but it's so fascinating because
you've noticed where you've been right
you've noticed where your arm went in
your tent to swipe it yeah that's that
self right and then you reflect on that
moment like oh my gosh yeah
yeah it so it's very much it's very much
like when you're doing Tai Chi Chuan and
you're sparring with somebody and you're
trying to do that you know in Jordan
Hall and I've been talking about this
and we're trying to bring back these
notions of you know of an older notion
of faith or at least a new notion of
faith I don't know if it's old or new I
can't tell anymore
but that we you find in the Socratic
dialogue you know our Socrates was very
you know adept at following the argument
no matter where it went and keeping his
interlocutors engaged and there was this
friend like you say trying to say with
that is it a reasoning skill well not
just reasoning and it's not just logic
it's it's this thing that hangs between
it's sort of you know it's got elements
of reason in it elements of poetry
elements of myth it's like it's this
amazing kind of thing and and and then
there's that's on the sort of the person
side and then there's this like you know
Christopher master pH when I talk about
like the guy's the third factor the
logos that emerges and you're crying
like you don't and you know what what
exactly that is is also something that's
constantly it's alright on the end two
people are doing that right yeah then
you have those two motions those two
circling motions yes yes and that is
truly you know that comes closest to I
think when when one of the some of the
great philosophers would describe
philosophy ax yeah a way of life right
is the true yeah you eudaimonia is it
something it's that that true that true
being that is the essence of being right
totally totally
you go from it goes from being something
you're talking about to something your
instantiating and participating with
them and your exemplifying a way of life
and your beautifying it your making it
attractive to to other people that's
yeah and that yeah and that's all bound
up together so at this I mean this leads
me to the question I mean it I've been
that's and it's happening on a place
called discord yes right I love the
irony of it kind of reversal right well
I I found the irony so as so Socratic
you know those Socrates looks like he's
always creating discord because he come
in challenges and crates aporia but
people get drawn along nevertheless in
this very powerful way so I as I wanted
to say um this sounds so resonant with
convergent with I'm not quite sure what
the metaphorical verb is here with this
project that I've been wrestling with
about the religion that's not a religion
and making it simultaneously scalable
and rigorous having a lot of the
functionality that religions had for
transforming consciousness cognition
community culture but also not being a
meshed with in the axial age two worlds
mythology in fact it's a different world
we're talking about here we're talking
about this weird symbol on between the
interpersonal world and the cyber world
it's a different world it doesn't it
doesn't fit in the axial world the axial
age mythology I feel like what we're
talking about here and the way I think
it's gonna connect up with these
emerging communities of practices like
what Rafe Kelley is doing and people
like that I think I mean it feels to me
like this is deeply convergent with what
I've been talking about in the religion
that's not a religion I mean you'll have
to forgive me of course I'm biased I I'm
gonna be looking for any signs that will
confirm my hypothesis but what do you
thought in in in the to use another
metaphor in in the top-down bottom-up
approach there's a reason that we
reached out to you right there's a
reason that these two worlds made
contact right there was these
supercharged elements of the the you
know the electric cloud right and then
the positive emotions underneath and
these little tendrils that send out
modes of contact right and if there is
something valuable here right if we
demonstrate if we truly demonstrate it a
spark of such power and heat and
transformative City and plasma and
energy what we'll demonstrate itself
such as as we've seen over and over
again like that one small moment you
came in and and you demonstrated not to
be too congratulatory for yourself I
think an element of what you talked
about there that that ability to to move
in towards in a way for
and to deal with some of the the the
people that spoke with you there that
evening that not necessarily had
something that was on topic but but you
spoke penetratingly you searchingly like
willing to go into their space and and
to question it right to interrogate it
and i really appreciated that and i was
able to see it happen and that
reflective moment made an impact on me
and now i will try to do more of that in
my own being right so that that was a
that was a wonderful affordance that
that happened in that moment right and
and you can think that maybe five ten
percent maybe more had that same
experience and to think of the way
though it ripples out and the way that
cultural elements kind of memetic lee
transferred it's something that we need
to recover that we've lost in the and so
i wanted to say the diaspora of our
meaning but i'm not sure what that would
mean it's been such a fracturing of
things that have just splintered off and
we have to bring them back in and
recover them yeah there's there's a way
to do that and i think it's starting to
show up there's a way to recover what it
is to be human and to really find out
what it is to be more than human perhaps
right what was meant by that and i think
it's really wonderful time to be alive
well first of all thank you for what you
said i mean i deeply appreciate you say
a nut i was i was aspiring to do that
when i came in and so the fact that you
that i might have moved towards
achieving that is very encouraging to me
so thank you for saying that i
appreciate that and secondly what you
just said at the end there that was so
was very beautifully well said europe if
you allow me to compliment you i think
you are an extremely good representative
of this emerging thing you are you bring
with it a presence and a personality and
a nimbleness and acuity of mind and
expression that i think is going to be
needed i think you you you you need to
be a little bit more public you need to
you know talking more about this which
is why i wanted to do this i think it's
very valuable
the
you you did what I was talking about
there you you articulated it in in such
a way that it was beautiful
and I don't mean it just in the markets
I mean in the in the in the book right
you know and and I didn't want to
transactional eyes it too much and I
well-received thank you right thank you
for saying story I have I have been in
the background a great deal and I think
honestly there are an extraordinary
number of people just like me in the
background I and I know you don't seek
we don't seek the foreground so much as
we seek to to strengthen the background
right right there's a middle ground that
all right there is a middle ground and I
think maybe maybe you found it right
like you might be in this little layer
that isn't it doesn't it doesn't
overemphasize the broadcast and it
directly integrates with it makes sense
of the world in fact it generates that
from from the work that you're engaged
in just the medium it's understood well
I didn't it's it's really phenomenal
process to be a part of it is I think
the reason why I might be in that place
that you've described is because it's
very similar to I like to try and keep
sort of as close as I can to my students
right obviously I don't mean in any in
any inappropriate way but I mean having
so that there's a sense in which they
feel that there's not just a you know a
knowledge transmission relationship but
the potential for some degree of
mentorship right and so yeah yeah that's
very important for me is a vocation it's
not not just an occupation well so what
what's that is it the Frost poem is a to
trance and mud time or when avocation
meets vocation there's something about
that place where you have found a place
where you can do both right where you
can where you can succeed and in
aligning the value of the marketplace
with the value of your soul yeah and and
that's just that's a beautiful moment to
find and I think that more people could
find it if we afforded them that process
and if we
if we played around with that space
little more I think we would find
there's a lot of good to be had here
that's a very well I think that's a good
place to end it that's a very well very
well says how do this was such a great
pleasure I really enjoy talking to you
it really was all mine John thank you oh
well thank you so so much like I said I
think I would like to if I know you'd
like to sort of hang back from the
center stage but maybe we could talk
again like this I would like that sure
okay thank you very much
okay thank you very much