howdy this is Jim rut and this is the
Jim rut show
[Music]
today's guest is Peter Wang co-founder
and CTO at anaconda a leader in Python
technologies for scientific computing
and data analytics and yeah that's
Python the computer language not pipe on
the snake well hi Jim it's great to be
here
Peter's not only a very accomplished
technologist in the Python space but
also is a deep thinker about our present
world and how our technologically driven
networked culture and humans interact
today and how they can better interact
in the future at least if we're gonna
survive he's also a leader in thinking
about next-generation distributed web
technologies so we got a lot to talk
about Peter so let's start with an
update on what's going on in the Python
world one observation I have I'm a
Python user I've heard of learn Python
at the hello world level in 2004 soon
thereafter you replaced my use of Perl
with Python for you know text mangling
and what have you then started using it
more seriously in 2013 and now it's
probably my number two language after
c-sharp and one things always been an
issue in the Python world is version 2
versus version 3 it now looks like we're
decisively past that gap and it looks
like version 3 from now on out that's
right
version 3 is I mean the Train is not
only left the station but as of December
31st of this year the version 2 platform
will no longer be maintained all the
developers are moving to only supporting
and maintaining to version 3 that's been
my rule for at least three years is
unless there's an absolutely
indispensable library that wasn't
version 3 compatible I always went with
version 3 and now I'm seeing a lot of
the you know the big main libraries have
actually started to drop v2 support so
finally the decision is clear yeah it
only took 10 years you know but and
retrospect a screwy decision to made
that fork over such minor issues but hey
it is what it is and it's now finally
you know rejoined and it's version 3
Hereafter now one question that
love bass got like you probably sees
absolutely everything in the Python
space what are some interesting new
libraries and capabilities that have
entered the Python space in the last
couple of years one thing I'll say up
front is that the Python space is so
huge now it is I think by many counts
the number three most popular
programming language and so no one
really can see all of it but the last
few years have in the general Python
space been consumed by the two versus
three transition and what happens to two
right and then also the async i/o and
asynchronous programming a lot of those
things have have just had some growing
pains they've been going through in the
data science and machine learning space
however there's a ton of new stuff and
that's where I do have a lot more depth
and understanding and there I would say
that in the last few years we've gone
obviously tensorflow you know started
happening I guess about a couple years
ago for deep learning and then we had a
few other frameworks that came out and
what we're seeing now as the glow I
think the initial burst and glow from
that phase we're seeing more libraries
come out that sort of deconstruct what a
deep learning library is and create more
general vector computing and
optimization stuff so I think that's
some really cool stuff related to that
Rapids from the Nvidia folks using some
of our technologies like numba desk and
what else oh there's some automated
machine learning tools that have come
out for just getting people a faster
start you know over all these different
possible machine learning models so I
think those are some of the key ones
there's just so much going on it's
really it's actually kind of an
interesting problem that we suffer there
where there's too almost too much
happening for anyone to keep track of I
think I always worry and you know we
know about how evolution doesn't always
converge to the right solution
are some really good tools being ignored
due to evolutionary drift essentially
you know where for whatever reason you
know three tools let's say higher level
wrappers around tensorflow which has
been a hot area of late and maybe the
one wins I don't know and you know how
do we keep enough diversity in the
ecosystem to make sure that guys who
should win do it well gosh you know
there's so much to unpack in that
question so I think there's a defense of
the ecosystem that's separate from
putting your finger on the scale and
saying this library should win and in
fact if you have a generative ecosystem
then no single person can say what is
the right thing and we almost we have to
round trip it and run a loop through the
user space right through the innovation
community and people actually applying
the stuff in practice so we might you
know developers we always have internal
intrinsic attributes of a library that
we optimize for we'll say oh this is
more elegant this one has newer
techniques so and so forth but until you
actually put it out and run a round trip
through you know user space you don't
know what's really critical right but to
actually answer your question I think
that one of the things I really very
strongly feel we have an opportunity to
do well in Python space especially on
machine learning is to articulate a more
modern defense of what used to be called
open source but it's something different
and it's a generative contribution gift
economy around source code sharing
that's not inhibited or anchored by
legacy approaches to IP and software
modernization so this kind of got really
deeply fast what I mean is we can talk
about like people know I'm an open
source advocate you know people know a
lot of Python stuff happens open source
but I think the term open source is
outmoded and we should almost stop using
it because a lot of corporate citizens
in the open source community will come
out with open source but their
governance models are very limited the
governance models basically retain
copyright you know only the corporate
contributors and the employees that
corporation can push commits and things
like that and that's open source
technically by every measure by OSI and
FSS and everything but it's somehow
manages to not retain the ethos of the
open source code sharing sort of this
generative innovation community so that
is a struggle that I do worry about we
talk about how do we assure that the
space have also a good way for me trying
to come up with that articulation of
what are the values
to send there that's one of those things
the second thing is then ensuring that
lots of things have a chance to compete
so when you talk about rappers over
Tessa flow that's all great but 25
different rappers over tensorflow
at the end of the day it's still the
tensorflow core there's other approaches
to deep learning frameworks like pi
torch like chain or MX net many others
and they have a different construction
they're more modular construction and an
observation that my senior director of
community innovation here has put so
eloquently was that the reason the PI
data community or the Syfy community one
what we're able to create all these
wonderful innovation things is because
the people who are doing the work the
the actual heavy lifting of making code
making new modular libraries they
designed them with a certain economy of
scope so they can play with each other
they reproduced they reuse pieces
already there nothing tried to boil the
ocean it was a really interesting
innovation community and I argue
actually one of my talks I've given I
argue that the PI data cyber community
is one of the very few things that I've
seen that has actually out innovated
capitalism basically the return on your
dollar there has been better than any
kind of capitalist firm I certainly have
found it an unbelievable ecosystem I'm
not a hardcore commercial production
programmer but I do like to try new
things right you know I've tried out the
various tensorflow rappers I tried PI
torch I've tried this I tried that dude
I do a lot of stuff and what I'm always
amazed at if I'm looking for some little
piece of glue where or something to move
data from here to bear you know a half a
line worth of Google search in the
Python space will usually turn up
something for me right you know the
space is amazingly well populated its
blessing in the curse you know we've got
about a hundred thousand packages so
good luck now I'm talking to the man
himself so I should ask this question if
say someone who is not a true deep
Python guru are there ways to validate
packages libraries systems you know how
does one think about choosing between
nine different machine learning
frameworks for instance what would
advice would you give to somebody who is
entering this world that's a great
question
as far as I know right now there's
really a standard way to validate it or
to like there's there is not a central
credentialing Authority right one
measure that's popular is people look at
popularity rank how many downloads off
pie-pie how he downloads off of Conda or
anaconda how many questions are there on
Stack Overflow how active is the github
for that particular project those are so
all these kind of like proximal measures
of the healthiness of a project but
unfortunately the way this goes some
software some projects that are very
useful very solid they don't need much
fixing they actually do a very small
thing very well and they sit around they
have no activity for a few years but
they're still perfectly fine and so
there's a biased source of newness and
activity there which is unfortunate so
we definitely lack for that and I think
any you know further on this
conversation we're talking about
decentralization we are suffering
exactly that problem here any time you
have an abundance of options now you've
got a curatorial need right and the
curation becomes very important so we're
thinking about ideas to improve that
here at anaconda actually and we do play
a very interesting role in the ecosystem
so we do have visibility into a lot of
things that could inform such a curation
'el system but we want to make sure we
do in a way that's not ham-fisted we
want to do in a way that you know does
surface again I talked about earlier
which is that sometimes projects don't
release very often or actually very
stable and should be the ones you do use
right yep it's not it's certainly not a
simple linear problem right it's a
multi-dimensional nonlinear problem and
you mentioned a lot of things I use how
many downloads does the community seem
alive you know are there mailing lists
or discussion groups you know help I do
use how often is it updated but I don't
use that as a binary as you point out
some very nice mature packages really
don't need the updating right so why
should you care about that the other one
I like to look at is look at the issues
list on github and if there's a lot of
issues out there that nobody's
addressing that's usually not a good
size it's interesting it can be but it
can also be a different part of the
quadrant which is this is an incredibly
useful library that
suddenly found massive popularity and
you know one dev working on it and you
know in his or her part-time and like
ten thousand people are on github asking
about it now it normally is not that
much of a ratio but we do see this
really interesting phenomenon now where
because Python has gotten mainstream
people their jobs depend on it right you
tell you talk about yourself being a
casual user but there are people who
literally you know Python is a very high
rank skill on indeed comm and these
others are LinkedIn and job search
places people they get a job and the job
requires I'm going to use these
libraries and these are open source
libraries maintained by volunteers and
so they'll show up on the tracker saying
hey your software sucks because it's not
doing this and then the other and the
volunteer maintainer is like well we're
not getting paid for it and there's just
the incredible mismatch and disparity
between the expectations of what I would
say the standard labor economics around
white collar work that uses this kind of
software and then the generative
abundance gift economy economics that is
part of the sharing tribal culture that
produces the software and at the
intersection of these two things
there's not many tangent points between
these two circles in fact so that's one
of my things I like to nerd out on which
is actually also an intersection of
meta-level its intersection between the
circles of my you know my day job and
all those Python stuff and open-source
community and then also my thinking
about you know future of human
civilization and collective you know
dynamics and things like that yep sounds
like you're the right guy to be there to
be thinking about this and you know the
Python community is amazing but you
could make it even more amazing if you
could come up with some way to help
people sort through that without putting
the thumb on the scale prematurely right
or at all right how do you get an
emergent signal that's a good signal we
will come back to that problem again and
again I mean it's funny you know one of
the things that we look at you know this
distributed search problem you know
people say well why can't we have a
distributed Facebook right well turns
out it's a pain in the ass to be able to
make it searchable or hate if everybody
has their own copy so these problems
come up again
again now I like to go to next is
something I know you've thought about
and talked about a little bit and that
is the match and mismatch between human
cognition and our worldwide
technologically driven networks Mis
master's in human cognition and a
worldwide networks technologically
driven network how you know you've
talked about things like speciation ok
well where would you like to start start
saying what you think about this problem
you know that the human cognition was
not designed for fractal huge
instantaneous worldwide network right so
there's two pieces of this so one of
them is tied to the limitations of human
cognition you know I was actually I was
listening to the Krakauer interview that
you did and he talks about it really
well there as well he talks about you
know all of our analytical models we
were really solving for how to have a
shorter model description than the
phenomenological of observations right
and a thing I like to say about this is
that humans really are narrowband
sensors that have a preference for
structure so we really we can't help but
see the world in terms of structure and
that structures how we compress sensory
input structures how we compress our
description of phenomenon and we really
have very narrow bandwidth to process
these things and to retain them and we
remember them remember these compressed
versions of them like almost like a
little reduced hashes of them not the
full description so human cognition is
really I mean our brains are just these
patterning engines and that works fine
in 3 plus 1 D space that we grew up in
had to hunt animals in and greed in but
what we've done in all of our caloric
access in modernity we've created now
technological infrastructure that
exposes all of this extra like cycles
that we have in our brains to a
completely different massively high
bandwidth set of perceptual inputs that
are all virtual it's all virtuality but
through our eyes and our ears I mean
even this podcast is an instance of such
a thing
we are exposed to a space that or to a
set of sensory things that inhabit
dimensions they carve out dimensions
they are well beyond the 3+1 D that we
that our brains really were evolved to
succeed in and these worldwide
or s the communications networks what
they've really done is now they've
created a place where signals and
messages and ideas bounce around and
essentially have a life of their own and
what I like to think about is this is
kind of if I could use a model that
maybe we come back to over and over in
this podcast but let's think of the
human being is almost like a connected
series of rods or masses suspended in
water and different layers of water have
different densities maybe different
temperatures and we're loosely connected
and we're each of us we're just every
single one of us has multiple planes
that we live in but at the highest plane
the intellectual plane we tend to think
of that as kind of this very sort of
rarefied air but actually our
intellectual brains and our cultural
brains that tear of us it is essentially
substrate for a massive amounts of wave
patterns and signals that bounce off
each other some cancel each other out
some reinforce each other so we're
really like little particles of water or
atoms molecules of h2o in this giant
ocean and that's really my model for
what's happening now why it's so hard
for people to talk about it because
people still think of themselves
essentially individual whole atomic
things that maybe read a book or watch a
TV show or listen to a sound byte but
actually we have to almost deconstruct
what it is to be human and realized that
you know there's so much more signal
pressure on this cultural intellectual
part of us and that actually causes a
disconnect in neuroticism as it
disconnects with our internal narrative
going between these different connected
pieces that comprise us so anyway that's
a lot to unpack there but I just want to
put that model out there as how how I
see the world and why I think right now
we're in such a weird place like we have
metaphysical problems we have a crisis
of philosophy so I like to say because
our model of self our model of agency or
model of what even a human person is our
human reality is or how important
consensus reality is all those are
breaking down do they haven't you think
this is by necessity because of the new
modality or is it part of learning you
know lack of learning you know if we
look back at the invention of the
printing press
apparently the
various frauds and indulgences
were a big thing that the printing press
was used for the early days of
newspapers were full of ads for quack
nostrums
I remember email quickly got inundated
by spam that's right Marcus cookie
recipe right exactly but fairly quickly
humans adapted and learned to filter out
the most egregious most of the
time is that what's gonna happen with
humans in this high dimensional
high-speed network world or we entered a
new regime where it's just beyond our
capability to deal I'm going to say that
it's the latter and the reason I say
that is because well if we see this in
data science to this argument that
quantity at some level quantity takes on
quality all of its own right and the
difference between the kind of
misinformation and fuzzy information
fuzzy propagation of high quality signal
and all these kinds of things that we've
had the past is we used to be in a
regime civilizational e or socially of
bandwidth scarcity there just was not
enough bandwidth to construct a high
quality simulacrum of virtuality we are
now past that point there really is a
binary point I mean there's a hard limit
to how many pixels and what frame rate
you need coming into your eyeballs for
you to see something that's very very
real right there is some audio encoding
bit rate below which it sounds like crap
and above which it's basically like
you're sitting next to me we don't need
a you know anything beyond that is gravy
so there's a hard transition point where
we have enough bandwidth to create a
distributed you know Scot thousand
plateaus and seven and a half billion
plateaus we can create this virtuality
and now we're in a space of attentional
scarcity so I think it is a very
different thing yeah and in fact I got I
got a really long discussion with a guy
who was asking as I was talking about my
ideas for decentralized web and things
like that he was saying you know all
this stuff out social media how is this
different than all the piece of stuff
people were saying about TV back in the
day right people are say TV would rot
your brain Neil postman hat is like
amusing ourselves to death block people
said the same stuff about TV why is it
different out social media I think that
prince is that there's a couple of
things but number one we're just in a
different bandwidth space number two
it's not broadcast it's not broadcast
and that's the problem
TV and radio and newsprint at least
their power came from broadcast they can
influence a billion or a million minds
but it was the same message going to the
same million what we have now is
aggregated narrowcast
so every single person can get a deeply
tailored virtual experience of the world
that is then able to manipulate them
however we want and maybe you're right
maybe it's a learning issue where this
generation of young kids that are
growing up with all this stuff they will
learn defenses the turmeric Weinstein
likes to use is malware right
they'll have been inoculated to the kind
of malware but we have a long way to go
before then and number two who knows of
the world will look like by then that
all of their interactions with each
other the human human interface is
already going to be intermediated by so
much virtuality a digital modification
we may really be putting ourselves into
a new phase of human evolution and we're
not
we've not contemplated really what that
looks like structurally what that means
and that's very dangerous I'm gonna come
back to that a little bit later let me
push back just a little a year ago when
they when it first started getting some
publicity I became very concerned about
the possibility of deep fake videos
being used for very pernicious purposes
and yet as far as I know there are zero
examples or you know they're you know
little corner cases but no major
exploits have been made around deep
fakes and that at least to me indicates
perhaps that people are developing these
anti-malware immune systems and say you
know that really is in Hillary's face on
that porn video right that's just
implausible right and isn't that
interesting that all this concern about
deep fakes a year ago has so far at
least not been met by actual problems
from deep fakes it is interesting I was
also concerned about it you know
actually when D face first came out I
went downloaded the you could download
the image via BitTorrent it was about
like you know two three gays was the
kind of the software to do it and I was
looking through
actually embedded anaconda to install a
tensor fluff and other stuffs I'm like
yeah I'm very proud of this kind of but
um here's the problem with that point of
view right and I agree with you we have
not seen profusion of deep faked you
know political whatever takedown videos
and stuff like that we are seeing some
of it you know we're seeing social media
sites and what not having to have
policies around you know is it okay to
take the likeness of a person and
tensorflow it you know or PI torch it on
top of a porn actress and like is that
fair use is that art is it slander what
is it right so we got that kind of stuff
going on that is happening that's not
deep fake video but it is happening but
kind of zooming up a little bit to
answer your question more broadly I
think the danger here is that what deep
fake represents is it tells us a we're
almost good enough to be able to use a
pile of GPUs to trick our iconic visual
perception system which has been very
good that's a very well honed system and
our proprioceptive system our visual
systems these have been honed for a very
long time and so you know we look at a
loved one they raise an eyebrow and we
read a ton of meeting right so these are
very well honed systems the fact that we
can take a bunch of vector hardware and
fool them is like not great it's kind of
like good huh but think more deeply than
this we are actually entering as own
where we don't actually know what to
believe right when we are going to
exceed our own capability like we can
create more virtuality that's more real
than reality so to make this more
concrete maybe I was a laugh track but
make it more concrete you say you
haven't seen any deep fake videos yet
how do you know I should I have but I
haven't been fooled by anything but
howdy no no I don't know certainly but
you would think still the forensic
ability to detect deep fakes is pretty
strong that if we had been fooled we
would
you know at least one example thereof as
far as I know there's not been a single
widespread exploit of deep fakes that
has you know penetrated any significant
distance into our world and as far as I
know the forensics can still detect a
deep fake at a high level if you're
willing to put the effort into it
right so to push back on that a little
bit number one again how do you know
because the way that we're going to test
for deface besides you know Amazon
Turkey a whole lot of this stuff is
we're gonna use probably cans and other
kinds of deep learning neural nets to
try and detect deep face so you can see
the kind of the problem there because
we're gonna take those turn right back
around to make better deep things so our
actual ways of detecting deep thanks to
forensics that we can do I think that's
sandbagging that's not gonna be a
perfect approach but even more than this
I don't know if you read the articles
that were coming out after the Trump
victory people talk about fake news and
stuff like that and there was a really
interesting fascinating profile down on
this guy who was just this Rando dude in
like I don't know Louisiana somewhere
and he just decided for lulz he was
gonna create a fake website and make all
these like bogus so far right-wing
outrageous articles detect roll his
conservative friends and they started
getting a lot of traction he started
selling ads start making money and then
before he knew it he was like becoming
one of these like main founts of
misinformation right-wing like nonsense
it was just a random dude with like
wordpress okay so the bar that you set
for yourself and like what you affect
what were you and i might see and say oh
yeah you know what that definitely is
actually trump on a bed getting peed on
by a bunch of Russian hookers like that
bar may be very high for us it ain't
that high for the vast majority the
electorate I'll tell you that you know
some Rando dude with WordPress can you
know make a significant percentage point
impact on election you bet deep face can
be a problem for us I'll be interested
to see what happens in 2020 to what
degree has the immune system against
malware improved you know for instance I
think the the most successful fake news
story which is still like to your point
guys like you and me wouldn't have been
fooled by this one
apparently the number-one fake news of
2016 was Pope Francis endorses Trump got
20 million views right will people be so
gullible in 2020 I would assert without
being able to prove the answer is no
they would not be so gullible that if
you know someone were to refloat that or
the analogous are equivalent story it
would not get 20 million views 2016 was
you know very early in the aggressive
and moderately skillful application of
fake news and since then just like spam
right how many people fall for Nigerian
letters these days not very many but it
was quite a good business back in the
day so we shall see I'm not saying that
we don't have an issue here but I'm
saying that the doomsayers I believe
underestimate the ability of humans to
learn adaptive immune systems against
information malware now of course it's
an arms race as you point out and
there's no guarantee that the technology
won't eventually overwhelm the ability
of the human immune system and just like
2016 showed it will lag so that even if
in the long term our immune systems
catch up a lot of harm can be done in
the mean time hey you know I think this
is actually a really important thing to
drill it on just a little bit because
you know kind of the way I said it
earlier I'll just reiterate that we are
getting better at making virtuality that
exceeds our sort of perceptions of
reality and furthermore more and more of
our experiences of reality are
intermediated by electronic means and
once you have this interface a point
that's some kind of electronic device
you can go and plug in virtuality you
can plug in reality it's like you know
when they they go in the hospital and
they put a little thing in your arm I
think you just kind of swap out syringes
and stalk about different kinds of drugs
and stuff as they need right we've got
that port in our eyeballs our ears now
we've got it
everyone's got one and so I think that
when you talk about underestimate the
human ability to adapt I would ask you
adapt how like besides turning back into
the quote of a Neanderthal where we just
have tribal hey what did you hear what
did you hear
beyond that what does your adaptation
everyone's gonna learn how to like debug
tensorflow code everyone's gonna go and
go through the training data sets for
these things know right so I think this
is where I think the arms race of
machine learning and machine augment is
human decision-making cybernetics all
these things are creating really
speciation because because I think
you're right people will respond people
not gonna they're not gonna sit around
and be lied to all the time but they
will respond and what I think is that
the response for a lot of people who are
below a certain tier of expertise they
are going to turn into vassals they're
gonna be digital vessels essentially I
mean they're already doing that now
they're not becoming that now so it's
not only elections that deep face matter
it's not only deep fake videos that
matter but it's the anti-vaxxer it's
people with all sorts of financial like
weird financial fraud little Ponzi
schemes that show up all the time on
Facebook right you and I maybe we move
into the kind of more rarefied circles
but for a lot of Americans out there who
are you know a lot of them are
struggling and desperate financially
there's a ton of random stuff they're
exposed to you and that stuff is gonna
become increasingly weaponized by
machine learning by maybe deep fakes by
whatever and those people after they get
burned a couple of times what are they
gonna do to not be a burden a third time
they're going to maybe shut off their
devices they're gonna maybe distrust any
kind of information to get through a
digital means and they then revert back
into like I said a more Neanderthal
state they're gonna revert back into not
Homo sapiens digital they're gonna
basically become part of a substrate for
other people to manipulate in control
and that's that's why I talk about
speciation that's why I deeply believe
some of John Lewis critiques of the
technological society I think we're
really really setting ourselves up for a
weird caste system and that's my concern
there yep speciation I think that's
interesting
maybe somewhat unusual that I still have
lots of interactions with my childhood
friends right I grew up in a
working-class neighborhood half the
adults had dropped out of high school so
this was not a tickly sophisticated area
but the people were generally
hard-working had good values and were
have been pretty successful but it's
amazing that there's lots of people my
age who hardly know what Netflix is let
alone I've ever used it right and
Facebook I would never be on that
goddamn thing isn't that just obsessed
full of right and so they literally
in some sense are almost speciated out
out of this this new thing that we've
all been doing all these years you know
I've been doing it since I was in my 20s
and I've been doing it continuously so
maybe a little anomalous for a mid
boomer but there are a lot of people who
just aren't engaged at all or as you
point out some who have been burned or
disgusted and become information
nihilists with respect to the networks
and frankly that may be better in some
ways and being duped again and again and
again but it's a loss of agency it
represents a loss of agency and I know
that all nations was a erics great quote
that a nation is a good people who
decided to forget something together
right we maintain an illusion of
democracy and government by the people
and all this other stuff it's a useful
illusion to maintain but at the end of
the day there is value to having some
reality behind that illusion and when
these people opt out of all the stuff
they're opting out of the governance
system that's why I call them vassals
well or they build a governance system
in a different modality perhaps they
decide you know what's on line
we're only gonna believe what we see
face to face I think that's an
interesting alternative and you know
you've probably heard me talk about in
the past my distinction between weak
links which are done online and strong
links which are done face-to-face and it
strikes me in the United States at least
the strong link networks have been under
invested in in the last 30 years as
we've all been ever so infatuated with
we
Clank we look at other places the five
star movement in Italy is a very
interesting example it was basically
built around meetup meetup.com
face-to-face interactions at every scale
all over Italy and you know we could see
that from the rejectionists so yet
speciation but doesn't necessarily mean
our species will win okay so I don't
disagree about it don't agree you're
right that doesn't necessarily mean that
our species will win whatever our means
like I don't disagree with you about the
strong versus weak links and and in fact
I would say that the past thirty years
of what you say the past thirty years of
underinvestment in strong links I think
that was your your phrasing I think
actually that's your touching your
brushing up against the root problem
here and you know where Vicky talks
about the crisis of meaning and the this
last thirty years has been more than
that I actually say it's something
closer to about sixty years and I peg it
to basically the post war in America and
the beginning of really mass media
driving mass consumption and what's
happened is that every single step we've
removed we've been weakening communalism
and community strong links between
people and then we've been replacing
those sources of meaning and those
interactions with interactions with
celebrities brands things that are
delivered to us in a broadcast fashion
and even with you haven't of that from
radio and local FM stations getting you
know snapped up same cable TV that went
from community local to being global
broadcast Turner right and so you have
this broadcast mass media phenomenon
that has essentially destroyed a lot of
that person-to-person in-person sort of
thing and I think that the strong link
system is the strongly breakdown that
you're talking about it's well maybe not
intentional but it's been an active
thing it wasn't like oh shoot we forgot
we were supposed to see other people no
it was hey your kids should watch more
TV hey did you see that TV show usually
read through the newspaper the
newspapers talking about the stars on
this new TV show this pilot
showed like all of us are tuned in to
broadcast mass media and that by itself
has been a deeply weakening thing so
when you talk about the people doing
face-to-face connections as a way of
building movements I think that's
fantastic that's true and correct
however however I think that kind of
stuff if it's actively being competed
against by the digitally networked and
digital mimetic systems it doesn't hold
a candle yep this is why I what I really
speak towards is a hybrid of strong link
nodes linked by weak links right so they
can coordinate and sense make using weak
links and act using strong links and
getting that architecture I mean those
are just words getting that architecture
right where you take the benefits of
both strong links and weak links and
create a movement that uses both
appropriately strikes me as the winning
strategy nobody's done it yet at least
that I'm aware of but I put it out there
as a challenge for you know movement
builders party builders you know mimetic
warfare people to take that combined
idea and see what you can make out of it
yeah I agree with you but I would I
would just push back on that concept of
it being a winning strategy because that
explicitly sets up and maybe you're not
really saying this but when you talk
about this being a winning strategy it
almost sounds like there's a goal
there's a thing we're trying to achieve
and this would be a way to win it but I
want to be very clear that when we say
that we're not this is a really very
difficult thing to articulate I think
you're right that in a state that you
and I would be happy to see would be a
system that could be described by that
description but the goal wasn't to win
the goal right now is to create a better
architecture for humans to build shared
values and shared meaning and so Joe
Edelman talks I think on the emerg
podcast he talked about having
goal-directed versus value directed
approaches and so even though I agree
with you from a phenomenological
description of what a winning state
looks like I want to make sure that we
don't convey the wrong idea that hey we
want to take over the world
here's you know Jim and Peter's grand
plan for megalomania that's not what
this is about
it's more about having communities where
hi meaning and hi conviviality which we
don't have right now right we have a lot
of individuals we're sort of I think a
peak individualism the mass media stuff
is played into that very well and we're
just done with it Liberty is not enough
I think that was very well said Peter
and maybe I will rip off that a little
bit yeah that's idea this weakling
strong link community when I say winning
let's say wins enough to build a safe
ecosystem to develop an alternative to
the status quo where people living
within this new force field can
basically reject the game a programming
and have a space in which they can build
game B and you know we don't know what
game B is yet but we know that it avoids
many of the pernicious aspects of game a
and to my mind that's winning yeah so by
that definition than avoiding game a
failures we can pound define that as
game be winning with that I would agree
all right let's hop back a little bit
here to you know fake news networks etc
one thing that's very different big
difference between 1975 and today is in
1975 there were a very small number
really a very homogeneous gatekeepers
there were the three TV networks there
were frankly a small number of
newspapers New York Times Washington
Post's LA Times Chicago Tribune that
drove the news agenda there was Newsweek
and Time magazine and so there was a
very narrow choice of views of the world
now this had some big negatives I mean
frankly the idea that de libération
would have happened under that kind of
system is relatively unlikely in lots of
other good things that have come from
the breakdown of the control of the
discourse by a small number of people
but at the same time having those small
number of professional quality discourse
mediators also kept out a lot of general
horseshit you know stuff like
anti-vaxxers and flat earths and god
knows what other crap circulates around
our unmediated networks today so seems
to me that what we really are in need of
is a new synthesis or we can get some of
the quality of mediation discourse
filtering
etc that we used to get from this
handful of big bland mediators but
instead is dynamic and small scale and
fractal and emergent and all those good
things you know sometimes that goes
under the name of sense making you know
we need to learn how to exist in a world
where there isn't a small number of Big
Brother mediators yet still have a whole
lot of the useless crap filtered out
that we otherwise would waste our
attention on yes I mean I do say that
but when I talk about what what I think
we really need to do we need a new
infrastructure for sense making and
meaning making and really collective
collective action but since making is
the first part of the collective action
could you define sense making this is a
word that gets thrown around a lot and
I'd love to hear what your take on what
it means is well the way I think about
it I've even last couple of years really
I've come to Plummer I have like a lower
and lower sense of esteem for our
baseline human Hardware even as I
maintain great faith in the nobility and
the potential of Homo sapiens and people
I just have a certain sense of I don't
know what the right term is it's not
nihilism but certainly a sense of like
man most of what we deal with this
construct right most of what we tend to
even hold up as being I don't know like
the the reason I say all this is because
on the one hand we can talk about sense
making in a way that lets say the
default perspective on sense making is
hey all the stuff was going on we live
in a Luca world volatile uncertain
complex and ambiguous and we need to
figure out which side is up you look at
the situation with the downing of the
airplane by the Russian missile right
well wasn't the Ukrainian rebels was it
the Russians who was it and then you
look at like when Trump like authorized
the air strikes on that Syrian airfield
and like even hardcore like actual fact
things we can make sense of now because
our world is now so big so complicated
we see so many different things and so
Fuko world we have to have something we
have to get new tools you know you
talked about the collapse of the
gatekeepers of the Fourth Estate how do
we figure out something that suffice is
the same need that those people sufficed
that's one view of sense-making right
your average Joe Schmo at home needs to
understand they live in a world that has
a continuous past it has some sense of a
possibly coherent feature my view on
stands making is a little bit I view it
in a way that maybe less privilege is
the human individual human viewpoint
which is to say that humans basically
lied to themselves all the time and we
go through the world relying on a series
of lies and myths and constructions and
fables all of these things we call
models model stories memories myths
whatever you want to call them and sense
making is the process of compressing
this gigantic amount of stuff coming in
into something that patterns into or is
resonant with there's not completely out
of tune with the various different
models that are playing in our head
that's what most people solve for they
solve for this doesn't offend me this
doesn't surprise me it doesn't make me
feel like I've been living a lie you
know etc etc so most people solve for
when they talk sense making now when we
talk about sense making in an
aspirational sense it's that we want to
get high quality models that we can then
feed into a control loop that we can
then manipulate the environment taking
courses of action that lead to outcomes
that we desire right that agency that
cybernetic loop is a critical part of
useful sense making but the vast
majority of people and I gave a
conference talk about this a couple
years ago it's actually where I've met
Jordan for the first time and I gave a
talk about the story of stories and how
I call the making of sense
most people demand that reality conforms
to their models more than they demands
their models have some semblance to
reality so that's unfortunately you know
we talk about sense making we have to
understand there's many different
species in the tribe of human that need
to engage in a sense making activity and
so when we talk about finding fake news
or coming
higher-quality news sources or having to
decentralize or distributed ways of
patterning it's all these things we also
have to understand that a large part of
humanity still runs on malware and
firmware that requires stories that make
sense more than you know information
that leads to higher quality courses of
action actually if we want to get
historical a little philosophical here
we're essentially talking about the
difference between enlightenment
thinking and pre enlightened and
thinking right the Enlightenment was the
first full break away from just
believing random horseshit that somebody
made up and instead attempting to make
sense that was actually congruent with
reality and yes I'll put my metaphysical
cards on the table and admit to being a
naive realist I actually believe there
is a single reality and we can learn
more and more about it though I doubt we
can ever learn everything about it and
that the Enlightenment toolkit was all
about sense making to bring our models
as congruent as possible to that reality
and it is a little disconcerting that on
both the left and the right or seeing
people explicitly pull away from the
Enlightenment
as a core value and retreating to you
know I'll just be happy to believe
horseshit that it's been handed down
through the generations because it's the
horseshit that I feel comfortable with
and that strikes me as exceedingly
dangerous and very counterproductive for
the future of the human race now in
terms of how this might actually work I
had an example today might you know I
mentioned my hometown buddies we go
hunting we go fishing we go out and do
crazy a few times a year they know
that I'm well-connected into the
networks and have reasonably good sense
making skills and also other nodes near
me I got an email today from a friend
asking me is this real or is this
 right had to do with something
to do with gun control and the federal
government or something I did five
minutes with a research and I said yeah
this is real and it does seem somewhat
unprecedented so yes this is something
you should pay attention to so as I
started thinking about that as uh you
know just a very baby example one might
think of sense-making being in small to
medium sized groups that are
interconnected across
call him secretary nodes kind of like
the secretaries of Correspondence in the
Continental Congress and the
pre-revolutionary America where every
community had our big community had a
group of pre revolutionaries and they
had a corresponding secretary who wrote
to the other nodes right and so my buddy
asked me I asked somebody else right he
to the research and he now has my power
at least at second hand to make sense of
some random thing that came in over the
Internet and that may be the model so
long as there are a sufficient critical
mass of Enlightenment thinkers in this
connected network that a person is part
of that provides their sense-making
apparatus yeah I agree with that
wholeheartedly and I think that this is
the thing you talk about there I also in
my own conference lightning talk that I
gave a couple years back I talked about
the difference between a human network
forces a computer network and a human
network the intelligence actually is in
the network in in that it's a trusted
network there is there's trust in the
connection so your friend if they got an
email from me or from you know Joe Schmo
saying yeah this thing is real they
would discount it completely but if they
get it from you they believe you right
the fact that it's you that connection
itself you know trusted connection is 90
percent of the signal doesn't matter
what it says on that wire actually right
it so strongly modulates the signal
going down that connection but the
Internet is very interesting right and
says you know as well or probably better
than most the Internet is just this is
ossified frozen you call it frozen
accident i think is great term it's the
frozen accident of a command-and-control
computer network where the network's
supposed to be dumb where trust was not
an entity we cared about at all on the
network right back in the day and so
we've overlaid our expectations and our
software provides affordances as if the
network we use is a human network but
it's not it's a computer network
and the modalities of communication the
broadcast the implication the kinds of
gamification we do on it all those
things exploit the characteristics of a
computer network and completely under
serve the needs of a human network and
also they they don't they'll surface
this kind of thing where you're a
trusted expert on a couple of things and
your friends trust you on that that's
very very hard to surface in a scalable
way you know the human networks are very
different than the computer networks and
so I think in the long run we'll have
sense-making networks that look more
like these organic human networks that's
my hope and just as a sidebar I have
talked about this a lot that our
architectures are technical network
architectures are all built on
foundations of sand right CCP IPA CTP
HTML and UNIX all three were designed
for a non-adversarial world or hey these
were all designed for you know
essentially research communities of
people who trusted each other and did
not assume bad faith exploits and here
we are trying to build high fidelity
reasonably coherent signals on top of
these bases of sand and it is a ongoing
problem which I we will probably not get
out of anytime soon but we have to do it
and again this is where I come back to
the weak link strong link when you say
scalable it doesn't have to scale think
about it as a fractal Network where it
can scale in smaller nodes right so you
know let's say it's a community of a
Dunbar number of people 150 who have
some reasonable level of interconnection
amongst them but some of the members
that network also reached out to other
Dunbar clusters right so that when you
aggregate up you eventually get to the
whole world but most of the
communications are within relatively
small groups that might be the right way
to go yeah and actually I sorta clarify
when I say the word scale I think it
actually can scale and it's one of the
reasons I say that the biggest social
network and the most resilient social
network in the world is still email but
actually the scale that I'm talking
about there I should have err quoted it
what I mean is scalable in the sense of
modern like vc-backed to scale
monetization model kinds of things I
think that these kinds of
it may very well be the case that really
good is humane communication
technologies almost by design cannot be
monetized in the fashion they're being
monetized now they the business models
around them are not scalable even though
the networks and the meaning making is I
love that distinction and I think
actually that may point us in some sense
of where to be thinking right don't
think in terms of yeah I gotta build
another unicorn that's what I'm doing
this week I built it let me build a
third one you know them unicorns
right instead let's solve the actual
human problem of how can people do sense
making of reasonable high fidelity even
if they personally don't have huge sense
making skills how do we allow people to
find their advisers or how they create a
virtual set of advisers from a
relatively small number may be Dunbar
number ish set of network connections
how they discover how they knit that up
yeah and I think the closest we got to
something like this was in the there's
kind of this like a period of a few
years you know I think the late 90s
maybe when the Internet we got rich
enough to have like embedded audio and
video kinds of things and some flash
animation stuff and we then had web
rings we had web rings out the wazoo
right I remember those are actually
pretty cool yeah there's a evolution
Darwinism right bring Amazon and there's
like a Babylon 5 web ring and all these
things those are great that's organic
socialization happening and the thing
about this is I think that we've
forgotten we forgotten just how
powerfully leveraged an activity
software development really is and that
in the last 20 years the creation of
software especially enterprise software
the fact of people get employed
stitching together writing more
band-aids of Java on top of other like
Java crap that some other consultant
build like we have so much financial
activity happening around building
essentially pretty crummy software that
we forgot that software actually is
quite leveraged as an activity and I'll
tell two little stories about one of
them is when we talk about in the open
source world the sustainability crisis
right this massively open SSL for
instance turns out the heartbleed bug
resulted because there's only four
part-time people working on OpenSSL and
it's a core piece of infrastructure for
the world right in Python we've got
software like numpy and pandas and map
Hollywood for instance the most popular
plotting package for python that's
maintained by like maybe a couple of
part-time people and they're like
part-time and so when we talk about the
sustainability crisis and open source
you know we can wring your hands about
it it's a problem that we're not funding
these people very well but if you think
what the flip side of that how many
billions of dollars of intellectual
value hasn't provided by just a few
people in their part-time like that's
kind of amazing right do you imagine if
you went back to the Middle Ages again
one farmer cutting wheat for you know a
couple hours a week could defeat all of
Paris that would be insane so the kind
of leverage we get off of software
open-source shows how incredibly
powerful and how impactful the power of
software leverage can be when it's
unencumbered by scarcity business models
I loved it if you have more to say I was
going to transition to a discussion of
non-rivalry economics sure well I think
this is all part of the same
conversation and I'll just say one more
thing the thing about all of this is
that most of software activity that
happens in the world today is pretty
much and it's because
we're building on sand well we have a
lot of stonemasons and architects trying
to build cathedrals and Notre Dom's on
literally on quicksand and actually if
we were to build good underlying pieces
that solve problems they don't need to
modify very much we can actually build
incredibly powerful and fun things and
you can look at knotch
minecraft which is one of the biggest
biggest gaming phenomena that's happened
last ten years it was one guy working on
the stuff and he put this thing together
in like six or seven days we'll write
who made SimCity right he put that
together as a fun little thing while he
was trying to make another game these
things these games that unlock
tremendous amounts of fun and enjoyment
for people they did not take a lot of
people to build it wasn't you know
hundreds of people in a big Hollywood
studio making some massive RPG and I
think software the same thing we have so
many people spinning their wheels on you
know so much JavaScript and broken
DevOps scripts and all those other crap
is because we're
building on sand or building on sand and
real underlying software innovation
hasn't really been happening in a real
way and I think in this way I'm also
resonant with Eric and Peter teals ideas
about stagnation and all of the as if
stuff we have a as this innovative
software industry but actual software
innovation it's really not happening
we're still building in the long shadow
of the 70s and it's starting to really
crumble though there are some very
clever things like I still recall about
five years ago the first time I used
uber I got holy
somebody's taking a bunch of the pieces
and connected with tinker toys and I
would not want to see the back end on
some of this stuff but this is really a
remarkable concept and execution I will
comment on the wonderfulness of the
business model but in terms of a
technological tour de force it was
pretty damn amazing it worked it was
intuitive it was easy oh wow someone's
actually innovated in a major way here
though as we say the foundations are
crappy God knows how many levels and
stacks of crap there are to make that
thing happen which a lot of the
engineers themselves don't even
understand yeah and to be clear I'm not
saying there's been no innovation I'm
just sort of saying relative to how much
money we see into it it's really
terrible like you know when we look at
the job ads in San Francisco for
entry-level front-end programmers you
look at what they spend most their days
doing it's garbage they're reinventing
Windows 2.0 api's right if the browser
was actually a UI framework instead of
some attempt to present information you
know people could build apps with a
hundredth of the effort hardware
engineers in Intel and NVIDIA and other
places they spend so much time making
these perfect chips and they all know
that you know people on average don't
even get one percent of the maximum
competition allow air out of their CPUs
and so I know I'm sort of just whinging
now but I would say that we have way
overshot on hyper specialization and we
have not made much progress in thinking
about building up from a position of
economy like if we only had five FTEs to
throw out this what is the simplest way
we could build this and in a robust and
resilient way right that's the kind of
thinking that we don't see very much I
think in the in the software world and
back to the earlier part of our
conversation when I threw out the idea
of you know the best
lucien doesn't always win a technology I
was actually quite interested in in the
early 90s at the time that HTTP HTML was
taking starting to take off and I was
gagging on it him it's bad now is
horrendous then son had a very cool
alternative called news which
essentially was a windowing environment
in which the native markup was
PostScript you could do amazing things
by sending PostScript to these windows
right that even to this day you can't do
an HTTP HTML in a reasonable fashion oh
you know you got to all these horrendous
ajaxy Kluge's and you know it's still
unbelievable show the HTTP HTML
world and if somehow news had won that
brief horse race in 1991 or 92 we would
be in a very different world where
people wouldn't be you know trying to do
the equivalent of moving telephone poles
with chopsticks which is what I think
front-end development is these days yeah
it's just why is it so goddamn hard to
do things that should be easy right yeah
I just I mean for all of the whinging
that I do about Trump and everything
nothing drives me to drink faster than
reading people complaining about you
know looking at people trying to build
stuff on the front end and seeing how
much reinvention there happens of stuff
that I was doing God in like 1993 you
know I mean it's it's like why is this
hard and how many hundreds of megabytes
are being thrown at making an enumerated
list that collapses why is this hard why
that's the hard thing it's just like I
said nothing drives me to drink faster
than that because that is really well I
mean I think so if we go through it if
we don't drink and we stiffen up and we
say well what what is this really what
is this really happening here this
brings me back to the ol ol thing this
brings me back to I should a little bit
when you talk about enlightenment versus
pre enlightenment and the left and right
abandoning stuff I think we are at the
coming to the culmination or at the
culmination of a cycle of glut we're
just at a point where the city you know
when the Mongols sacked Beijing the city
was was
overflowing enriches right and
civilizations and cultures and tribes
when they get rich and when they get you
know they get rich and they think
they're in control things they get fat
and sloppy and you just put all this
energy into excess that has nothing to
do with the hard economy of you know of
like when your frontier person and and I
think Jordan calls it the arc Heidi
Smith model of the domestic the the
feral and the wild type and I think we
have just a whole lot of over
domestication a whole lot of mandarins
and these these front-end devs that
spend you know three weeks putting
together list control that's just a
symptom of us having it's such a turned
off gravity and allowed these things to
grow these cigarettes to grow too high
and of course thought the money signal
says it's worth doing because even an
incremental improvement efficiency and
some crappy big ponderous corporation is
actually more is worth more than it cost
to do and if it's even just a little bit
more valuable and it cost to do it ends
up getting done even though it's some
higher level it's kind of a ridiculous
thing to do that comes from our
signalling systems so that's actually a
good pivot the idea of non rival risk
economics and for our audience I'm gonna
introduce non-rivalry economics a little
bit and get your reaction to how you
think it might be part of the solution
going for maybe not you know this is a
concept that again our friend Jordan
green Hall now Jordan Hall was the first
person I'm aware of who brought forth
though I believe there were a couple of
precursors but he's the one that in my
space at least made it real and that's
the idea that we have kind of missed the
thought that there's a big difference
between rivalries economics and
non-rivalry second ah mcc's a perfect
example of a rival risks economic item
is a ham sandwich right either i ate it
or you eat it we can't both eat it you
know a classic example of a non rivalry
second ah micarta fact is a mp3 file of
a popular song it's essentially at the
in this day and age free for us both
and our economic model has not really
taken advantage of the fact that we
could have a lot more distribution of
non rival RIS economic goods than we do
now for instance many medicines fall
into this category very inexpensive to
actually make the pill but when you have
to navigate through the intellectual
property levels and corporate ownership
and all this stuff this 2 cent pill
suddenly costs $200 and that means a
whole lot less people are able to take
advantage of that pill than what
otherwise on the other hand and you
point this out on the what was the term
you used for under supported libraries
and stuff what the nine non-rival risks
a radical non-rival list approach missus
is there has to be a loop back to incent
to creation and improvement and that
part has not really been thought through
yet where there is some economic signal
that comes off of the distribution of
non-rival risk goods that goes back to
incent those people who created the
non-rival risk good though it doesn't
make them billionaires and also sustains
a reasonable level of maintenance and
improvement in those goods yeah that's a
good that's a good at talking about it I
think that definitely captures it I'm
just making some notes here while you're
well you're saying that I think maybe
this is why other things one of other
controversial things which I think we
should just do away with copyright
altogether I think I think copyright is
this radioactive albatross that we're
dragging into the information and
digital age and I think it would be
better if we got rid of altogether and
people from demand site actually created
the pole for curation and for
dissemination and popularization but
that's just neither here nor there but
but this is one example right when you
because you said the mp3 file I would
say that for me my view on economics is
if from the perspective of dilettante
and amateur I mean you know I don't have
a degree in the stuff earning like that
but so as far as I can tell economics as
an activity for you know trade of
specialization around the route aspects
of economics and those two fundamental
activities are so different when we talk
about the space of objects and ideas I
give rise to non rivalries there
dynamics that it's almost worth asking
is the term non-rival risk economics is
that term itself an oxymoron that is to
say you know is economics really as we
think about it fundamentally only useful
we have these rival as scarce or
scarcity mentality things and if we move
into the metaphysical space where non
rival as things can happen and it
predominantly it's non rival really is
happening is that we're talking about
economics at all is it more about
coherence and resonance is it more about
you know phase resonance and phase you
know constructive and destructive
interference
you know maybe those are better terms
frankly I guess I don't really care what
we call it right I would still say that
it's the technology or to the toolkit
for creation and distribution and yes we
call it economics in game a but there
has to be an analogous toolkit that is
coherent for an alternative mechanism to
emerge and whether you call it economics
you call it something else I don't
really care you know there are some
people have done some you know
interesting work on analogues to
economics in you know the game be or an
alternative world in for instance you
know that Daniel shmatte and Berger and
his for essays on his blog about a
future economics is a good place for
people to start right yeah I think that
the reason I bring that up is just
because the way I see it viscerally kind
of where I have to deal with the stuff
on a very practical level is in the
intersection of the open-source software
communities and the business world
that's starting to adopt that as the
fundamental sort of building blocks and
the business world still thinks about
software artifacts as being valuable it
still thinks about its employees on the
basis of a labor economics model and
when we look at what's made the open
source software movement successful the
values are completely different the
units that we talk about you know people
talk about the values that our spouse
there are completely different set of
values so I think if we really want to
pull this
to the metaphysical basis there's not
that much that people fundamentally have
to tokenize to parcel out to to quantize
and and give to other people that can
can constitute the basis of an economic
system or at least one that's worth
talking about because if it's entirely
bespoke in any given pairwise
relationship then there's no model
possible that we can build right but
it's something we can abstract some
interaction dynamics we can abstract
outside of that then maybe we have the
basis for the fern economics but but I
don't know I just don't want to put too
much technology and math into something
that is a very deeply human interview
man kind of activity currently I think
talking about open source you know one
signal and it's not a fungible signal
it's a completely differentiated signal
is the reputational signal from working
on an important or even an unimportant
open source project you know as part of
a part of your resume and I certainly
impresses me when I'm looking at
somebody you know I was a contributor to
Project X for the last seven years right
not only does that show that they know
how to you know deal with other people
but I they've actually pointed me to a
significant body of their work that I
can go take a look at so there's an
example of signaling but does not use a
fungible token maybe that's the way
forward is thing is realizing that the
signaling may not be in terms of simple
tokens yeah I mean because at the end of
the day bunch of the fungible token
aspect of economics is just there to
scale transactions beyond the zone of
trust right because if you're changing
cows and chickens for fishes and fish
nets your zone of trust is like your
clan or a tribe level but if you want to
trade you know silks with people across
the mountains you got to have something
else right so the tokenization is way of
scaling transactions beyond trust
barriers is fine but that's not as
useful when it comes to these kinds of
activities it's almost like every
project has its own kind of token every
person has their own kind of token right
if you get a thumbs up and it actually
our software systems they don't they
don't create affordances
for this actually it's really
unfortunate like you look at a project
like oh this get a project only has
three stars another one has 10,000 stars
right but the ones the what 10,000 stars
some professors taught a bunch of
students they all thumbs up his project
but this one three stars it's like guido
van rossum and linus torvalds and like
you know somebody else you know some big
computer science person well guess what
that's the restart project it's worth a
whole lot more right so these
reputational systems are I think
certainly a way forward but I wonder you
know I do wonder if there's better ways
that we can scale interactions you know
beyond the simple naive web of trust
model but I don't know it's early an
area where there's a crying need for
innovation think about an emergent
bottom-up filter that could be there on
Facebook one of the things that drives
me crazy is that Facebook provides no
real tools for nuance full response to
content that flows by you know I'd love
to put every piece of code on everyone's
that either pissed me off or I really
liked I'd like to place them in you know
some two-dimensional space of quality
and importance right and if Facebook
just allowed that and then use a little
bit of tools for smartly aggregate them
and doing some commutative structure
across those we could tune up a much
better flow of what we saw than this
current crazy world where the only
signal is like like all right oh my god
I mean I this could be a whole series of
podcasts because the thing is that
people don't understand just how much a
little bit of a software tweak can have
an absolutely massive impact on the
usability of communications
infrastructure building communications
infrastructure is such an odds thing is
such a nuance thing and then we just
have like interns go and try this and
try that it's absolutely it's I don't
know what kind of malpractice it is but
it's some kind of malpractice I mean
it's it's ridiculous you talk about the
things that we all like to see on
Facebook there's so many things there's
so many things we can do on Twitter or
Facebook that would you know they took
Twitter was still talking about hiding
retweets and likes right as a thing you
think about that right or if
you added a downvote button or a dislike
button right or if you had simply
socialized k files so every single
person on Twitter has the ability to add
block lists and turn on essentially some
weight of all of the people they follow
their block lists that would instantly
instantly change dynamics of the
virality on Twitter but of course it
would screw up their evaluation but it
would create a much better
conversational space and all these
different tools all these tweaks free
but we might use they what what they
would do is they would give the end user
the ability to participate in a
conversation around the norms of that
communication space so you know what one
of the things that I talked about is
that every interaction between two
people is a space every conversation is
a space and the space has norms and the
problem with the social media platforms
that we build we call social media there
really attention marketing and virality
platforms but they're there too they're
completely unarmed they're unknown
spaces which is why it's so screwed up
and it's just deeply again I don't know
what kind of malpractice is I don't know
the term to use in the future we might
have some you know someone write a PhD
thesis about the nature of harm and
communications and the way that these
things are perfect examples of bad
design but I I don't know how to I don't
have the worst for right now but it's
something I feel very deeply and
viscerally I had this idea actually last
year about putting in a concept of like
equal time right so we used to have this
cost of equal time on the airwaves and
now you have places like Twitter and
people on Twitter with larger followings
then the broadcast networks used to have
and there's no equal time concept but
they have the same kind of reach how is
that right how is that gonna be a good
thing so you know all these UI's systems
that we build they have so many millions
of variables that we get tune and tweak
to make for much better for meaningful
human interaction but none of them are
incentivized to do this none of them are
monetized in a way that would be aligned
with that it's a really terrible
situation the unspoken attractor is the
fact that the way they make their money
is selling ads right and
the world went down that route this kind
of shallow but massive exploit is
exactly what one would expect right all
they're trying to do is optimize
eyeballs times attention times
excitability and then sell that to
people
purse which basically the alternative
model i thought about this a lot but the
world really just seems to reject it is
suppose we had a discourse platform that
we you had to pay for a little bit five
dollars a month ten dollars a lot three
offerings essentially a trivial amount
and it was built on the principle that
we are not here to maximize your
eyeballs or maximize your twitchiness
we're here to maximize the value you get
from the system what a concept right and
will and we would build in many of these
clever networks smart tools so that we
all have a better experience and because
the company is paid by the monthly
subscription it actually has the
incentive to keep you off the system as
much as possible so long as you got the
maximum amount of value isn't that the
correct incentive well I think again the
in terms of leverage of software we
think now very much on the internet one
of the legacy sort of things we've
heritage from the success of the frozen
accident of the internet is this
thinking that these must intrinsically
the client-server and they don't have to
be we can create very powerful
peer-to-peer communication networks now
we still need some level of transport
levels decentralisation for each
optimize for low latency and and
resilience and things like that but at
the end of the day people are talking to
each other people don't have to talk to
a server and so a lot of the ideas
behind the decentralized web are really
around creating these tools that don't
they don't impose a client-server model
and the reason that's so important is
because the instant you have a
client-server software architecture
obviously as the app maker or the
developer you're gonna run the server
for everyone and now as you scale you
naturally carry this drag with you right
every every user you get is another
liability and you've got to keep a
session alive you gotta back up their
data you got to delete if they ask you
to if you're complying with gdpr
all those nonsense so the pernicious
thing about client-server are
is that they force successful businesses
in that environment must have scaling
problems they must need to then monetize
every users use because they're taxed by
bandwidth costs so then you're looking
at putting either monthly charge in or
selling ads or something like that but
what if you actually just create a
system that didn't do it that way what
if you create a system that just had
users have their own data if they wanted
backup their data somewhere else they
can and to share they share their data
at one time with someone else the data
moves over there and and that's like
that's a very natural system no server
needs to be up I don't need to if I need
if I'm sitting next to you at dinner
I'll share a picture with you doesn't
have to round-trip to Cupertino or
Mountain View you know that kind of
model dramatically increases the amount
of bandwidth available it dramatically
decreases the the cost to build new
innovative types of software and so I
think that is why I'm so gung-ho on
pursuing the decentralized web
technologies as the next generation of
essentially a portal to a new land where
we can create new kinds of information
systems it's not just the one
decentralized Facebook it's about
creating better better Wikipedia's
creating better shared jupiter'
notebooks it's better everything when we
don't force decentralized surveillance
we're ad-supported kinds of companies
and i don't believe because these
companies are now hugely public worth
fifty hundreds of billions of dollars
they essentially are bound as
fiduciaries their directors cannot have
them pursue models that destroy their
market capitalization so they are I have
a basically deeply pessimistic outlook
on any of them ever reforming their
business models I just don't think it'll
ever happen so criticized by creating
that's why I'm putting my efforts and
and some my own dollars even behind the
decentralized web we'll turn that next
but I want to make a little sidebar here
maybe it is feasible to have
subscription-based services at scale
these days and when did the numbers and
Facebook's revenue per month per user is
a dollar ninety-nine and built into that
dollar ninety nine is a bunch of profit
they have a very high
margin and a large cost to operate their
advertising infrastructure so they can
operate probably as a profitable
business at a dollar 25 per month per
user that seems to me a number that is
so low that maybe just maybe
particularly if the payment
infrastructure were painless we could
finally get people willing to actually
pay for a service so that the service
job is to make them happy not to exploit
them a couple of things number one that
number is incorrectly low in North
America Canada basically Canada the US I
think it's something like 15 to 25
dollars per quarter so it's much more
than that actually much more than the
number you quoted and furthermore that's
on average keep in mind Facebook is a
targeted advertising platform so the
user not all users are created equal the
users who can pay twenty-five dollars a
quarter or hundred dollars a year for
Facebook they're probably worth $500 a
year to Facebook because they're the
ones with money the poor users who don't
have that kind of money who are at the
low end of that they are they're worth
less so it's not it's not all equal I
had this explained to because I did the
same math I was like crap what do we
just they had a big old campaign of
Facebook just a charges and I was like
no no it's not gonna work out and in the
second the reason is because of that
dynamic and second of all because you
know you might be willing to pay five
bucks a month for Facebook I bet you're
not gonna pay 500 bucks a year for
Facebook ain't that valuable right so
that's the problem there this and then
tied to that then is their market cap at
the end of the day they are one of a
certain amount of money on the market if
the directors of the company go and
sabotage the company's business model
because they want to be nice people
they're going to have shareholder
lawsuits for the next 10,000 years
right they cannot do that you know not
left it in a serious antitrust action or
something can they then say we're gonna
pivot our model we're doing this we're
going to banking right we have all this
creepy information on people
well users score their credit instead of
you know selling ads to them so that's
why they're doing this all this like
Libre stuff is because they're trying to
pivot to see if maybe that's another
area to do this stuff but I you know at
the end of the day I think it's
fundamentally philosophically
inappropriate to be the central entity
all of this information on people and so
any business model tied to monetizing
that privileged information is going to
be immoral and problematic in its own
way and I agree with you that the
incumbents can't do it
but I would just hold out to you young
entrepreneur wannabes that maybe the
time is right because if you can get $2
a month from people and you don't care
if they're poor or rich right then you
can support a service that has the level
of complexity of Facebook at least its
scale where the scale transform is I
don't know but I bet it's a shitload
lower than it used to be now that you
can actually build your back-end on
cloud services and don't have all the
high fixed costs or running your own
data center it might just work so the
attack with a different business model
might bring them down particularly
because it would preferentially I would
posit strip away their most valuable
customers you know it's the people that
are willing to pay two dollars or five
dollars a month that as you point out
might be worth $50 a month and as those
people migrate to the cheap paid
platform that has a pro consumer rather
than an exploitive business model that
could be very destabilizing just the
thought for you young entrepreneurs out
there go get them well it's also the
other thing to keep in mind is there is
a hysteresis to this or a past
dependence
it took Facebook a lot of effort to get
everyone onto Facebook now that
everyone's on Facebook you know when the
next platform comes along all it has to
do is hey click here to invite your
Facebook friends button right or click
this you know share this link on
Facebook to have your friends join you
on this new network that's doable like
that kind of thing is doable and so you
people can bootstrap the next Network
off of Facebook the way that Facebook
couldn't have boots dropped off of
MySpace or you know like classmates.com
god forbid so so I think there's
definitely the opportunity there that's
again I wouldn't be investing in this
space if I didn't think it was possible
to change it but it is going to be a
process let's move on to the next item
and that is as you hinted at you've been
a significant player in thinking about
an alternative distributed network
architecture and now you and I have
talked about some really radical stuff
ideas of yours so go riff on the idea of
a distributed internet a distributed web
all the cool things that could be done
on it okay so the basic idea actually
came to me not because I'm a you know
crypto anarchist from the 90s or
anything but actually was a few years
ago that I had this realization that
almost all of the data that I get in the
space of a year that I download read
consume whatever all the content that I
get could fit on a flash ship the size
of my pinky nail that pretty much hold
all you know maybe barring like
streaming 4k movies and things like that
but most everything else to news the
fake news everything all of it can fit
on a physical device the size of my
pinky nail so I thought about wow now
that's of course getting it all once
it's different than you know getting it
on demand but still you know it kind of
got me thinking about you know we put a
lot of infrastructure in place to do
this client-server stuff when really the
content sharing piece can be done in a
way that's orthogonal to you know lots
of these other things I sort of went
down this rat hole of like looking at
things like IP FS looking all this other
stuff and I emerged out the other end
realizing that there's a few pieces that
we need to actually create we create a
radically different kind of approach
which is basically to say that the
client-server approach of HTTP is busted
it inherits all of the the problems of
tcp/ip primarily IP itself and
client-server architecture fundamentally
creates a asymmetry the user does not
have control and access over their own
data so then I also realized that the
lack of an identity system on the
Internet has been a problem since day
one right since we started getting in
spam problems and so we use email we use
phone numbers which all these are
identities that we rent from various
centralized services very few people can
run their own email server anymore so it
sort of got me thinking I came to this
realization that we can create a
radically different architecture that's
actually very powerful that maintains
all the modern sort of things that we'd
like to see in our web apps of stuff but
it separates out the interaction of an
application with the data and then the
transfer of that data to is sharing it
with other people so we have a
point-to-point system for people to
share their data with each other
we then use some modern techniques like
CR DTS and some other sort of hash
blockchain myrtle trees sort of based
thing
we can create decentralized
infrastructure for running apps that are
eventually consistent that's almost like
you know imagine if this is maybe the
best way to put it is is imagine if
visiting a website to view you know
going to someone else's server to be a
webpage instead of what we did is we
made a two-step so that we have a
Dropbox and I share my Dropbox folder
with you so they're synchronized
whenever we they can be but I then point
my web browser to just look at my local
Dropbox if I want to edit a file and
save it saves it to local storage it
saves in the Dropbox eventually I get
synchronized to your Dropbox and then
you open up and look at it and just by
separating out that application
interaction with the state and then the
transfer and merge of State down the
road we can create a fundamentally
different architecture that then doesn't
put a Google or Facebook in the middle
of things and furthermore if we separate
transport of data from the application
communication to data we can create mesh
networks and local things for instance I
had this incredibly frustrating
experience when I was on a flight in the
international flight with my family and
I had a video file on my phone that my
kids wanted to watch I was on the
Android device there on an iPad and
between these two devices I could not
without you know there's no Wi-Fi there
was no internet
I could not transfer like actually it
wasn't a video file it was like 30 Meg's
of mp3s
I couldn't transfer these songs from
this one thing to another without being
connected to some centralized data
center and that was just absurd but if
we were to use local mesh based
technologies my phone and the iPad could
communicate i gigabit speeds and I could
just transfer that to the device there
and they could just play it so it's a
completely different way of thinking
about applications about thinking about
the relationships between output
application authors and the data and and
the users and their data and that's why
i support i've been funding the the
beaker and the dot projects and it's an
alternative way of building a browser
and application structures and user
authentication and all these things it's
an alternative way of building
essentially an internet infrastructure
let's tell the people where they can
find out more
beaker will say the other one was debts
he asks us the dat project org I believe
in beaker browser comm that dat dat can
tell us a little bit about those project
what do they do well so that is you
think about it as essentially like a
peer-to-peer BitTorrent like protocol
for doing decentralized Dropbox so it's
a blockchain based system and you can
create a data archive of anything on
your drive is basically a shared folder
that automatically syncs with other
people have a copy of your shared folder
that's the DAT project so kind of works
like ipfs but there's not an attempt to
monetize there's no file coin
monetization model built onto it and
then the second thing that beaker
browser it's a browser from the
decentralized web so it looks at your
local data archive it runs a full I
means a full flash browser so it can
speak to HTTP colon slash slash standard
internet sites you can load up Facebook
you can go to Twitter everything works
great it's just a web browser but it can
also load dat colon slash slash URLs
which then are you know 32 byte hashes
or 64 byte hashes that basically go and
create or than they create on your local
machine a mirror of a particular you
know shared archive and then it opens it
up on the local machine and you can make
your own copy of it you can edit the
code you know to the source code of the
application that's being served up and
they've built chat apps on top of this
they built like a slack like thing
they've built decentralized Twitter even
a basic decentralized Facebook like
thing and the whole idea here is that
websites now become central the websites
again becomes central to the experience
the data itself becomes central to the
experience and applications just
lightweight things that sit on top and
give you different kinds of you eyes
they're no longer walled garden
platforms that you for call your
activity and data into you your data
still your data and apps are just
lightweight things that manipulated to
show it to you in different kinds of
ways it's a really wonderful system and
have you have there been
some winners yet you know again this way
we know each one of these new platforms
to take off usually there's a single
winner you know the Apple took off with
busy calc and the IBM PC took off with
Lotus 1-2-3 the Mac took off with the
various graphics tools that were created
for it sir in your mind a application
that has done so well on these new
platforms that it's compelling no not
yet it's still early stages on the stuff
it's so early days take a look at I
would encourage other people you know
who are thinking about something new I
mean I remember how exciting it was the
web in 1992 I can't even make myself
think about the web anymore it's so old
and horrifying so it'd be fun to
actually spend a few cycles looking at
something entirely fresh I'm sure there
are a lot of other people out there who
feel the same way well it is nice to
have had a privilege and it's been a
privilege to have ringside seats
watching a generative open collaborative
communication space get punched beaten
and cut down into a mere broadcast
system for copyright copyrighted
materials like it's really been
something fascinating to watch but you
know it's a long conversation to talk
about the OS technical debt which of the
operating systems that led us to the
browser winning as essentially the
winning middleware which then led to
this kind of thing happening but that's
maybe a different conversation for a
different time yep I think in fact we've
come near to the end of our time do you
have any final thoughts I just wanna say
it's a it's a privilege to have this
conversation with you and thank you very
much for having me on the show and I'd
say I had high high expectations you
exceeded them this has been an amazingly
broad and deep conversation which is the
goal of the gym rut show which as we say
is real thinking about deep ideas so
thanks very much Peter and I hope to
talk to you again soon thank you Jim
[Music]
production services and audio editing by
Stanton media lab music by Tom Muller at
modern space music.com
[Music]