all right everyone we're about to begin
can I get a thumbs up if you can hear me
all right good good so in a moment I'm
gonna hand this over to Yancey who will
be facilitating today's workshop and as
most of you know in addition to the
podcast I run I also run an in-person
group in Toronto called the intellectual
Explorers Club
and we host regular events like the one
you're about to experience today and I
recently decided to take these online
and I'm dubbing them for now since
making wormholes and I'm inviting past
podcast guests to facilitate whatever
they want to facilitate really and this
idea coincided with me hanging out with
Yancey a few weeks ago when he was in
Toronto and he mentioned that he was
doing workshops on a concept he
mentioned in his new book called bento
ism or the concepts called bento ism and
he was interested in doing some of these
online so I offered him this space and
platform for him to test one out so to
introduce Yancey he is the former CEO
and co-founder of Kickstarter he is also
a writer and author and his upcoming
book is this could be our future
manifesto for a more generous world so
that being said I'll hand it over to
Yancey and you will be completely in his
good hands all right thank you Peter
what's up y'all
thumbs up if you can hear me yeah cool
all right so I'm gonna take over the
screen and put a presentation up as we
talk let me just get that going and that
should be there in front of all of you
now you'll see this is called experiment
number five so over the last six months
I've been experimenting with what we'll
do together the previous four of these
have all happened in someone's house in
someone's living room I guess this is
also happening in my house but you
people are not here but I've always
treated this as a very
like DIY Co experience that
coincidentally has always happened on
Sunday mornings we'll see we'll see
about that but anyway just some
introduction for what we're gonna go
into together I asked Peter to send out
a couple handouts beforehand of things
that you'll be filling out and writing
on today you'll need three pieces of
paper to go through this today and we're
gonna need the first one of those right
now because I want to start this
experiment by having you take out a
piece of paper and write down four
should I questions should I questions a
question like and and one of these
should be related to work one of these
should be related to your personal life
one of these should be existential and
maybe we'll just do three one one
professional one personal and one
existential so should I question might
be should I ask for a raise should I
quit my job should I tell my mom what I
really did should I you know they don't
have to be so heavy but something that
is from your real life that you're
really thinking about so I'm gonna start
just by giving you a minute to jot those
down and I hope to think about how to
let you ought to let me know when you're
ready but we're gonna do that and I'm
gonna throw in a little bit of music
while you do that just as we get started
[Music]
yeah just simple should I questions real
real things you might be thinking of
three things and then once you write
those down you could set them to the
side we're not going to do anything with
that quite yet
[Music]
he said something about how heavy these
should be or something like that can you
remind me of that I don't think I think
maybe one one heavy question I think
it's just more like a real thing you're
considering because this this is
something we're gonna engage with later
so if you wanted to explore a question
like this is something that you will be
able to do so have heavier light is on
you I think one that's maybe a little
challenging maybe one that's a little
more day-to-day just do another twenty
seconds and then I'll jump back in
[Music]
alright so you could set that to the
side and so I'm gonna I'm gonna speak
for about fifteen to twenty minutes with
slides and then we're gonna engage in a
few different exercises together so I
want to start by asking you to picture
your commute to work you leave your
house you get into your car you get onto
your bike you get onto a subway you ride
somewhere for 20 minutes and then you
show up at the office now think back and
consider what do you see on the
right-hand side of the road on your way
to work what kind of stores do you see
and if you're someone that lives in a
residential area and commutes to a
commercial area to go to your office as
most people in the Western world do on
the right-hand side of the street on
your way to work you're going to see a
Starbucks or a coffee shop or a bank or
a gas station now if you imagine your
same commute home from work going from
the office from a commercial area back
home to a residential area on the
right-hand side of the road then you
will see grocery stores and shopping
centers and restaurants now the reason
for this is something called the no
left-turn rule in the world of retail
planning and the idea is very simple
it's much more difficult to
turn left rather than right you have to
wait to turn into traffic it's more
dangerous that people are less likely to
do it and as a result for several
decades now developers have
intentionally tried to play big try to
place businesses so that they can be
right-hand turns at the right time of
day so things you need in the morning
need to be right-hand turns on the to
work side of the street and things that
people tend to need after work need to
be right-hand turns on the to home side
of the street now the no left turn rule
is an example of a hidden default a way
that our choices are being made for us
without us being totally aware of it
this sounds like something nefarious but
it doesn't have to be a classic example
our organ donation rates where countries
where forms opt people in automatically
to donate their organs have far greater
donation rates or societies where people
have to actively choose to opt in we go
along with whatever that default is in
front of us whatever it happens to be
I'm based in the US and here in the
United States our Congress has never had
a reelection rate of less than 80
percent over the last 60 years the same
people keep getting reelected this
despite the fact that the approval rate
for Congress has plummeted during that
same time and you get something absurd
like 2014 when Congress had an 11
percent approval rating and 96 percent
of them were reelected again we go along
with defaults now I started thinking
about this question around this time in
2014 when my neighborhood in New York
City was starting to change there was a
place that had been there forever called
Mars bar which was a punk dive bar from
the CBGB's Punk era and in 2012-2013 it
got torn down and was replaced by a TD
Bank not only was the kiddie Bank not
the most beautiful or interesting thing
in the world but the crazy thing was
that it was the fourth TD Bank within a
15 minute walk of that same corner local
businesses were being pushed out and
this TD Bank was being put in its place
and when I started looking into this I
discovered that this was happening on a
mass scale across New York City in the
2000s and early 2010's there was almost
a thousand new bank branches
across Manhattan and it suddenly dawned
on me that in every one of these places
where there had once been something like
Mars bar that's where these banks were
and so these businesses being run by New
Yorkers for their fellow New Yorkers
were being pushed out did the extent
that there are almost as many subway
station subway restaurants in New York
as there are subway stations and this is
the reason why over the last 40 years
the Entrepreneurship rates in America
have dropped precipitously from 1977 to
today the Entrepreneurship rate per
capita has dropped by half in America
the same decline as smoking rates since
then so as many more people used to
smoke in 1977's today proportionally a
similarly significant larger amount of
people used to be entrepreneurs - we
hear about this being a start-up age but
it's not true and if you go to any
suburban area you will see Walmart's and
big-box stores that show you that this
is the case you can't have a small
business in those places they tend to be
dominated by chains and the hidden
default behind this is the same reason
why every movie is now a sequel this is
a tweet from this summer of what was
playing in the the theaters this summer
all sequels and this is not something
that we're imagining if you chart out
the number of sequels prequels and
remakes in the top 10 of the box-office
over the past 70 years it's only the
last 20 years that we've had this sequel
itis and so instead of telling new
stories as Hollywood once did instead of
just retell stories that have already
been told before and the reason why this
is happening is the same reason why
Taylor Swift is on the cover of every
magazine now the I did the phrase I give
to this reason that is driving this the
hidden default that is driving this is
financial maximization the belief that
the rational choice in any decision is
whichever option makes the most money
this is the hidden default that operates
the world today now someone could very
reasonably say hey isn't that just
capitalism like what like isn't that
what capitalism is what are we
disagreeing with here and it's true that
in in Adam Smith in 1776 wrote it's not
from the benevolence of the butcher that
we expect to be
but from their regard for their own
self-interest but Adam Smith did not go
on to write that that butcher must
maximize hog slaughter rates lower
safety standards and pay workers as
little as possible and distribute that
money to shareholders instead but that
is the standing a standard operating
procedure for organizations and
companies today and we can pinpoint the
moment when this really started to
happen it was in 1970 the Vietnam War
was raging young American men were and
Vietnamese men were losing their lives
in war and in America the debate started
well what should companies be doing for
the greater good and into this argument
the economist Milton Friedman wrote a
landmark essay in The New York Times
that argued that businesses had no
social responsibility a phrase he puts
in skeptical quote marks 23 times in the
essay and said the only social
responsibility businesses have is to
make as much money as they can that is
the social service that they provide and
this idea really changed how business is
operated and there's a number of ways
that we can track this one is looking at
worker pay from 1948 to 1973 the wages
of the egde American worker glued by 90
percent and this was this is true in
every pay class the highest pay people
the lowest paid people all saw similar
levels of gains and then in 1973 this
began to dramatically change even as
worker productivity continued to
increase at the same rate compensation
flattened so if you're looking at the
high point of pay for productivity for
the American worker that ends up being
1973 the same year that Pink Floyd's
Dark Side of the Moon came out that's a
long time ago now when I picture what's
happening here a strange image comes to
mind and it's the mullet
I trust you all remember the mullet it's
the pinnacle of 80s hair technology with
business in front and party in the back
and what we're living through as a
result of this hidden default of
financial maximization is the mullet
economy where for 90% ik people for
workers it is business in front with
wage freezes layoffs increasing job
insecurity and for the top ten and
especially the top 1% it's a party in
the back where executive compensation is
a Greek
increased by 1000% since the 1970s and
bonuses and buybacks are how companies
are spending their money if you look at
the gap and income that's happening
since the 1970s this gap this is the
mullet one group's earnings have shrunk
and because there are so many of those
people even those earnings in aggregate
would have been small when they're
applied to just the 1% they become
enormous over time there's another
interesting place where we can see
evidence of this change and it's a
survey that UCLA has done every year
since the 1960s and it's a survey of
incoming American college freshmen and
it asks them a lot of different things
but one of the questions is what are
these objectives you consider to be
essential in life and there's one of
those choices that has to do with money
and it's this one being very well-off
financially being rich and in 1970 it
was 36% of incoming college freshmen
called being very well-off financially
essential or very important the most the
most essential life goal according to
college freshmen at that time was to
develop a meaningful philosophy on life
86% of students that that was the most
important thing and 2017 when the same
question was asked it was sorry
it was sorry I'm my screen it
was 80 sorry
it was 82% sorry 82 percent of college
freshmen in 2017 said the same thing so
36 percent of college kids thought being
rich was essential in 1970 and 80 more
than 80 percent in 2017 so when I
picture this sort of concept of
financial maximization the idea how it's
driving the world today I picture this I
picture a simple graph and this is
called a hockey stick graph and in
Silicon Valley language where whatever
it is that you're measuring whatever
your self-interest is it's growing so
fast the lines it slopes up into the
writing whether it's money popularity
whatever it is this is this is the
definition of crushing it this is the
definition of success but when you take
a step back we can see that this is
actually just a small slice of a larger
picture because both of these acts tease
the x-axis
representing time and the y axis
representing self interests they both
extend and they both create new spaces
within them the x-axis of time goes from
now and the bottom left all the way to
the future on the far right and our that
y-axis of our self interests goes from
me to us as our self-interest grows so
does our the responsibilities and so we
can divide these spaces up and see a
different map of our self-interest there
are still art now me space where the
hockey sticks live just what I won right
now but there's also a future me space
thinking about the older version of
myself that I will when they become the
obituary I I wish I could have there's
also the now us space thinking about the
people who we rely on and who we rely on
us how our decisions affect them and
finally there's the future of space of
the next generation our children and
everybody else's children our decisions
affect all of these spaces and all of
these spaces affect us in our choices
but today we operate as if only now me
is the rational space that is the only
rational space the only one that we can
really see or acknowledge so I call this
this way of seeing bento ism like a
bento box
I call it bento ISM for a few reasons
one is that the bento comes from a
Japanese word meaning convenience the
idea is that something that is always
easy to have with you the bento also
always has a variety of dishes never too
much of any one thing so it's a balanced
and convenient default and the bento
also honors a Japanese eating philosophy
called Hara Hachi Bou which says the
goal of a meal is to be 80% full that
way you're still hungry for tomorrow so
the bento is a convenient healthy and
balanced default for lunch
bento ism is the same idea of a
convenient and healthy and balanced way
to see our true self interests so I want
to demonstrate how this works using it
as an example and then we're gonna
engage with this together the example I
want to give involves the movie Pulp
Fiction and the story of butch this is
Bruce Willis's character and butch is an
aging fighter with one last fight in him
and he agrees to throw that fight after
being paid off by a gangster
about the last second instead of winning
the fight like he's supposed to instead
of sorry instead of losing the fight
like he's supposed to which wins the
fight escapes out of a window and goes
to a hotel room to go on the run with
his girlfriend Fabien but just as
they're about to leave which discovers
that they forgot to pack his gold watch
and not just any gold watch his dead war
hero father's gold watch the same gold
watch that Christopher Walken memorably
describes hiding in an uncomfortable
place earlier in the movie so butch
faces this question should I go back for
the watch and even though he knows there
are gangsters almost certainly waiting
for them and that he is likely to be
killed he chooses to go back to get it
and from their experiences as he later
says the single weirdest day of my life
so my question is was Butch's choice to
go back and get the watch rationale it
seems strange and silly to ask whether
something that happens in a movie is
rational or not acknowledged especially
a Tarantino movie but I think this is an
interesting question because our notion
of what is in our rational self-interest
today is largely based on ideas that
were created in the development of game
theory this is the mathematical study of
conflicts created to analyze the Cold
War and what should happen in the face
of nuclear war and an attempt to
understand how situations play out when
people have competing desires and the
most famous game theory scenario is
called prisoner's dilemma where you and
a friend are both arrested and you must
choose whether to rat on the other
person and then you'll go free or you
choose to stay silent and you take the
years now the situation is meant to
illustrate the rationality of maximizing
your own self-interests and how unusual
the ends might be to do that in the case
of prisoner's dilemma even though your
instinct might be to be loyal to your
friend the scenario teaches that the
rational thing to do is to rat out your
friend because it's what was most
maximizes your self-interest so is that
what butch is doing if butch were acting
rationally he would be maximizing his
self-interest but is that what he's
doing by going back and getting watch
and I would say no if he was maximizing
his self-interest he would just go and
buy another watch why not but that's not
what butch does so before dismissing
Bush's decision is completely Arash
I want to add a wrinkle to this story
which is that in the original shooting
script for pulp fiction there's a scene
that Quentin Tarantino wrote that didn't
make the final cut and in the scene
which is sitting in front of his house
deciding whether or not to go back in
and he has this monologue that I'm gonna
read to you
here's much I ain't gonna do this this
is a punchy move and I ain't punchy
daddy would totally understand if he was
here right now he'd say butch get a grip
it's a watch man you lose one you get
another this is your life you're messing
around with which you shouldn't be doing
because you only got one which continues
to pace but now he's silent then butch
this is my war you see butch what you
forgettin is this watch isn't just a
device that enables you to keep track of
time this watch is a symbol it's a
symbol of how your father and his father
before him and his father before him
distinguished themselves in war in fact
if you look at it that way it's almost
kismet that fabien left it behind
and using that perspective going back
for it isn't stupid it may be dangerous
but it's not stupid because there are
certain things in this world that are
going back for worth going back for so
we can imagine butch asking his bento
this question should I go back for the
watch and as he asked this question each
of the bentos now me future me now as
future us would respond with their
perspective and we hear in his monologue
what they think if we hear the now me
voice I don't want to die you should
leave this is just a watch
there's his now us voice think of fabien
leave but there's also the future me
voice that tells him this watch is more
than a watch it's a symbol and finally
he finds the future us of his legacy
which is that to live up to who he is to
be self coherent he can't back down from
this fight so butch makes a choice that
is not maximizing for now me it's
maximizing for other areas of his
self-interest but by consulting his
bento he found the rational choice and
he got to see live to see another day
so our self-interest is bigger than just
this hockey stick space of now me there
are other spaces to consider and then
it's in that now me space where
financial maximization the idea that
just every decision maximizing the value
of money where that mindset comes from
it's based on this
self-maximizing now me game theory
concept of the world but what about
these other spaces and what's happening
there so I wanna give you three quick
examples and then we're gonna talk a
little bit the first one I want to talk
about is Patagonia Patagonia is a
clothing maker that does all sorts of
great things for the environment and
they have a public benefit corporation
charter that says that if they develop a
new technology that will materially help
the environment they will share it with
their competitors even if it will hurt
their business and in 2014 Patagonia
followed through on this they developed
a new new kind of sustainable bio rubber
for wetsuits and they gave it away they
used a big ad campaign to give it away
to their competitors this seems like an
irrational choice but Patagonia is
optimizing for sustainability a future
US value there's still a for-profit
company that has to think about their
now many needs but they can balance that
rationally rationally with this future
US consideration another example is
chick-fil-a which is the most highly
rated fast-food chain in America it's
also the only chain in America that
still closes on Sundays
this is 23% less hours a year that
chick-fil-a is open than their
competitors cost him a billion dollars a
year but they still do this one day a
week they maximize and optimize for
tradition rather than just money and
then the last example I want to share
was Adele the pop star Adele and 2014
Adele was going on tour for the first
time in many years and when Adele goes
on tour she has a challenge which is
that her tickets get immediately scalped
and sold on the secondary ticketing
websites for much more money
this leaves Adele performing shows for
either just wealthy fans or for people
who are spending money they probably
shouldn't to see her perform
and so Adele found another way to go
about this she found a startup that had
built an algorithm to measure a fans
loyalty to an artist it would analyze
their social information Spotify
information etc and use that as a way to
prequalify people and invite them in to
buy tickets without putting any
restrictions of whether or not they
could resell them the idea was that they
could algorithmically maximize for a
kind of fairness and a kind of community
experience and through that produce a
better outcome so fairness is another
kind of nowis value that someone could
maximize
for and I'll skip the last example so
this notion enough our self-interest
being bigger than just this now me space
is something and I found to be a
powerful idea in my life and that's come
from applying this idea and using it to
develop my own values to discover what
my own bento is about and I would now
love to do that with someone here so
what I'll do is I will walk someone
through the questions and we'll do this
as a model sort of model exercise and
then after doing this together you all
everyone else will be writing down these
answers as well in their own time and we
will experiment with with asking some of
your should I questions to see your
bento so I want to click back over to
zoom and figure out how to ask people to
raise their hands do I stop sharing to
do that I think so so does someone want
to raise their hand that's something you
could do in a zoom map Tara okay so what
do I do you hear Peter do I invite Tara
to join anyway bring her in or Tara just
put yourself on video yes she can just
go off mute and participate so Terry
you're currently on mute if you're
talking hi Tara maybe there was just an
errant thumbs up from earlier like
talked here oh she's in a lot of coffee
shop she said okay someone else want a
volunteer to be a guinea pig here just
looking for it oh sure this gentleman
Jordan Jordan unmute yourself okay how
you doing pretty good huh so I'm gonna
so what's gonna happen here is that I'm
gonna share that same presentation and
and in this I'm going to walk through a
little bit about what's happening inside
each bento and then I'm gonna ask you
sort of some basic questions and as you
do I have did you just see a second
keynote screen pop up on my window do
you see it like a weird screen on a
screen now it looks kind of like a
like I see some you're editing a slide
like a bunch of slides yeah okay your
second movie or are you saying I'm just
trying to figure how I can switch
between these okay I said now it's
switched over yeah I can see the bento
bam yeah the empty one yeah okay all
right so so I'm going to talk you
through what each bento is about and I'm
gonna let you riff I'm first going to
give you a little bit a little heads up
about it and then so let's start by
talking about now me all right now me
this is the bottom-left space this is
your most self interested voice you're
now me is the part of you that wants to
be safe and secure that enjoys pleasure
that once you what you want to do you
know the most selfish part of your stuff
we've all got it and so what I'm
interested in is is just what what do
you think is in what drives your now me
what what kind of what's in that space
for you to use uh are we talking in
terms of just super generally or are we
going to talk about in terms of like a
decision we're gonna its first talk just
super generally okay now me usually a
sense of pleasure
one thing is although this may be a bad
answer but one thing is like Oh am i
doing something that is going to produce
like a good long-term effect or not so
maybe that's a bad one but it is like a
like an effect so it's really not just a
psychological thing but yeah so there's
that there's pleasure there is avoidance
of pain I'm waiting for pain yeah what
do you feel like what do you if you
think about that desire that we all have
to like be secure what do you need do
you need good health do you need money
like
what are those sort of basic things for
you I a lot of that stuff for me is
pretty well taken care of right now
actually it's like I feel healthy
although usually I'm worried about like
how well I'm eating and if I've been
getting enough exercise can I say good
habits is something that is maybe a part
of your success and now me yeah you know
and then you know some sense of
providing I mean you're you're in a good
place now but that's because you are
providing well for your now me so
there's some elements there that are yes
happening yeah so obviously like you
need to have money you need to have that
kind of stuff yeah okay right sure
that's fine all right so now uh let me
switch my share when all right so now
we're going to talk about your future me
so imagine the future me is the obituary
you wish you could have the gray
wrinkled version of yourself that just
like every fork in the road made the
right call and and it's that person
looking back at you and saying hey
here's here's what matters here's here's
here's here's how you live up to being
you what what do you think that person
is um let's see uh one of them is
wishing that I took risks that were like
worth taking but like someone scary you
know one is really wishing that I made
the most of my time so I like I'm a big
procrastinator so I worry about that
kind of thing a lot what do you think is
are there certain qualities that you
think are like really core to you like
if you were to imagine your closest
friends to say you know what here's
here's here's the thing about here's the
thing about him he's what I think that
is
I identify a lot with like the imagery
and and narrative stuff associated with
heroism so I'd like to be able to see
like myself reflected in a way that
could be seen as admirable in like in
that sort of heroic sense like taking on
worthwhile challenges that kind of thing
yeah any anything you feel like is
missing as you as you sort of hear this
direction we're going anything you feel
like is you'd wanted to add another
thing just to feel like I really
appreciated the like the whole time
while it was happening I think yeah
okay all right so now we're gonna switch
back over so I can give you a little bit
more background so next we're gonna talk
about now us so now us are the people
that we rely on and who we rely on us
this is very contextual I think for most
of us it's probably a similar subset of
family friends co-workers neighbors I
would ask you to try to picture those
people in your mind imagine who those
people are and think about what do they
give what do they give you in that
relationship what is it that they really
give to you and what is it that you give
to them what is it the core of that
exchange in the relationships that you
have is it about spending a lot of time
together is it about just like being
having honest conversations it's yeah
having fun like what what what what is
at the core so of the three visions that
you listed definitely having honest
conversations really important feeling
like were part of a community together
is really important
feeling what else you know as
conversations being part of a community
feeling like or somehow like mutually
striving and improving and then we're
influencing each other positively to do
all of that having fun together and
feeling like like our
there's something exciting and you know
enjoyable about our relationship like
your inter inter relationship and is
that this is this would this also
reflect like your your work
relationships as well are you just
thinking about personal relationships
like is there any or do you have any
spaces where your obligations are a
little bit different or is this just
feel bad this is about right okay all
right so now going over to the last
bento so future us is thinking the next
generation our children
you know it's worth considering that the
future will be there now and so we have
to consider what future us needs and one
way I'd encourage you to think about
this is to imagine yes what what like
the next generation will need but also
to reflect on like what what do we think
what do you think you got as a
generation from the previous generation
and like what is that sort of iterative
thing that you would feel like it's
important to be thinking about so so
again just what comes to mind so first
question you're trying to kind of trying
to say like let's look at this in terms
of like also how I'm receiving a legacy
from the previous generation well yeah I
mean I I don't know that you need to
list those things I just find you know
it's just easy to take a lot of stuff
for granted I just find one that when I
sort of ask that question is just helps
me think about what's what is like the
foundation we stand on so maybe that's
not a healthy thing to directly think
okay no no I think it's super helpful I
was just asking for clarification I
think one thing is to feel like we
maintained a I guess maybe one of the
most important things is maintaining a
place for like real human beings in the
world as opposed to a kind of like
atomization and commodification of human
behavior so so there so I guess yeah
some kind of keep humans human yeah yeah
sure yeah okay
another thing would be that we give them
a world that seems to have a optimistic
like a shared sort of optimistic world
view of the future and itself or
ourselves yeah what else and I mean like
I don't just mean well we're optimistic
but I mean that there's a collective
sense of of interconnected
meaningfulness yeah yeah another thing
would obviously be survival that's
important
sure sure I mean maybe yeah maybe maybe
maybe we'll see well I mean anything
else anything else you yeah anything
else when I think we're good so great so
the next thing I will be to look at your
should I questions sure and I won't want
you to pick one and you're gonna read it
out loud and we're gonna talk it through
from the perspective of each bento and
just get a sense of like what it thinks
all right so I've been I have a youtube
channel that started getting pretty
successful but I haven't used it in a
while because I've been uncertain about
well how much I want to do it and how
much I want to be involved in it with it
and what kind of direction I want taken
in so I guess my question right now is
should I seriously commit to my youtube
channel alright great so so let's talk
that through so the way I so the way you
the way you do this is that when you ask
a question I generally start with the
bottom left and I start with now a mini
right so I ask so I try to isolate just
the now need and what does the now
meanest say to this question so as you
as you focus just on like you know the
basic sort of stuff wanting to do good
avoidance of pain and just the the
moment like visceral feeling what does
that say to you in response to this
question um the moment visceral feeling
is
really positive because I really enjoy
talking about ideas and I've got a lot
of ideas that I talked like with my
friends and some of my friends are we
get involved in these conversations I
have another friend who's starting to
make content and so the now me senses
that it's a really fun thing to be
engaged with and there's a lot of like
open-ended creative potential to where
things might go with it so I like that
that sense that yeah I feel you I can
sense you're energized by it yeah I can
sense I could sense it through the
screen that you feel energy is energized
by that okay great all right so so let's
go to your your future me so the future
me wants you to be heroic no no no
pressure but because I know it's a great
it's Israel you can be yeah of course
like everybody has a heroic aspect to
them yeah but yeah so if I were to look
back on it I would say that I think that
it would be that way because it's it's
an interesting thing to do to get
yourself involved in it and in creating
content because there's a there's like a
like a personal vulnerability that you
create that kind of like archetypal like
like the fool kind of doing something
stupid Lee initially in order to develop
confidence that's a totally yeah so like
I have the belief that I have a kind of
belief that well I won't go into it but
yeah I think that well doing something
that could look stupid because they
think that it's a really good idea is
very admirable and that oftentimes it
produces some results it start to look
quite good enough look later on do you I
mean I think like does it feel like a
risk worth taking
yeah that's true yeah certainly certain
yes okay all right great so that's two
yeses so far so now going to now us so
you're now us is about being a part of
community helping each other honest
conversations is how does this line up
with that well okay so with respect to
my best friend who's also started making
content if there's there's a strong kind
of like inter connection there so it
really works in terms of our being part
of a striving community together there
and I have other friends who are and
have been sort of similarly interested
in this kind of stuff I'm going to put
this I think a lot of my friends see
this is something that I could do that
would be really positive and so if I do
something that's really positive for
myself then we feel like better as a
community because then we're all sort of
like engaged in watching each other
climb in the world which is really good
it's like that feels like a good that
feels like a thumbs up to me yeah yeah
and then and then future and then this
future us it seems to me if this isn't
in conflict with it unless like you're
anti YouTube with keeping humans human
for some for some reason but I don't
think that's really would be uh-oh if
they work exactly because I think that
because I think that people getting out
there and being honest is one of the
things that keeps us human because we're
you know people are full of ideas and so
it's very good to sort of expose
yourself to the expose yourself to the
like potential impediments to your own
self-expression bravely know that will
that kind of that kind of in like a
somewhat like editor Road perspective is
a way of encountering an obstacle to
being very human as far as survival goes
I'm not sure it's really hard to know
what it is that we what are the data
limits gonna be like in the future we
don't know we don't know yet oh no I
don't mean that I mean like it's hard to
know what is the right thing for people
to be aiming at yeah so so so what I so
what I take from this so so I will say
this is the
first time I've done it should i and it
work shut up and it's been all yeses
like right off yes that's right but
there's a but there's a couple things I
want to note about it so one this
destiny is that making that choice would
be in your self-interest and it would be
a self coherent thing to do but I but I
also see in here a couple interesting
ideas that say to me how you should go
about doing this so if I look at like if
I look at your now us values like honest
conversations between the court of
community helping each other get better
like those three things they're like
that is like that that could be your
show Bible for your for how you approach
like being a youtuber in the sense that
like there is a kind of truth of values
a truth of sharing if you do that you're
definitely keeping humans human yeah it
seems like that probably also fulfills
making most of your time but like I
would kind of this to me is like would
would be a pretty good map for you to
think about like what's the identity of
my show like everything I make what is
it what does it need to live up to what
does it need to fulfill for me to be
like sign off and be like you know what
that's like a I'll put my name to that
and so it can this both shows us like
right right or wrong answers but I also
think it shows us like what is either
what is in our nature or what do we want
to be in our nature for how you go about
doing these things right so so I look at
this as it's like it's it is
sense-making as the title title this
session says but it's also like you know
it's kind of empowering you I think to
to probably you know maximize the eunice
of doing this right not just to do it
but how do you do it in a way that is
self coherent in like a really broad
sense
yeah the phrase I I keep coming back to
a self coherence I don't know what what
that phrase means to people but you know
I just think the world forces us into a
lot of self-contradiction all the time
yeah that makes sense and so how do we
embody how we fully embody ourselves so
so thank you thank you Jordan for being
a guinea pig if you will
knew yourself once again all right
thanks a lot Yancy hop back in with the
group appreciate that very much
and so now so now this is something that
we're gonna all go through maybe you all
were writing some of that while we were
well Jordan I were going through it but
I'm just gonna walk you through these
questions again so you all can jot these
down and make notes on your bento and
what's gonna happen is I'm gonna leave
this to these questions I'm gonna put a
little bit of Pharaoh Sanders on the
background so you've already been
writing you won't be bored but I'm gonna
give you 60 seconds to just jot down the
answers the same way that Jordan I were
and just you get a sense of like what's
in those spaces for you and when we're
done with that when we filled out all
four bin totes gonna take about five
minutes to do them all then what's gonna
happen is that everyone is going to be
paired off and you're gonna go into
private rooms and you're each gonna have
a conversation together to talk through
what what you're experiencing and to
share
so first let's just get your your bentos
out I'm gonna get this great Pharoah
Sanders song on the background it just
puts me in the zone and let's just start
let's start talking about these so we're
gonna start with now me that bottom left
that we've learned a lot about today
this is the most self interested voice
it's it just wants you to be safe it's
concerned about physical pain and it's
where your flight flight-or-fight
is it's also the part of you that craves
pleasure has desire and so think about
what those things are for you what
drives your now me and I'll show you
what was in mine maybe it's gonna be too
hard but yeah let's get sixty Seconds to
just write down what what's in your now
me what are the day-to-day things you
need to feel secure to feel happy to
feel like you have what you need 60
seconds just jot those down
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
all right so future me future me is the
the old gray wise version of yourself
the one that made the right decisions
the one that looks back with infinite
wisdom and love and compassion for you
the one that always knows what matters
what matters to future me what does that
voice telling you what is it saying that
you must always stay true to what are
the red lines you can never cross sixty
Seconds what's the best advice you ever
gave yourself from the future now us are
the people in our lives who we count on
who we need and you also need us
these can be our family our closest
friends our co-workers are now us
doesn't have to be people we like even
people we play and co-op mode with
together
but the people who are part of our lives
and we think about when we make choices
so think about your now us I don't have
to write down who they are but just try
to picture them in your mind and think
about what what is it that you give each
other what is it that you share what is
it that feeds you
how is it that you helped them what did
what do they count on you for just write
down what comes to mind just one minute
and I answered this question for myself
I realized that my relationships were
about deep time with people I came to
realize why I was so bad at texting with
people or bad on email but I could spend
an afternoon with someone and not look
at my phone once so what is it that core
thing just ten more seconds then we'll
head to the last one alright last is
future us the next generation our
children so think about what it is if
they need what kind of world will they
depend on what is it that the previous
generation left for us and what is it
that we need to leave for them if you
were to imagine incorporating that
future us and into your decisions what
is it that you need to remember what is
it that you need to make sure your
decisions are adding to the values that
they're growing one minute on this
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
so I have here on the screen in front of
us this is my bento so the first time I
asked myself these questions tried doing
this process for me here are the things
I came up with what do I want to need
good health money in the bank
groundedness good habits self-awareness
what must always be true of me don't
sell out be loyal to my values be
curious what do I want to need for my
relationships my now us it's about
closeness with friends people being
together and when I first saw this this
was a fascinating because it resonated
with me this felt like a real reflection
of who I was and a more clearly
articulated way than I'd found before
but I'd love for you all now to take the
next 10 to 12 minutes and Peter and I
are going to split everyone up into
rooms and you're going to be paired with
another person in this group and for the
first half of that time the conversation
will focus just on one side person a
will say person a is the focal point of
the conversation and person a will begin
by sharing what's in their bento and
just reflecting to the other person
whether that feels right to them or not
what they learn from that you'll do that
for about three or four minutes
something like that I will send a
notification when it's time to switch
after you share what's in your bento
then you're gonna ask a should I
question and the other person will help
you talk through it after person a has
had their time doing that
I'll send another message saying it's
time to switch and then the focus will
turn to the second person and they'll
talk through their bento for three
minutes and then talk through a should I
question and with that other person get
a sense of what they should do so we'll
be in those smaller groups for about 10
to 12 minutes after that we'll circle
back together and then we'll have a
collective conversation about what
happened
so Peter if you want to go so there's
there's 18 people in total including you
and me so that made nine groups if you
and I go in them and then there's
sixteen without us so they'll be eight
groups would would you which a
preference I'd read I'd rather to sit
out because I want to if people want to
ask me questions I want to be available
for them okay let's see it Phil you're
familiar with breaking up people you
know you know how to break up people
without including me and Yancey in it
yes actually so I go manually and then
create breakout rooms yeah yeah like
create eight okay cool all right all
right so Peters gonna drop you in I will
message in with when it's time to switch
but when you will first start just
choose which person will go first and
you're just gonna talk through your
bento with the other person and first
share what's there and then you're gonna
talk about a should I question so I'll
be sending out little messages to
everyone with instructions and if you
have questions send a message let me
know
so filler you what do I do now when I
owe everyone okay okay cool
well we didn't assign you George okay
looks like I can't hit unassigned hmm
looks like I can't honest assign you to
ticked it we can all do it together with
George oh he left
oh no he's in there's somebody by
himself in every room I'm gonna move him
back to the main room let's get him back
in here
[Music]
okay I'm gonna joined it with a very
good join okay see if I send a message
with that pop up in people's rooms okay
yeah yeah yes you see okay looks like
this
the other guy I'm gonna so I'm gonna
join this guy in the breakout room great
yeah okay okay I'm gonna meet myself
you
Nancy can hear me down here
hello hi me I don't my headphones on
this way yeah I can hear me yeah I got
you yeah so I don't know if you're
sending I just put pause they got
talking to I don't know if you're
sending messages to everyone
you're not coming through no so what are
you yeah I was okay it wasn't coming
through to me so I yeah we I just
finished one round with my guy yeah if
you go to the more section on your end
and go breakout rooms you it looks like
this is where you have to do is
broadcast the message to all and then
you can maybe say switch or something or
we can just bring everyone back in do
you see that right now I don't see the
breakout room where do I see that so you
go to a after at the bottom has paused
recording there's like more dot dot you
click on the more and then there's a
breakout rooms tabatha should pop up I
don't have a more I just get to I just
go to leave me
okay I'm gonna see I'm gonna make you
the host and so you're the host right
now we should have it okay yeah and if
you can put me back with Julie because I
don't have that option anymore
yeah alright and now I drag you yeah
just click my name in design - yeah
there you go alright
[Music]
you
you
[Music]
[Laughter]
[Music]
is it just me so far I think more more
or coming dragged out of our session ear
nice to meet you Dora everybody sorry if
that was a good that was abrupt didn't
mean that to be wait for everyone to
join and then interested to hear what
happened will your sounds on but
[Music]
okay finally well spell now all right
here we are
girl here all right
hi everyone so please make sure you're
muted and and I'd love to just open this
up and and hear about what happened what
happened in your conversations anything
they want to reflect you know just just
just raised your hand or you can just be
yourself and just go
you
anyone I have a small thing I probably
like the future us is easier for me to
consider because I feel like maybe I'm
not doing this right but
I don't know for some reason to feature
us I put like the world at large and
like community at large versus like us
now maybe I considered people that are
closer to me for some reason
I was teamed with Phil and he mentioned
community and I told they forgot to put
that in now us but it's probably because
I'm just a selfish prick and only think
about myself I have the same assumption
I have the exact same an assumption of
you is like us is closer and future us
is more like have humanity writ large so
I think I think that might be there
might be a common default that we go to
yeah so I guess like the now I Swiss may
be the one I struggled the most with
considering my mailbox yeah on that note
that came to mind is when I was going
through the my bento and then now us it
seems like oh man the stuff that I want
in it like the quality time just really
being present with people I feel like
that was most lacking in comparison to
the now me I will say that since I like
I made my first memento a year ago and I
now like explicitly create now us time
every day like I just have to I have
I've made it a conscious effort to like
if it's a good day it requires me having
now as time with someone because it's
something that I realized that without
making effort I would just I just
wouldn't pay attention to that by I
think people probably all have different
areas that are feel more natural to them
than others any anyone else want to
share anything
I'll go here so just want one one kind
of interesting thing and now I'm just
thinking about this in reflection we
didn't really talk about in the
conversation but it's interesting
looking at the connections between kind
of my values and what what I think our
our values ought to be like my one of my
true me things was intellectual honesty
and I like care a lot about that as a
kind of personal value and that also
went into what I said for future us is
just making sure that the kind of
institutions of knowledge generation are
maintained and and so I you know it
helps me to see my own future goals in
the context of future obstacles and kind
of bring those into to coherence I think
also that might say that might say to
you that maybe the idea of working on
the truthfulness of institutions over
the long term maybe would have seemed
like is that like is that a job like
what what you've been is that but I
think this also might justify to you
that like there is real rational value
and an importance in that and like you
can you could see where that exists it's
not as easy to explain it as like
something as immediate but I feel like
this also makes the argument that like
there is a that is a that is a pursuit
worth working towards that yeah that
provides imminent and long-term value
yeah it's a it's also a helpful way of
thinking about like what makes for good
institutions and communities as to what
degree they like afford people
practicing their personal longer-term
values I imagine a lot that that the
institutions around me or the the work
around me or whatever allow me to
express the values that I had here so
yeah it's useful thank you thanks Jay
anyone else like to share I have a
question it was anyone just like have
the worst time together talking to each
other well it was was how did it feel to
talk to another person and say hey
here's what I'm about did you feel seen
in that what was that experience like
you
unfortunately I'm not gonna speak to
that exactly I just want to go back to
the box because I actually find it a
little revelatory because as everyone
else is talking about there now so I
kind of got stuck in a moment and I've
realized looking at the other three
quadrants that I that's where my
transformation is happening and then now
as those are the parts and pieces that I
think that are going to start shifting
in my life because I started thinking
about the responsibilities the
connections that I may idealize in the
future us but I don't necessarily have
and then now us and so in that way being
able to reflect on how I started stream
of consciousness just writing things
down in the quadrants it's helpful to
reflect back on be like okay it doesn't
really fit with the other things that I
desire for myself so that's really
helpful so thank you yes you don't know
on the internet yeah anyone else wanted
to share anything I have I'll have like
a little there's one one last small
exercise and I have like a little
five-minute sort of thing before we end
but anything anyone else wants to share
get off their chest uh one thing I think
is really interesting about this and
it's hard for me to know exactly what to
make of it but I feel like when you
consider all four like in the rational
self interesting obviously you're saying
well that's not really what it's all
about because obviously you have to care
about yourself in the future you have to
care about everybody else also and
what's interesting about this is that
when you put things in context of all
four quadrants things that you seem
instinctively drawn to that maybe don't
make
seem to make as much justifiable sense
from the you know like just the now me
perspective start to make a lot more
sense and so it's I think it's kind of
cool how when you bring all these things
in then you're you're like deeper drives
start to all of a sudden make more sense
and instead seem and seem less of some
kind of like weird that you're
trying to justify to yourself so I think
that's pretty cool uh hundred one
hundred percent one hundred percent so
I'm gonna go and talk again just a quick
thing yeah somebody did share something
in chat as well Oh Thank You Lee yeah
yeah totally
I appreciate that yeah so I wanna so I
want to show you on my bento and I want
to talk about sort of the last steps of
how I got there and and give you an
opportunity to do that too we won't go
all the way with that I see we do or
should I so here I showed this before
but here's the bento that I made this
was me doing exactly what you all just
did you know maybe I gave myself a
little bit longer time to write down
more things and I ended up trying to
shorten that I had this idea like how
can I get these things all down to like
four or five words that I'll remember so
I ended up circling things in here and
trying to pull out what seemed
consistent and then I ended up with this
so this is my bento so my now me the way
I end up summing up like what's the most
in line with my now me is showing people
the matrix like I can make a living that
way writing a book and whatever and
that's also like where I'm most just
clicking my future me I found was about
creating harmony and not selling out I
saw this like don't sell out thing was
just came up a lot that was interesting
my now us was about my family and
friends but what I was really focused on
was deep time focus like those are the
traits most important to me and the
future us that I imagine it's a better
matrix it's not imagining there are no
hidden defaults but
like how do we iterate on that and so
this is something that I have as my home
screen on my phone that picture on the
left that's my desk sitting right next
to me right now but these are things
that I look at and think about and
actually actively use when making
decisions so an example a real example
that changed how I thought about things
is that one of the ways I make it living
is as like a paid speaker and I will
sometimes get asked to do talks for
companies that I don't like or agree
with and I always say no always say no
to these things but I still like
whenever I have to consider this
question I get angsty and like it's very
frustrating its emotionally difficult
for me so I decided I would ask the bent
oh I got another one of these and I
asked the bento and it was interesting
my now me which wants me to show people
the matrix says yes I should do the talk
for this company and also this provides
for yourself but this is in line with
who you are my now us not totally
relevant but you know I did find it
relevant that I didn't think I should
just be preaching to the choir
I felt like my now us was bigger than
just like people I already knew the
future us giving a talk for a company I
don't like absolutely like if you're
gonna build a better matrix it's these
are the people but then I saw my future
me voice which just says no cuz it says
hey you might be selling out like are
you a sellout and when I wrote this out
it was like a enormous weight had been
lifted because I always have that aren't
you selling are you a sellout voice and
now suddenly like I could I could put in
a place and I could like respect it and
and I thought of it I thought of this
voice as less like something I had to
wrestle with and more like a bouncer
standing outside the door and I could
tap it on the shoulder and I could say
no no this is cool but I'm I'm allowing
you to be here as like a values check
for me as a like a yeah a bouncer for
these kinds of choices and so this
really shifted how I thought another
example another example which I didn't
include in here and the slides was a
smoker asking whether they should quit
smoking and what's interesting is that
the smoker is now us their future
in their future me all say to quit like
it's bad for your family you want to be
alive in the future but the smokers now
me which is rationally addicted to
nicotine it says to keep smoking and it
is like rationale for doing so because
quitting will suck it's addicted
nicotine so we struggled a reason with
those voices because they are rational
but just on like a limited point of view
so the question is expanding that
perspective and then allowing that to be
a space that you start to operating in
when making choices this is something
you have to practice you know it's it's
now a second nature thing for me I've
been doing it for a year like really
trying to live according to this mindset
and it's it's not always easy but like
yeah it's I wouldn't be teaching it in
this way if it hasn't been but so the
last thing to do would be for you to
take your your brainstorming sheet that
you have and to take that second bento
picture that the printout or you could
draw it on a piece of paper yourself and
it would be to shorten down what you
have in each bento down to like four or
five words a catch phrase something that
would be on a billboard just something
that you might remember because if you
can remember it then it becomes an
easier muscle memory so that muscle
memory for me when making choices as I
think about something like I just run
through the bentos and kind of in my
head I see a you know red X or a green X
if it's a yes than a red zero but to
know but just a way to yeah just keep
hold of what's important to you so I
would encourage you to take this and
spend a little time to come up with
those four or five you know three or
four word phrases someone's mic is on
and if you can send that if you want to
yeah love if you did that I'm gonna send
out something after this and if you want
to share me your bento with me I'm
interested in seeing it so that the
simple steps using this mic is on it's
George's mic you have the option to meet
him
oh there we go okay let me fit in here
we're almost done
yes so the so the using the bento in
five steps you it is very simple when
facing these should I decisions I find
it works very just naturally with should
I decisions you can make anything as
should I decision if you wanted to but
he's asked your bento you run it through
those values you consider from those
perspectives and like I did with Jordan
and I think when you look at things that
way you can understand not just what the
right choice is but also like what's the
right self coherent way to go about it
um and I think the power of this idea is
significant so here I have a bento and
slightly relabeled where I've made now
us to save relationships and I've made
future me to say values and imagine that
we're looking at this and they you to
that that is you your child that is the
next generation and then we can imagine
building their bento on to the previous
generations and you can see how the
relationships of the generation before
and the values of the generation before
form the foundation and for who that
next person becomes this is how this is
how values change or stay over time it's
by each generation sort of continuing
them pushing them forward and it's
ultimately this process in the same way
we learned it from our parents and this
shift of like a values helix moving
across generations this is what makes it
where 36% of college students believe
being rich is essential from you know to
82% believing that today it's this
gradual change over time and that comes
from that focus on values on that focus
on future us and we live in life we're
only bit focused on that now me we're
just blind to these others bases
relatively not contributing to the
bigger picture we're not contributing to
the longer-term so I think the power of
acting from your bento and seeing our
self-interest and the rational value
space through this frame I think can be
incredibly powerful and can be hugely
transformational there's a lot of steps
between here and there but it's just
like turning left you need a destination
worth going towards and the patience to
get there so this whole lecture and the
idea bento ISM is introduced in a book
that comes out three weeks from today
called this could be our future it's the
first book I've written Peter had a copy
I have
I don't have a fishel copy yet Peter got
it before me but yeah that's coming out
soon and there's there's more about
bento ism and and the first half the
presentation as well and because this is
an experimental event and because I love
I don't know I just I think this is a
wonderful piece of music I'd like to
close with a benediction and this is a
son raw track and I just asked that for
the next 90 seconds as I play it you
disclose your eyes and listen to this
and then will will be completed
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
all right and that's the end of
experiment number five thank you all so
much for participating and yeah anything
anyone would like to share in closing
before we before we depart anything you
want to leave with Peter had a great
suggestion actually that maybe at the
end we each take a turn introducing
ourselves and maybe saying just
something that we leave with just and
your name and either a question or a
learning that we leave with maybe we can
start with Jake here in the top left and
I'll go and then we'll go to Ryan and
we'll just go around that Sun all right
all right okay Thank You auntie that was
great I guess the thing that I'm
thinking about and and leaving with is
it occurred to me when you were giving
the first part of your presentation that
if you don't incentivize people to be
socially responsible in one way or
another then you get a kind of
perversion of what it means to be a
values driven business that is in fact
covertly kind of driven by by market
forces in the same way and so the
question that that's sticking around for
me is how can you design systems to
incentivize those behaviors I suspect
that's something you probably talk more
about in your book so Thanks
great thank you
yeah cuz I'm Yancey this is I've learned
that it's possible to do something like
this on the Internet and I think I'm
gonna send a survey after so I'll find
out a little bit more but like thank you
all for being part of this this has been
so strange to just talk alone in front
of a camera to my computer for so long
without any feedback but I felt you all
there and so I'm just appreciative of
that
hey guys
I'll go real quick I'm on a plane my
flights about to take off but I just
really enjoyed being part of this as
well I had a great talk with Ashley and
I just think it's the early days of
these types of meet ups on the internet
but I think they're gonna be much bigger
than features so exciting to be part of
the early days and thanks Cianci for
sharing the bento we're gonna put to use
myself so thanks everyone
all right safe flight well thank you we
should Ryan yeah what I'm leaving with
is I guess impression that I guess that
I need to put a bit more thought into
what my future self and future community
will think because it is I think a
valuable way of looking at and analyzing
my goals so yeah cool thanks Ryan reread
oh yeah reading reading Icelander here I
guess I'm I like this whole set up this
whole format it's great can't wait for
more thanks Pete for messaged me about
it and yeah I guess yeah thanks nice
camera things also filmmaker so yeah and
I guess this reminded me of the future
authoring program which I need to
finally finish of this that's probably
what I'll take with me I need to finally
finish that thanks cool
Amy
hi I am baby and I just wanted to say
thank you and also to second holds a
statement that I also I really
appreciated often Peter yeah so the word
that kind of jumped at me is the self
coherence piece that you used and some
of the people who are kind of like into
the game be space that's the word that
constantly is being used as coherence
the guy that's coming on next week that
I mentioned to you Jordan hall he uses
that term a lot and the moments when I
actually feel like I have that self
coherence and reflecting on it now those
kind of four boxes feel a line for that
one moment mm-hm so I'm taking away of
that kind of just being sensitive to
that felt sense feeling of when you're
not in coherence and then in going to
some kind of activity like this
to get back into it mm-hmm great Jordan
first thing I'm taking away from this is
that well of course I'd really like
these mean ups like a lot of people have
been saying but one thing I particularly
like is how this meetup is oriented
towards like self-actualization which is
going to be a really important part of
any like collective movement because
people need to take time for themselves
it's kind of like the serenity thing
with Jordan Hall and game B and the
other thing is I don't remember what it
was that was gonna say yeah that's it I
guess thanks a lot
and film all right both things I'm
really true with what Pearce said I
think it was interesting for me to feel
the coherence between all four boxes all
simultaneously coming together and then
just looking this as like a simple to
two things coming to me at the right
time where it's like I'm not just
thinking about myself it's like also
think about us and then there's is also
a dimensionality around time and I think
it's just me at the right time yeah and
then the third thing is around I don't
think it's just me and the collective
there's like a spectrum that goes from
me family to society to larger that
obviously this is a simple like two by
two but it can expand it to think maybe
someone like that as well love them Paul
yeah a couple take this one I love
anything that has to do with we space
and I'm not sure if that's something
that's a consideration here but it's
definitely something I feel like fits
with that one of my big realizations and
takeaways is that's I think I have a lot
of consideration for a future us and now
me but I could work a lot more on now us
there's a lot of vacancy there that and
I'm really hungry for a bento box right
now it's though it's make you kind of
fall next you stab you don't have a name
they're just staff but hi howdy
it's Ashley I'm sorry about that it's
it's a work so I I truly appreciate the
communal space I have really been
energised by the interaction I like the
breakout sessions that's new to me and
so I thought it was really productive
and then we came back as in a full
circle which is always nice
this is going to be really good for me
because I am my counselor I wear a
counseling hat and so mine I'm going to
be using this with students because I'm
an educator and I think it's super
helpful and guess who gets the credit
you've done an amazing job here intern
collectivizing our action are single
action steps so to to see like I think
it was Paul I'm sorry about the names
but seeing the spectrum and how each
decision or choice or value based
decision that we make affects all of us
is really important than I really like
how it's done
so thanks thanks for you thanks oh yeah
hey so for me it's the tool itself I
feel like I think about the way I make
decisions using this spectrum that
exists right now in self coherence but
this allows me to draw all these fine
lines to use as a tool to also better
talk about the way I'm thinking about it
with with others around me
some people are often confused by some
of the decisions I make and and I'm not
always able to express why and this is a
this is a good tool for talking to out
there's in in expressing that totally
totally I really like that usually
absolutely loved it so I do like to pay
a lot of attention to where precisely
the new tools that I came across they're
really useful
I think this is a really good place in
my life again I sort of echoing my
earlier comment that I'm taking away
here is that there are there's a space
of decision making where I don't want to
put in all the work of going through all
my dollies one by one but I also don't
want to like do nothing but just by
sheer instinct and I tend to actually
operate just jumping back and forth I've
been a better tool kit that allows you
to operate somewhere in the mill and
find a balance
this is really nice I am in love with
the idea of coherence and I look I I
will not actually want to interesting
things that I have in fact started
treating a very long-term value as an
immediate value because I spent some
time sort of looking up in values
integrity is really important and then
I've now come to like literally feel
pleasure when I'm when I think we in the
immediate term so I have this mnemonic
that I do exudate in the short term
decision-making framework in my mind
where I go integrity is important but
when I looked at the four quadrants
integrity is actually clearly a future V
value yeah so it's interesting that I am
still like developing a little bit and I
think making this an exclusive practice
essentialism idea is actually going to
really help me do that better and I
think it's gonna let me discuss I love
the story all right thank you thank you
Phil Phil and then Dora Dora Ray's would
raise her hand Dora do you want to go
right now
I'm sure thank you um so yeah first of
all thank you for sharing the tool it's
been really helpful I really like how
you can kind of put things and structure
in perspective even if it's think that
are something a little bit less
structured and less sound less
reasonable to you especially when you're
involved in it and then kind of what I'm
left with is is the question for me as
to what happens if you get like a 50/50
answer in your bento like something
that's very interesting for me and I'll
have to figure out okay so what's then
more important yeah that's totally
totally yeah I mean you also end up
iterated and kind of to find out was
there some way I'm assuming I'm going
about this that makes this bento think
this way like it I do this differently
but yeah it definitely happens and we'll
finish with Phil and then I'll have one
last thing and then we'll all go but
Phil Oh party time oh you've already
gone so is everybody gone sorry all
right
well
yes so the just the last thing I was
gonna say is that you know this is like
I call this an experiment this
experiment five and each time I'm
iterating on this and I'm learning from
it I'm gonna send a feedback thing
through Peter you know feel free to
share you can also like my contact info
will be a part of that but my hope is
that just like Phil's question about
building on what us is like I my dream
is that other people build on bento ISM
and that this is like a a new space
making tool that other people develop
things on and so if that's something
that's interesting to you you know you
should say what's up sometime and I you
know I'll probably be looking for people
to help move this forward and to think
about what it should be so thank you all
for taking time I really appreciate it
and and I'll you'll get an email from me
that'll have the two songs we listened
to and the handouts and you know and
where you can get in touch if you're
interested in talking more all right
thank you all thank you guys see ya
thank you thank you thanks Peter too
many thanks
[Music]
you