hey guys this is a quick announcement
because we're going to be putting up a
whole load of films over the holiday
period and we want to let you know
what's coming up you may have seen
yesterday we put out a video saying that
we're moving away from patreon patreon
apparently some people picked up on new
Americans we have created a subscription
service on our own website as a whole
members area where we're putting all of
the subscriber only films and we will be
adding to that quite a bit over the next
few days and also quite a lot of stuff
coming up on the main channel here
probably the film that I'm most excited
about is so last year we put out a film
with the Zen master talking about Jordan
Peterson the shadow and somehow it
became this sort of runaway viral hit we
have another interview with dou Xin the
Zen master from that film where I asked
him why I was so successful and also why
so many people found in a bit creepy and
a bit weird there must be something in
the way that I'm using emotions because
I'm playing with emotions I must not do
it very well is all I could think of
also on the main channel in the next few
days we'll be releasing another really
good film with Bret Weinstein and
Heather hi in we're also gonna release
some of the back catalog which includes
another interview with Warren Farrell
and a really fun piece with Jordan green
Hall and a cure of the Dom talking about
comic book culture superheroes and how
that applies to the intellectual dark
web and we're also putting up a load of
subscriber only content onto the website
including two more films with Brett and
with Heather and an exclusive with dojin
the Zen master talking about practical
tips to integrate the shadow and then
coming up in January we've got a whole
load of stuff I'm really excited about
as well including a whole series about
psychedelics which includes an interview
with Stan Grof the legendary
psychiatrist and pioneer of psychedelic
therapy and another interview with Gabor
mat√© a both of those are already
available for subscribers early access
on the website and then we have our long
waited series with ken wilber the
integral philosopher where he talks
about the intellectual dark web Jordan
Peterson and where the hell we are as a
culture the future really is trying to
break through have a look at rebel
wisdom to get glimpses of what it looks
like so happy Christmas season's
greetings happy holidays and most of all
have a wonderful intersectional
winterville and see you soon
[Music]