welcome to the stola the stoah is a
digital campfire where we go here and
dialogue about what matters most at the
night's edge what's happening now
[Music]
all right check-ins
[Music]
yeah I feel calm and stoic I wish I had
something and I wish I had something
more interesting to say I think that's a
longing for something more interesting
to say with my chicken all right welcome
to the stoah I'm Peter Lindbergh the
Stewart of the stoah and the stall is a
place for us to go here and dialogue
about what matters most a nice edge of
this moment and today we have Konrad
Hamilton Konrad is a PhD student based
at Paris 8 University currently pursuing
research on non-human agency in the work
of Karl Marx he's a contributor to the
text
what is postmodern conservativism and a
co-author of myth in mayhem a leftist
critique of Jordan Peterson as well as
the author of a forthcoming book the
dialectic of escape a conceptual history
of video games and today he has a talk
on thinks Marx epicureanism and
Peterson's stoicism and in the kind of
the description is a question
provocative question is Jordan Peterson
a crypto stoic is his rhetorical foil of
choice marks a crypto epicurean and then
when I tweeted that out someone said to
me or someone tweeted back please don't
spoil the stoic tradition by even
remotely suggesting that Peterson the
stoic so this event is already getting a
the appropriate the controversial buzz
which is delicious so how about today is
going to work is that Conrad's going to
present for around 45 minutes and then
if you have any questions throw them in
the chat box I will unmute you you can
ask your question if you don't if you
want me to read your question your
behalf because it's going to be on
YouTube just let me know and I'll read
on your behalf and then you know we
might switch pivot to just kind of an
open discussion we'll see how it goes
but we have 90 minutes here in total so
that being said Conrad I'm going to hand
it to you you're in mute right now you
know hi good to see you all so I want to
clarify before I start and I'm going to
clarify this subsequently within the
presentation the
well two things first of all I'm not by
any means an expert in stoicism you know
modern European philosophy is my area of
specialty so you know there if there any
errors or inaccuracies in terms of my
treatment of stoicism or or epicureanism
for that matter I welcome Corrections
the second thing I just want to say is
that I've kind of set this up as a bit
of a thought experiment with which I
intend to make a a slightly different
philosophical point about the appeal to
biology in order to sustain
philosophical structures which we'll get
into but or notions of the few SACEUR
nature as it were but but again it's not
actually I don't mean to suggest
Peterson is a stoic right that is not
the function you know I want to I want
to play around with these kind of
concepts right and experiment with them
you know and of course it's the nature
of these sort of comparisons that you
can say well someone's you know X much
like this or X much not like this you
know there's certainly a level of
variability and how that functions so
with all that said I want to I built a
slideshow so I want to bring up the
slideshow see this okay so you can see
my screen here there we go
everyone can see yeah okay
so here we go we have the we have Marx's
Epicureanism and Peterson's stoicism
with typical rigor I just totally built
this in kind of the default PowerPoint
format so don't expect any great sort of
technical pyrotechnics press like okay
so I just want to begin by discussing a
little bit the very basically just the
structure of stoicism we see that
stoicism founded in the early early
third century BC by authen founded in
early that early third century BC Athens
by Xena Oh Satyam it's not a body of
knowledge but a practice or exercise
excuses and in stoic physics only
corporal bodies and I'll start with the
physics in stoic physics only corporal
bodies can act upon things or are
existent in a way though in incorporeal
things like time place or saleable 's
are conceived of as subsystem and for
this reason the cosmic life force of god
is conceived of in a certain way in
biological terms as a kind of logo so
Numa that contains the sperm or seed of
the world's develop and in this
structure it's the rational agency of
God that structures the the passive and
activity of matter right so the the no
the Numa or the logos you know is
responsible for the arrangement of
matter in that way this might sound like
when you talk about the the role played
in structuring the universe or matter by
the logos through the Numa this might
make it sound like the Stoics are
deterministic but actually they had a
more complex causal structure so they
have notions of preliminary causes
sustaining causes proximate causes you
can't associate them with a simple kind
of anticipate causality and we see that
with Aristotle to write with formal
causality final causality Express formal
causality final causality efficient
cause
and so on you know that it's not based
on a system of simple and distinct
causality for the Stoics the mind is a
rational commanding faculty that can
elect to assent or not to rational
impressions so here we get into the fun
you know kind of moral implications a
little bit a rational impression
something that can be exhibited in
language and for something to be
signified there must be a signification
a signifier and a name there so where is
the where as the the the this the
signified is incorporeal assailable can
be judged as true or false well these
these this sort of refers to the the way
that simple samples or propositions work
the Stoics also had to develop a theory
of non simple propositions to fully
defend these ideas so then you get the
idea of like contingent propositions and
things like that
[Music]
ideally one should only assent to
cognitive impressions that is rational
impressions which are secure and
unshakable but this generates
significant epistemological problems so
if you look at the the debate between
the the Stoics and the skeptics a lot of
it turned around well what would it mean
for you know something to actually be
rationally demonstrable in language so
that we could call it a cognitive
impression so basically you have the
ability to assent or not to rational
impressions but how do you develop a
criteria for determining what a rational
impression is right and that's where you
kind of get into this logical sort of
sub structure right and why it's
important right
so very very developed right and you
know I've been there caricatures of
stoicism that are used but you see a
very very developed kind of sensibility
at work there now in stoic ethics the
only things that are truly good are
human virtues right wisdom justice
courage and so on but awareness of these
has to progress through a process in
which we start with basic needs like
food and shelter and then we acquire
moral virtues
and these these sort of lower-level
needs like you know food and shelter
they're classified as indifference so
while there might be good most of the
time exceptions can nevertheless exist
right so you know I mean for example
like you know most of the time it's
desirable to have shelter but if you
imagine okay you're you're Hitler well
if you having shelter it could be is
perpetuating some greater harm then it's
not good for you to have shelter right
so you know there's just there's sort of
a generality that's use that right and
helping to structure our preferences is
the rationale character of nature very
important so it's best is to live in
accordance with nature though exceptions
will sometimes arise as when you would
have to go without food to keep someone
else alive and this is this is what I
said about an exception right to the
good of the the basic needs of survival
as with the Socratic spirit ease or
technique concerned with life in general
is assimilated to rationality so like
their the idea here is that you know
there is no disassociation between
rationality and virtue right you see
this with the idea of accenting -
verifiable cognitive impressions right
verifiable rational impressions that you
know to be rational is also to have you
know an adequate moral framework right
and in a way it's even more so I was
saying then with the
than with the Socratic because you have
no tripartite theory of the soul so
there's a very very rational dimension
right - to stoicism in terms of
functions okay so now I'm going to talk
a little bit of epicureanism sorry I
realize this is a lot I hope I hope it's
not you know too much for you but
epicureanism is maybe a little easier
epoch Epicureanism shares
Epicurus name it is like stoicism a
long-standing tradition that started in
ancient Greece in the 4th century BC and
that was carried on to ancient Rome
where the crease
was actually it's most famous proponent
and like stoicism it was also a popular
or practical philosophy so that's
actually really important to note about
both Epicureanism is Sohus ism is that
these were not purely sort of academic
projects these were actually you know
philosophies that people use to to guide
their lives so interesting in that way
here we'll focus a bit on the ideas of
about the curious himself so the
physical theory of Epicurus builds on
the early one of Democritus and pausing
the positing that the world is comprised
of material atoms but his solid
indivisible particulars below the
threshold of visions that there's a
space void between Epicurus method is
largely deductive he posits an infinity
of atoms because without the nature
would regress nothing and the proof of
their statuses bodies lies on their
continuity with the visible structure of
the world so again if you think about it
right this is like your Turtles all the
way down kind of thing like if you think
about it there has to be a basic
constituent of the material world right
and that's how you logically deduce the
presence of atoms right so it's a kind
of logical experiment that's performed
from the standpoint of first person
observation while atoms function
mechanistically for Epicurus they are
unlike for unlike for Democritus capable
of swerving in a determinate manner so
Democritus had a very sort of
mechanistic conception of atoms but
Epicurus altered Democritus conception
of atoms by saying that they had a
certain there was a certain margin in
which they could swerve right you know
in terms of the voids they're moving in
four Epicurus the souls comprised of
atoms which for him is proved by the
fact that only corporal entities can be
can move or be moved so in other words
like the the changeability of the soul
right and its capacity for sensation
you know proves the fact that the soul
must actually be material or corporal
and
and by the way we should remember when
we when you talk about the soul in
ancient Greece this is different than
now because now we tend we tend to think
almost definitionally of something
incorporeal which reflects the influence
of the Christian tradition but like when
Aristotle uses the term soul for example
he means like its anima which is just
principle of animation so actually when
we often use the translation soul I
don't like the translation soul I prefer
enema because I think the problem when
we use the word soul is we give it a
spiritualist Association which it
sometimes has in ancient Greece um but
it's much more open-ended right it's the
princess it's the sorry not the princess
it's simply the the the nucleus
responsible for the animation of life
right so this this theory of the
materiality of the soul leads
Epicurus to two conclusions one is that
the atomic composition of the body is
too delicate to be transmitted to the
afterlife and two that the material soul
is only responsive to physical
impressions such as pain and pleasure
right so we have on one hand this idea
that the afterlife cannot exist because
the the soul comes from a particular
composition amount of of atoms right so
how could you how could that get to the
afterlife right if you know you know
it'd have to sort of be magically
transported or something right and he
also you know there's a certain
secularism here qualified secularism in
which he he points out that you know
what defines the soul is what is
palpable to us on a kind of sensual
level right so the sensations of pain
and pleasure right being very very
tangible are prior to part of this
material metabolism right in which the
soul functions in this context ideas
such as those of the gods come from thin
films of atoms which are internalized by
the soul giving rise to mental
impressions which aren't necessarily
correspondent so this is very
interesting right
like part of the epoch here an idea here
is that and and you can actually see a
strong parallel with them with the with
the work of David Hume in this respect
but there's this idea that the soul
internal
atoms that come from diverse sources and
then it manifests them as the notion of
the gods right but again that doesn't
mean that the gods exist right but
actually Epicurious didn't dismiss the
existence of the gods
he just claimed that by the very nature
of their perfection they would have no
need to intervene in human affairs right
so classic you know kind of theological
conundrum here right you know why would
God have any compulsion to intervene in
the world if he's so perfect that you
know whatever it should already be okay
right the soul has for the Epicurus is a
rational and a non rational component
and the former must be used to judge how
to pursue the acquisition of pleasure or
pain right so again a very you know kind
of sensualist basis there are three
kinds of desire for Epicurus ones that
are natural unnatural but unnatural but
desirable and empty natural refers to
human necessities like health and
happiness
unnatural refers to unnecessary
amenities like good food or drink an
empty refers to extraneous conundrums
like fear and death right so you have
three categories right yeah you have
your your stuff you you you need right
you have you stuff that that's nice that
facilitates pleasure but isn't necessary
and then you have stuff that doesn't
really matter right like fear of death
and what maybe we'll get into this in a
minute but for the Epicureans because
they didn't believe in the afterlife
fear of death was totally it's like why
would you worry about death when you
know you're not gonna know what happens
when you die right it's a dumb thing to
worry about okay so again you can see
the critique of a certain critique of
metaphysics very interesting right a
very very early critique of metaphysics
that's being posited by the Epicureans
the swerve itself the existence of it
permits the delegation of a kind of
qualified human freedom right because if
if atoms can swerve that means that the
atoms within our soul or not just
following determine
cicadas right that we actually have a
certain kind of freedom that's bestowed
to us okay wait okay now in epicurean
epicurean Epicurus social theory early
egalitarian society is defined by
scarcity were then replaced by autocrats
who were then overthrown in favor of the
rule of law this is I would say on an
anthropological level this holds up
pretty well by the way
so again prior to the creation of like
agricultural surpluses you had kind of
relatively comparatively speaking
harmonious subsistence societies then
you have autocrats who emerge because
they appropriate surpluses then in the
context of ancient Greece for example
you had the implementation of a kind of
qualified democracy or Republican
notions right so an effort to allow
forms of public deliberation right so
very interesting right it's a very very
sophisticated social theory right with
the rule of law right with the formation
of you know these sort of more organized
societies with the rule of Locke and the
development of systems of punishment
that obstructed the acquisition of
pleasure right this in turn colored the
view of the gods
whereas early religious notions seem to
emerge out of all with nature such as
lightning later ones are codified qua
punishment so this is part of the
critique of there's a critique of the
formalism of Legal Society in Epicurus
view because if you think like you know
if you think that the goal should be to
facilitate pleasure right because of the
material composition of the soul you you
know you can see how a lot of laws might
obstruct them right like to give you a
very very cursory example like in our
society we have rules against the
consumption of you know certain forms of
drugs right now
not that Epicureans would have had a
totally positive view of that because it
can
military's physical consequences but you
know I don't think anyone suffers too
much for smoking a bit a bit of Jake
right so you see the way that there can
be a tension between law and pleasure in
this way and then there's this view that
which is very interesting as well that
like early religious ideas kind of
expressed this again this sort of pure
aw of natural phenomenon but that the
gods are you know religion becomes quota
fought codified in relation of
punishment to support the punitive
character of the state eventually so
again quite a Marxist very interesting
quite a Marxist dimension to that right
in terms of base and superstructure this
idea that the gods have to become these
moralistic figures or punitive figures
in order to you know morally justify the
actions of the state for Epicurus just
laws or those that can be justified in
ur contractually as a means of promoting
happiness
whereas on unjust laws or those that
obstruct it so again very interesting
the kind of primitive social contract
theory we see here right still he
doesn't see breaking laws though is
necessary even if those laws are
irrational because of one the limited
nature of our desires and to its
inconvenience right so go back going
back to you know natural needs right as
opposed to unnatural needs he didn't
think all the laws were good but he
thought like no matter what the laws are
you should be able to meet your basic
needs which is the important thing and
also the problem is if you break laws
you potentially be punished which can
increase your pain and reduce your
pleasure and Epicurus placed a high
value also on friendship or love
philia which he describes as a kind of
utilitarian relation in the way that you
know you become friends with people
because you seek the pleasure of
friendship but then it's one for him
that acquires a certain kind of value
and of itself right and there's there's
some ambiguity
okay so on to on to on to modern society
here we go wait
okay so Peterson and stoicism the fun
part right there have been a spate of
recent articles and blog posts which
have sought to answer the question of to
what degree the thought of Jordan
Peterson reflects his stoic gimble's
well any comparison will invariably be
approximate we we endeavor here to
juxtapose his work with stoic ideas
while the logos for the Stoics pervades
and shapes the world for Peterson is
largely psychologize so remember you
have the pneuma for the logos which is
coming in shaping inanimate matter for
the Stoics um for Peterson Peterson the
logo is actually some for Peterson the
lowest the logos is actually something
psychological right and the logos
reflects from the search for truth right
and it's it mediates between the two
meta archetypes of order which is
associated with the left side of the
brain and the masculine and chaos which
is associated with the right side of the
brain and the feminine for Peterson then
the logos is a largely subjective agency
and he credits Christianity in
particular with announcing its
subjective designation right so you know
Jesus Christ as announcing the capacity
of humans to improve their circumstances
within the structure of their own world
to form a cultic community you know kind
of subjective Isis right the notion of
the logos in a way but what's
interesting to note is that like the
generative logos of the Stoics for
Peterson the psychological logos is the
privilege means through which extrinsic
material processes are structured and
interpreted so again material like the
structure of the world for the Stoics it
comes from the logos as a generative
numa or logos that structures matter for
Peterson like you know he says I think
at one point like um what what what
matters isn't matter it's what matter or
what matters he said the our world isn't
based on matter it's based on what
matters
that's what
right so you see here for Peterson
materiality is always secondary right
he's you know in a certain way and we'll
see he's anti materialist because for
him you know you always have a
subjective agent who has to interpret
material structures and give them
meaning right that's very important
unlike unions like James Hillman
Peterson tends to portray the struggle
of subjectivity or the logos as one
through which chaos is tamed by the
forces of order
um so Peterson's a bit unique in this
right like um I mean there's a lot of
debates and there was a recent one that
was going on between mount McManus and I
and a guy involved in psychoanalytic
practice and study whose name I forget
it took place on Marion West but he was
saying that there's a lot of unions who
dislike Peterson because they find he
stresses too much the role of order
right whereas for you it's a more
complex relationship between the two
not that Peterson doesn't have elements
of complexity but I think what's the
name of this it's 12 rules for life an
antidote for chaos right so again you
know even in that kind of presentation
um chaos is treated like something that
has to be combatted like the principal
antagonist I mean a lot of unions do not
see it that way this assignation of
priority to order permit certain
comparisons with stoicism Peterson like
the Stoics believes that one must live
in accord with nature in a certain sense
something seen by his first chapter of
12 us for life in which he naturalizes
inequality by claiming for instance the
Pareto principle structures it so in the
in the first chapter and we discussed
this a lot like at the last event in the
first chapter 4 of 12 rules for life
stand up straight with your shoulders
back
Peterson puts forth a model of nature he
posits in which essentially nature is
inherently in Equus
right you know so he talks about you
know prices law and the brett-o
principle and how this applies to nature
he talks about that the natural
character of differential production
right
and for Peterson of course if you
transgress this right if you try to
achieve equal outcome right whatever
that means you you know the great risk
is that you create totalitarianism so we
have to try to address certain forms of
systemic and wealth inequality but for
Peterson we have to do so in a way that
comprehends and represents the fact that
individuals and more of our nature are
differentially productive and here's a
big but but here's a big difference
right between Peterson and stoicism
again for Peterson nature is not
rational right fundamentally which means
that the role the logos is to order it
without running afoul of its fundamental
ontology so again the logos is
subjective for Peterson it's not
situated at the at the objective level
so what so in this way you know Peterson
is is less rationalist then than the
Stoics because the Stoics perceive a
fundamental harmony or order to the
structure of nature whereas for Peterson
nature is cruel you know it's like like
Hobbes kind of nature it's it's you know
sort of barbaric and brutal and unequal
and you know in terms of rational order
what you have to have is you have to
have a logos that can respect you know
that inequality and structure it without
totally you know trying to change it
because that would be very risky so
again should one insist on going too far
and ordering reality the invariable
result would be to Talat arianism and
I'll add that while Peterson is not a
logician this also leads him to an
embrace of the need for logic which he
accuses the postmodernists of having
abandoned right and so you see the term
fellow go centrism here which is
associated with Jacques Derrida the
French philosopher the idea that the
idea that our
the logical structure of our sort of
intellectual discourse is already
characterized by the patriarchal or
hegemonic position of the phallic
signifier of the phallus right so that
that's quite that's actually quite
complicated how that how logic works
within Pederson but I think his his
position would be that we need to be
logical because we're not logical we are
not going to be able to acknowledge or
or represent the objective structure of
nature which is radically unequal and
we're not going to be able to develop
systems and means of adopting to it okay
so now we move on to Marx and Epicurus
right now this is a little actually
easier right then then Peterson and
stoicism Marx's doctoral thesis the
difference between the democraty and an
epicurean philosophy of nature
investigated the ways in which the
thought of Epicurus differed from that
of Democritus so again we have a direct
connection in Marx's intellectual
history to epicurean thought in
particular Marx remarkably considering
the textual basis if you worked on
stresses the importance of the swerve
for Epicurus or the way the atoms do not
follow pre structured patterns so Marx
you know actually traditionally people
said we'll have the Cure as Democritus
same thing Marx is one of the first
people to really say no what Epicurus is
doing is quite fundamentally different
than what Democritus is doing because of
the allowance of personal freedom we're
not just personal freedom but I mean the
allowance of contingency in the universe
right and this is actually pretty
amazing when you considered the sources
he was working off because as we find
more tax and and understand better the
relationship of Democritus and Epicurus
a lot of what we discovered conforms to
what Marx sort of speculatively
demonstrated already and this question I
think for Marx was largely a question of
how to do philosophy post system because
Mark said directly with the work of
haggle so of course where Marx was
developing philosophically the
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel was very
very dominant in German context and such
was the complexity and depth of haggle
system that in a way it the problem with
it was it swallowed up everything else
because for Hegel you don't just have
the truth the truth is the negativity
through you which through which you
progress to the truth right
you know and it's changing so he says
like look at the time right it's seven
forty four and one minute it's going to
be seven forty five so how do you
overcome the philosophy that has
incorporated all philosophical
dissidents our own electoral dissidents
into itself in advance and I think he's
really struggling with this question you
know when he when he talks about how
Epicurus broke with Democritus so to try
to break with haggle Marx latched on to
the work of for back and for back argued
that haggles dialectic is interpreted as
having its true basis in biology so that
for example the dialectic of religion
reflects the spiritual impulse
pre-existent in all humans right so we
codify for our backs idea was that we
codify for example religious
institutions we create all these moral
rules you know this is what God says but
for for for back the truth of of
religion you know is the need of human
beings on a biological basis for you
know solidarity community a certain form
of spiritual participation right but of
course you know this was quite
fashionable on the left in Germany at
that time because if you accept for
backs thesis then you don't need
formally organized religion anymore
because the truth of religion in a way
becomes these very general moral ideas
so by secularizing haggles idea and
attempting to make the dialectic pivot
on material particularity marks the
juices in askesis or practice through
which capitalism must be overthrown in
order to abolish alienation from man's
nature to be realized
so let me unpack that a little bit so I
talked before about how haggles
dialectic 4/4 back reflects certain
natural impulses that we have as humans
right and moreover social institutions
like religion which are part of this and
Marx agrees with this but what he
observes is that religion isn't the main
problem anymore the problem is that our
natural human needs are being obstructed
by capitalism right so again the sort of
idea of alienation right like you
produce something it's the object of
your labor you're intimately connected
to the production process but on your
capitalism you're producing things you
don't want to produce for other people
right you know which you know engenders
this this this frustration or give
munition of the of the subject but in a
way this this attempt to read Hegel sort
of biologically by for back it fails and
this is shown by Max Turner who in the
1840s he he basically says that that all
the the socialists like Marx have really
done is they've just naturalized the
religious notion of man or the human so
store nurse critique was that they're
basically continuing with religious
ideas but they're just putting a new
label on them right so conscious of this
Marx alters a system in the mid 1840s
and he starts to try to think about
rather than thinking about humans is
having pre-given deep biological needs
and his dialectic reflecting that mark
starts to think about is it possible
that even the idea of the human or the
character of the human is conditioned by
economic history so he shifts his system
so that he starts with you know notions
like value you know relations of
production means of production and so on
rather than starting with a biological
and abstract notion of the human so
because of this dislocation between
Marx's early humanist and biological
work and his late sort of economic work
waiter Marxist thinkers tended to read
Marx broadly is either humanist or
materialist so Michele uhnari a French
Marxist thinker he explains that Marx's
later work
he explains Marx's later works by
appealing to his early humanist writings
where as Lewis South is they're very
materialist very scientific rejects
these is immature because he claims
they're still too ideological and I want
to just add that altas are in materials
in the encounter connects Marx's suppose
a trajectory ization of materials
tradition that commences with the
atomists he calls this aleatory
materialism
so for alphas are to be Marx had to get
rid of the notion of this humanist or or
biological notion of the human being the
basis of a system in order to fully
realize the materialism that was already
latent in for example the democraty in
or epicurean traditions so here we go so
Peterson's problem here's here we go
Peterson's problem um
Peterson's philosophy is in part popular
because it offers advice directly to
individuals as to how they should live
their lives and this occurs in common
mysticism to do this Peterson appeals to
certain normative structures in here in
nature right we see that with the the
Stoics as well the notion of nature is
pervaded by rationality however as
embodying the logos was far more tenable
philosophically prior to the scientific
developments associated in modernity
so again when the Stoics were were
writing they all they could engage in in
broad speculation about how nature
functioned you know nature is structured
rationally and so on so on you know
modern science really poses a challenge
right to that kind of generalization of
nature
um so of course you know anyone who
knows philosophy we know well Immanuel
Kant right kind of signals the shift
where you have you can't just go out and
you know make these kind of metaphysical
suppositions you have to ask the
question of you know how those sub
positions relate to the subject who's
putting them forth right
so again Peterson this is where Peterson
you know he's a product of modern
philosophy so it's a far more subjective
formulation of that Peterson attempts to
overcome this problem you know that the
like the fact of having to the fact of
of the on attained on attainability of a
full knowledge of nature by one
positioning consciousness is something
that must represent without directly
reprising in egalitarian natural
structures and to buttressing his at
ARCIC image of nature with evolutionary
biological researches so again to try to
you know Peterson on one hand stresses
the distance between the subjective
logos and the structure of nature and -
he tries to defend his vision of nature
by supporting it with things like you
know research and evolutionary
psychology but this is like a fairly
fragile edifice actually right so um
Peterson will say you know and this is
very dubious you know in terms of the
studies he uses but Peters animal states
say the fact women pursue STEM fields
lessen gender equal countries like
Sweden proves that women are
biologically right less interested in in
STEM disciplines right but this only
really works if you accept like a very
very tenuous idea of these evolutionary
archetypal structures I mean not many
women did stem 50 years ago and there's
a lot now so you see the way Peterson
has to you know it's quite hard to
defend sometimes how he uses that and
ultimately Peterson purchases his
thoughts utility to individuals by
paying the cost of its philosophical
coherency so again
Peterson's able to
you Petersons able to you know issue
this this hard advice that that is
connected to nature because he draws too
far to direct a link right between
nature and you know structures of
behavior individual structures right
like I said about you know okay well
women naturally or interests in stem and
this kind of thing so there's a real
loss of philosophical here and see that
that happens in that way
so again Peterson has you know he's able
to you to - not that he directly says
copy nature but he's able to use to
claim that natural structures can offer
us instruction only by you know more
directly connecting them than you really
should to the way we behave right so
here we go now we get into Marx's
problem and solution like Peterson
Marx's early work justifies its appeal
to individual praxis on the basis of
biology specifically for box biology
biology ization of haggle so again in
the early Marxist work like Peterson's
work it used conceptions of biology
nature to justify the kind of
anti-capitalist in this case praxis that
one should engage in but unlike Peterson
Marx relinquished this agenda because he
recognized that it was intellectually
untenable but we still see that in
capital Marx's mature economic work that
biology and subjectivity play a role for
Hegel truth is temporal but still exists
I think I said this for haggled the
truth could be you know at 7:44 and the
next minute it's 7:45 right and so
rationality for Hegel is changing and it
has to be brought into the world by
different individuals or classes so know
so for example a haggle views Napoleon
the world spirit on horseback as a
manifest agent of rationalization right
he talks about state bureaucrats playing
this role
the philosophy of right so it's not just
philosophy in the abstract right
philosophy actually has to be you know
manifested in reality and borrowing this
from from this model Marx posits the
proletariat as the universal class in
capital whereas it succeeds the
bourgeois in this respect um so again
for Marx there's nothing absolute or
biological but the proletariat it's
brought forth historically but the fact
that it's brought forth historically
right doesn't change the fact that it's
the kind of a point to historically
appointed agent that's going to adjust
history right or check radically change
history as the case may be so we see an
effort to cultivate a notion of truth
that doesn't require one to assert its
basis in nature right and Marx also
woods to the way that hagas dialectic
agrees with Darwin
whereas nature is in flux yet permits
successions so in a way Marx is also
understanding nature differently because
he's saying nature isn't just a fixed
image right it's always changing you
know of course when Peterson says oh
prices a lot of pros principle that's
true in nature these are like massive
you know generalizations right so again
for Marx we see that you know in a way
just as nature changes and just as there
are species that you know succeed and
overtake other species you know history
is changing and there are social
agencies which succeed and overtake
other social agencies and change change
society right so you have the total kind
of elimination of a really fixed image
of nature right and now I just want to
talk Peter directed me to some his work
so I just want to talk about a little
bit about some of the stuff Peter's
written that I think has some importance
for the stoah in in their article
mimetic Tribes of culture war 2.0 Peter
Lindbergh and Connor Barnes proposed a
set of potential solutions for the
multipolar battles fought by mimetic
tribes so for example trumpets the dirt
bag laughs the intellectual dark dark
web me too
New Atheists etc across our current
culture
landscape so again it's talking about
how all these different factors you know
a decentralization of media for example
political just getting economic to
stabilisation and so forth have led to a
situation where you have this multi poll
or warfare being fought by these online
groups somewhat different you know
decidedly different than our traditional
you know political processes so to you
know because they see you know because
Limburg and bar and see you know all the
sort of chaos and the incapacity to to
facilitate discussion this creates you
know all these different cultists right
they propose certain you know means
through which we can adopt collective
structures to remedy this right you know
the diffuse good faith posts right the
defusing of the agonistic structure of
debate rendering philosophy more
accessible and so on
well these are all fine proposals I
think the risk here is that subjectivity
becomes kind of over unified so as to
justify the notion that current
struggles could be rectified for the
collective subscription to a set of
liberal and consensual norms Limburg and
Barnes acknowledged that the current
crisis has a socio-economic basis with
their replicate well what I want to what
I should say about this is what I mean
is that you can talk about these sort of
norms of interaction um but like you
know in a way I'm and this is thinking
about the analogy with Darwin right the
way certain social agencies overtake
each other and so on you know the
problem is its I think it's very hard to
get people whose opinions are so
radically different about how the world
functions right to participate on the
basis of the same set of norms right so
I think these are I think these are very
very good proposals but again when I say
over unified I mean I think in a way all
this kind of presupposes that there are
some kind of common basis right and I
was talking about much of this lecture
is about the risk of kind of fixing
right a notion of the subject
that there's a kind of totally common
basis upon which people can relate to
and I'm not sure if that's the case
Bloomberg and Barnes acknowledged that
the current crisis has a socio-economic
basis with the reference to leotards
thesis about technological changes
undermine grand narratives for example
so Jean Francois Eliot ah was a French
philosopher he's responsible for the
term postmodern because he wrote a book
that was commissioned by the Quebec
government called the postmodern
condition and in that he talks about how
the difficulty of the huge amount of
information that's becoming available to
us based on digital and automated
processes has created a difficulty and
aggregation that's eliminating our view
that there are these sort of Tidy
large-scale narratives that can be used
to structure history right so we're
constantly exposed to different
narratives different versions of history
and we have a very very difficult time
unifying those and this for him is is
characteristic of what what
post-modernism is right it's also an
economically and technically induced
change but I think you know if if much
of the problem is socio-economic I think
we have to say also that you know
addressing this disunity will require a
socio-economic solution right that you
can propose certain strategies that may
help but to really fix this problem
there has to be a unification of our
socio-economic reality right that
addresses this difficulty of aggregation
for Machiavelli every Republic is
founded in violence and seeks to build
consent retro actively he uses the
example of the Roman Republic right so
Romulus kills Remus right that's the
foundation of the Roman Republic and the
Roman Republic but the Roman Republic
later becomes you know democratized
that's complicated too but just just
roll with me um so you can see this all
the time right it's like you know in
America what was the first founding
gesture of America it was like do you
support our democracy okay if not get
the out right so you know the
French Republic China you know like it's
very very hard to start the Republic
under democratic conditions usually you
have to commit consider
relax of violence to achieve unification
then you have right you're kind of
consensual democratic participative
conditions the notion of the universal
class like the proletariat the Marx puts
forth is not about plural consensual ism
per se but about the identification of a
social actor that's capable of both
ideologically and materially creating
the conditions of freedom or
universality or a subletting
contradiction so what I mean here is
that the question the more important
question may not be how do we relate to
each other on a good-faith basis it may
be what is the perspective if we look at
these different tribes that exist are
emerging is does one of them have a
perspective that could actually achieve
the unification of the polis right in
other words that could through you know
the committing of acts of structural
violence could they bring about the
conditions through which our society
could become unified and through which
these kind of good faith processes could
again prevail so there you go and that
is if I'm not mistaken yeah that's the
end of my lecture thank you all right
thank you
Konrad and it was a pleasure seeing my
name and honor on a PowerPoint slide I
feel like I stepped up my intellectual
game there so if you have any questions
for Conrad or anything you you've just
heard just right in the chat box and you
know we'll start off with actually Jacob
because Jacob said he didn't have a
question per se but the critique and
that's okay too if someone kind of just
provides a critique on what they hurt
and then you could have a little back
and forth on rent sorry so Jacob you're
up so thanks Thank You Conrad for all
that it's a lot there so just preface
this it could be that you didn't mean to
write it this way and that this is it's
not actually what you meant to say
and so this critique is hinging upon
something you wrote and I realize you
might not even mean this and so it's
open to it's not concrete right because
I realize you just said something badly
or something so I'm kind of going
through your neck here okay take it take
it
uh I mean the possibilities I would make
make make a mistake in the presentation
of these subjects which I'm not so
familiar with is very much you know
built in so I invite this right right so
I I find it hard to take any of your
arguments seriously let's say if there's
a general current of a misapprehension
of Peterson's teachings since I saw it
several of like man I think your
profound me miss apprehending it so
here's just one this is the one that
maybe yes that badly as you said that
George and Peterson doesn't work warns
against too much ordering and so it's
actually the opposite of that because
you want infinite ordering because
you're open to the chaos enough to where
you're constantly engaged in the process
of integrating information so you're
actually constantly ordering what he's
against is too much order which is the
opposite which is where you build a wall
and stop the process and just concern
yourself with what you've already mapped
and so anyway that's just an example of
where you've got something perfectly
backwards wrong and then it's like well
how can I trust anything you say so
there's that's that's not way just to
say it with that that's not that's not
like you know of course like you know
you can find these these particular
phrases but I don't think that's so out
of sync with what I was actually saying
right because I was saying that he
acknowledges you know so you refer to a
distinction between order and ordering
right and I mean the way you're
describing ordering it's the achievement
of a kind of mediation of chaos by order
right if I understand you properly right
sure well I wouldn't say actually no not
at my ammunition of cast by order of
mediation of chaos by the by the logos
but but nevertheless go ahead okay okay
well the logos is very involved in this
mediation
right that's that's um but but again I
don't think that that you know III I
very clearly acknowledge here you know
in terms of the logos that you know in
its characteristic of psychoanalysis in
general and particularly Union
psychoanalysis that however what however
one much tilts in the direction of order
and chaos in terms of their
interpretation of Jung or psychoanalysis
more generally that there's going to be
an acknowledgement of the sort of Co
determinate of nature of these processes
right so we can talk about order and
ordering or whatever right but again
this basic notion right of the
acknowledgment of a certain level of
chaos you know I do recognize that and I
think that's that's very primary to what
I'm trying to put forth right so I don't
like I'm not gonna I'm not gonna sit
here and just be you know the content of
you know a few lines that appeared in
Peterson's work or something like that
I'm not a Peterson scholar I don't think
many people are Peterson scholars though
I probably you know spent more time
reading his books then the vast majority
of his fans even but I will say that I
think the basic matrix that I'm positing
you know it's not suddenly rendered you
know totally invalid on the basis of
this sort of critique if it is I would
appreciate if you explain that well only
in only in that it's such a it's such
it's so core it's like to understand the
nature of what he means when he says too
much order it's like it's it's a it's
blood component of his teaching and so
if you get that wrong it's like anything
underneath its gonna be wrong okay so is
plain to me you have to explain to me
how that functions right because
ordering you said that he says stop
ordering that's not what he says and so
you're saying something he actually
didn't say okay but you have to explain
to me you have to explain to me the
importance of that to the systemic
structure that's being put forth well
because if it's happening at a surface
level which a nice one I mean my surface
level was like like that's a package
right
too much order that's a package and
then what underlies that is tons of
information but if you're expressing
your especially in that top layer wrong
it's like okay you're just repeating the
same thing when you're repeating this
what you're saying why do you have to go
deeper I mean I'm asking you to go
deeper right you may not have to go
deeper you may not feel you have to go
deeper but I'm so you know why that's
wrong okay because it's too much
ordering is to say that it's bad to be
ordering too much and is actually what
he's saying is it's good to be doing it
constantly so that that expression too
much ordering is and is it Nanak it's
the expression since leading okay but
the process of ordering involves the the
mediation of chaos right sure but I
don't see that's relevant
um it's not relevant well but it would
be relevant right because what it would
mean is that you know you can you can
refer to it in terminologically
different ways right you can say you
know the mediation of order and chaos or
the super proliferation of order as
ordering you know in this mediation but
again we're not talking about some if
we're talking about something really
fundamentally different I would just ask
you to illustrate very concretely why
you can this is something a lot of
Peterson fans do right you know is that
they take you know some kind of semiotic
slippage or something like that
you know and they say and they declare
someone the order is a noun ordering as
a verb it's like that's the chasm we're
dealing with man yeah that's good let's
go jump it time uh um I just wanted like
Conrad you was we have other people and
be sensitive to the questions like you
can if you want to maybe have a little
bit more of exchange here but I just
want to just check in the pulse pressure
okay Billy you had a question
yeah in in the the presentation you're
given I was kind of interested in the
role of the idea of being in accordance
with nature and just wondering about how
the idea of
of nature was for the Greeks versus
today with our with our evolutionary
psychology kind of perspective on things
because to me a big a big question is
whether we should be acting mainly in
service of our own pleasure while we're
here or if if we feel like medically if
we try if we make any attempt to go
against nature we will inevitably be
pushed back because it's kind of like
swimming upstream and that it will be
futile to do anything that goes against
these kind of like the mimetic try try
to create memes that don't flow in
accordance with what evolutionary
biology says we must behave according to
the laws of which I I see like things
like what Peterson says about about his
relation to nature as being kind of
about just the futility of trying to do
things that like in a game theory
perspective you're you're the memes that
tell you to go against nature will die
out so so what did the Greeks think of
nature and and I guess Marx as well well
so there's a lot in that question so I'm
just gonna maybe focus on the sort of
more succinct or concise way you put it
forth at the end just for starters you
know one thing that is elided a little
bit by this presentation is how
different in certain ways the modern
conception of nature is compared to the
ancient Greek one right so you know the
in ancient Greece you have the fuses
right which is different than the
conception of
of nature in the modern sense right sort
of something created by a cosmic
watchmaker or God or whatever you know
that can be sort of be mechanically
manipulated in this way so the fuses is
actually constantly in a process of a
certain kind of transformation right but
I think again what what even though you
had this idea of the fuses you still see
something very common within in ancient
Greek philosophy which is sort of the
metaphysical generalization of nature so
even if it's more kind of amorphous
portrayal you still have that that
strong tendency and I think the
importance of someone like Darwin in
this respect is that he furnishes
scientific justification for the
transform transform ability of nature
that doesn't function purely on the
level of a kind of metaphysical
supposition right if that makes sense
you know of course even Darwin is
precipitated by efforts to think you
know the transform ability of nature
against you know the more absolute
schemas that were common to in sort of
the empiricist ideologies emanating from
the English world so of course you can
talk about people like shelling or
Goethe for example in German Romanticism
you know showing associate with nature
philosophy Goethe also associate with
nature philosophy so you know again
prior to Darwin right we have an effort
a more speculative effort even within
that European context to think against
you know this more mechanical and
absolute conception of nature does that
do that hope it'll I guess I guess I
don't completely understand the
diffusive concept because it's it's very
different from what I have been kind of
raised with an understanding of but it
is if if we're trying to practice like
stoicism today it is
like there's a lot of knowledge about
about what nature is that has
transformed some of some of these ideas
and brought to light some understanding
of of the nature and and like to me to
me it is I've kind of been vacillating
between this idea of it's futile to to
try to do any project that is not
aligned with what appears to be the kind
of attractive attractor points of the
dynamics of evolution which means it's
kind of futile to go against like
hierarchies and stuff and Pareto
principle because we observe that that
is kind of an attractor that seems to
exist and and just it seemed like
Epicurus there is something about you
should be in accordance with nature but
not if certain other things happen and
and that the stoicism also had something
like that yeah yeah there are there are
exceptions that are placed into it for
sure I mean I think to try to get it
what you're saying about the notion of I
mean you talked about hierarchy and the
inevitability of that to our modern day
conception of nature and I think we have
to understand kind of the historical
specific idea - right so when when
Darwin is is writing you know one of the
things that Karl Marx observes about
Darwin is that in a certain way his work
is greatly influenced by Malthus right
now Malthus Minister classical political
economists you know sort of posited that
we have to you know it's preferable to
starve out the poor because of the
tendency of populations to proliferate
exponentially whereas food supplies
grow linearly which like if that were
ever true it would have been true in a
pre-industrial context right but the
point is there's actually a tension in
Darwin in the Origin of Species between
to what degree he's saying like the
strongest win and what degree he's
describing a more plastic and alia Tory
process right and so it's his cousin you
know Francis Galton really gets into
this with like survival of the fittest
and that proliferate sin - social
Darwinism in the 20th century but again
the part of the reason I'm not so
uncomfortable associating marks a bit
with Darwin is because I know that's not
the only way you can read Darwin right
um so there's something deeply retro in
a way when Peterson looks to nature and
always sees in it and it's no surprise
here that that sorry just went outside
but there's something very very retro
when Peterson looks to nature and all he
sees are these very very you know tidy
principles of hierarchy so tidy that
they can form with these pre given
mathematical structures apparently right
like if you look at Stephen Jay Gould
like if you look at the research he's
done on evolution his big sort of hot
take is that there's like a high level
of contingency that's involved right in
the evolutionary process you know and
that's quite credible scientifically so
I think I think generally the real
challenge of thinking stoicism today is
how do you how do you connect the Greek
notion of fuses is there a way of
connecting the Greek notion of fuses to
the more contingent and variable
portrayal of nature and evolution that
we see having overtaken to a large
extent today these more you know
hierarchical simplistically hierarchical
conceptions
now the simplistically hierarchical ins
conception still have a lot of currency
within popular culture but again within
science I don't think that's the
dominant element right does that does
that help could I take a stab at my
interpretation of Billie's question sure
sure
so what came to mind and what Billie is
asked
was kind of this example I visited a
monastery in Nepal and I tried to
meditate with the monks there and I
thought it was really interesting like
on the first day people are coming in at
5:00 a.m. and one guy would always try
to come in a little bit earlier the next
day and so on and by the time I'd left
three weeks later like it was like kind
of ever like the first guy was coming in
at 4:42 and I was kind of like kind of
intrigued by that that like that
starting point was going forward and
basically I'd asked him like what the
hell you doing they were competing to be
the first one there and what they were
spending their time doing was you know
obviously different aspects to Buddhism
often around yeah it was just it was it
was hilarious to see people learning
about kind of the limits and foolishness
of ambition and all of that and yet like
instinctively like without him them you
noticing like competing to try to be the
next Abbot by being you know the first
one there in the abbot having it praised
there's another meditation teacher named
John Yates behind a popular book called
mind illuminated and in spite of how
enlightened he got he recently kind of
lost his position because he was just
caught like sleeping with tons and tons
of prostitutes and so I guess maybe
that's what it is it's like you can try
to do all these things but you can't
like that you still have that animal
part of you and so in spite of your best
intentions that natural light or
whatever is still going to come out I
guess is Billy would that would that be
a better without being understand well
okay so here's here's something for you
like you know again and my supervisor
Catherine Malibu is working a bit on
this question now you know if you look
at what's the name of the book if you
look at the famous anarchist Peter
Kropotkin
he wrote a sort of very famous the title
alludes me now but it's a response to
you know the co-opting of Darwinism to
justify you know inequities social
hierarchies and what he discusses in the
book is the absolute essential 'ti of
the development of forms of social
cooperation both to evolution as well as
to the formation of different societies
so I guess you know when you talk about
the animal part right I think it's
already very very risky to is so
ta you know necessarily don't literally
on those words okay um but but this is
what I'm saying right like here's here's
what's interesting right because you're
talking about you know these sort of
values you know whatever I think or
anyone else thinks about these values
you're talking about how one should
overcome ambition and this kind of thing
well you know and I'm not not
attributing it to directly to you but
just saying if we're talking about these
higher-order moral concerns I think the
real question would be is it possible
that those are actually imminent to the
structure of nature so that there's a
way of updating the stoic conception of
nature so that you know it's not just oh
you have like a base selfishness then
you have this external you know set of
set of higher injunctions right can we
can we develop a conception of nature
that that you know supports a refinement
of this way of thinking in its totality
I guess another way then to respond to
that would be like Harare has this great
thing where he's like the most important
thing in my life is meditation
and if everybody meditated the way I did
like the role would be saved but
meditation is not scalable and so like
kind of to Billy's point like like
there's a minority of us who have enough
metacognitive power now enough ability
to take short-term pain for long-term
gain and apply knowledge over these
evolutionary impulses but to Billy's
point I guess it's like that's not
scalable because it comes in to contrast
with these evolutionary patterns and so
that would be the question I guess I'm
asking is is this inherently an
unscalable approach well maybe maybe
maybe it's not scalable maybe it is I
mean you know because I think that one
thing you know going back to the way
that Marx use biology and his early work
you know I think one thing we see is
that you know the UM you know I think I
think I think belief often functions you
know in its religious form as a crocks
for people who are going through very
very negative circumstances but I also
think that you know get like a less
dogmatic form of concern with these sort
of more elevated moral questions so
speak is more common amongst people who
already enjoy certain level of social
comfort right and we already see this
you know in North America like corporate
Buddhism okay you know like and so on
Madonna's Kabbalah and so on um and you
know without saying like well that's all
good right what I want to say is that I
think in a way if you're trying to
expose people to you know having the
time to reflect and kind of develop
themselves I think one way of
approaching it is you know what you know
Kent are we bestowing people with the
you know material conditions they need
to do that and are we creating an
intellectual culture in which those kind
of opportunities are in addition
available to to all people so I think
the question of scalability has to be
addressed very broadly in that way I
think the point from Billy if I
interpret correctly and the way I would
do is like it's exactly that even if you
were to get the norms right and even if
you were to do all the things you're
saying right it's the point here is what
if it still is only 10% of people yeah
well I mean what the way I mean is more
like if I analogize it to the idea of
not being in accordance with nature is
kind of like trying to swim upstream I
mean it's it's possible it's just you'll
get it you'll be there's a chance that
you'll be making all this effort and
just nature and and this this kind of
inherent and tropic principle of nature
will be working almost exactly well
maybe not exactly well maybe you'll make
some progress but it seems to me like
like there's lots of traditions that the
various extents what whether it's about
changes in society or changes in
yourself like like in in Zen practices
and as well as this stoicism and stuff
they all talk about a need to be in
accordance with nature versus some some
traditions
the idea is to is that
our nature is sinful and that what we
need to do is to try to escape from from
our nature in a way versus living in
harmony with it and I'm just and and
it's just that Jordan Peterson seems
because he's very interested in
evolutionary biology it seems like that
like this being in accordance with
nature is kind of part of the reason why
he makes a big deal out of oh this is
what we observe in nature and therefore
you should live in harmony and
acceptance of this being the way that
things are not necessarily that it's
impossible to go against them but that
you will live a more harmonious life if
you if you take it as a given that
things will go in a certain direction
before you respond Conrad I want to
sneak in one more question so if you can
respond that I'll call trumping do you
do you want to respond to build oh sorry
yeah I'll respond and then you're gonna
ask a question okay yeah so yeah I just
wanted to say very quickly you know I
think these are all interesting
questions I think in a way you know and
it's no mystery that you you know there
was a get a much more positive view of
religion than Freud did for example for
Freud it was a kind of collective
neurosis that's outlasted its
significance you know I mean ultimately
it's it's the terribleness of the world
which you know is supposedly
scientifically gauge able that causes
Peterson - you know positively evaluate
the need for these kind of somewhat
escapist spiritual notions not totally
right because of the the mediation of
order and chaos are ordering or whatever
I don't but I you know but I think what
it really speaks to again I consider
Peterson's concept is nature quite
limited and reductive and I think what
it really speaks to
that if you're going to if you're going
to base your philosophy on a conception
of nature which we see in a way is true
of all of Marx's work more directly in
the early work but even in the way to
work I said we see this parallel between
the fluidity of dialectic and the
fluidity of evolution that you have to
make pretty sure you have a good
conception of nature right and I think
that you know for stoicism especially
for this kind of discourse I think
that's a really good place to start is
is you know what what conception of
nature we're using so I just want to
just be honest at the time we have to
close up exactly ten minutes I got
another another call after this so the
question that I had is referring back to
the slide on the the white paper the
cultural white paper so first I'll say
like I have like I'm not attached to any
of the propositions on that paper it was
more sort of I viewed as a psychoactive
drug that could help people see like
that current culture landscape
differently instead of like a bipolar
world or as a multipolar world and then
the speculative proposals they were just
speculative number one and they weren't
a panacea but they were also selfishly
motivated or there's a selfish bias
there because when I wrote that paper
and I still today there's like you know
being not having a political home having
that feeling and and being this state of
a knowingness and just being like having
a thirst for real dialogue so I can
figure out what the heck is going on and
then especially then and now to the
environment when you think in public
this is what the felt sense that I had
is that there was a dangerous game to
play and not just from kind of like the
social justice activist but from all
kinds of medic tribes reactionary or
whatever it felt like you're being the
medically gaslighted and attacked for
thinking something that does not
correspond to what they believe to be
true and then there is this kind of
sense of making space we talk about
others as meta crisis where there's a
sort of like ecology of existential risk
and suffering risks and you know social
economic issues is definitely one of
them so I'm fully on board that we
need to have what you said a
socio-economic solution but I'm curious
how what do you think the role of good
dialogue is in regards to that which
those speculate proposals a lot of them
not all of them but a lot of the gesture
towards do you mean do you mean how do
you mean like do you mean good dialogue
like as regards socio-economic issues or
just can you frame that a little for me
yeah so so like let's say good dialogue
that will help resolve the medical
crisis including social economic issues
okay um I mean I think for me I think a
big problem is that you know there's a
real hesitancy it I think in our in our
world and and I don't necessarily
approach it narrowly and and you know so
naturalistically
but this is one thing I do you know kind
of like about Peterson's cynicism is I
think there's a real hesitancy you know
by anyone especially who has achieved
any level of privilege and I don't mean
that in like the SJW sense just you know
in general to acknowledge the important
role that forms of social determination
play in where we are right so if you
look in the United States your
likelihood of going to university is
exactly the same as the wealth level of
your parents right and you know again if
you get a discourse like philosophy
right I think a big part of the problem
is that most of the people who have the
ability to study philosophy are already
people who come from these you know more
affluent backgrounds you know if you
tell someone who comes from a more
socially mobile kind of bourgeois
background if you say well look you're
very socially determined I find they
almost always have a very negative
reaction to it um if you tell
working-class people that the reaction
is usually less negative because they
live that known that in many cases for
every day of their lives
and some way or another so again I think
the first step toward you know I see a
lot of these problems in terms of this
anger as being
driven by kind of abstract moral
presentation of how people develop these
views right and I think when you
consider how much were structured by our
communities how much were structured by
our families how much was destructed by
our level of wealth I'm we talking about
race gender so many things I think that
in a way it becomes easier in a certain
way to facilitate dialogue because
you're not just blaming people right you
know for the disposition that they have
right of course I do think people have
access to more education of more
responsibility to probe right because of
that that privilege that they're
bestowed with but I think it's very very
important when you engage with anyone to
try to appreciate how their positions
and including our own by the way right I
don't mean to say like one's gonna be a
philosopher God and helper above
everyone on the contrary it's very very
important to consider the way those are
structured by social factors but again
that also requires because you know
philosophy as a sort of bourgeois
discourse has this accept obsession with
kind of freedom and social flight I
think it requires a kind of remedial
intervention into philosophy you know to
try to accept social determination as a
way of addressing it and reducing it
right does that kind of make sense the
other may just double-check the time so
my understanding is that you need a
really good kind of social economic
analysis on people's sort of positions
so you get a feel of like the I guess
the privilege hierarchy and so then you
can address it accordingly
appropriately to the context yeah yeah
yeah and I think like I think you know I
think this this you know I I think this
is like very very common to how our
ideological structure works or you don't
really understand the implicit and we're
not encouraged necessarily to understand
the imperatives the drive different
groups right so again like you know you
look at now like this whole kind of you
know talk about breaking down a dialogue
if you look a little anti-china thing
that's emerging right it's like you know
and invariably we always look at China
and we say like and I'm not saying
everything is right or anything like
that but it's very easy to look at it
and say well they're not you know
liberal-democratic like us or whatever
um but it's like wait how did our
republics emerge
was that peaceful you know because I'm
pretty sure it wasn't when we were that
dis unified right so when you actually
situate something like the Chinese
political project in a certain kind of
socio-economic structure you know it's
not like saying well this is just good
right but it gives you a basis to
actually have an honest dialogue you
know and I think the same you know if
you're approaching anyone like someone
from an older generation men and women
across social classes I think it really
really helps have that framework right
right so you're gonna just appropriately
one thing terms that I like it was like
civility porn and then I think another
would be like dialogue porn he looks
like by a sort of proselytizing dialogue
in a certain way that's tone-deaf from
you know certain kind of different
analysis then I think that could be
dangerous or not productive so let's
wrap it up there Conor have any closing
thoughts for us yeah yeah I think I
think you know I just want to stress
that you know it makes sense if someone
is trying to defend you know somewhat
you know kind of strictly sort of rigid
conceptions of social hierarchy that
they would appeal to those kinds of
ideas in nature and you know again I
think I think nature is is is but I do
think nature is much more variable than
we give it credit for
there's a lot of potential for flux
contingency radical change and so forth
and I just want to you know I want to
point out you know if we talk about
Peterson very often
he uses the word merit right you know we
need societies based on merit well this
is very interesting right where does the
term merit come from right and you know
if you look at the term merit basically
it comes from this I
yeah and this is laid out explicitly in
an address made by the founder of seals
Paul when he launched the university he
says you know we're no longer us rich
people us aristocrats we're no longer
going to be able to dominate society
just based on our vested privilege so we
have to begin to acquire merit right you
know in order to justify our ongoing
domination now the term meritocracy
actually comes from a parody write a
satirical work of this sort of ideology
this kind of bourgeois rationalization
of social domination on the basis of
merit rather than vested privilege so
again I think you know there's the pub
there is a I think it can be very
compelling to try to you know and
worthwhile right to try to look at the
structure of nature as a way of posing
the question of how we ought to behave
are you not dismissed that but I think
we have to be very very careful about
the way that a lot of people you know
when they look at nature what they see
is a rationalization of the dominant
social order or paradoxically just a
rationalization for you know a kind of
intellectually pallid leftist politics
and that's the risk I mean mark says and
his early work he says you know the
problem with the German force is when
you showed in to them they don't show
back right so you know I think we need
to pursue the question of nature but we
have to be very very sensitive about how
it can be manipulated when we pursue it
cool awesome so I'll make some
announcements for upcoming events but
Conrad thanks so much for coming to the
stoah and taking on the Stoics
understand your own territory I love it
um I'm gonna well people here by the way
now cuz you know everything is good that
happens in small numbers like Olympics
stole the Jesus Christ and His
disciples well okay this is this is
important right here we good we arrived
we arrived my friend so uh upcoming
events tonight at 10:00 p.m. Eastern
Time our first raw sexuality series with
maybe gray she's doing this new sense
making series at the stone
she kind of talks to all these people
and sex worker who talk about sexuality
and this one's called no filter with
conve at the filmmaker New York
filmmaker conveys the heady coffee is a
friend of the story's been on before
he's like a really super meta filmmaker
he was a this is some called I'm a sex
addict that kind of like chronicled his
journey into sex work and then out of it
so that's gonna be really juicy
discussion definitely check that out
and tomorrow James karst author of
finite and infinite gains is gonna be at
the stoah and he's gonna do a session
called playing the infinite game during
a meta crisis that's at 3 p.m. Eastern
Time so that's gonna be dope check that
out
I guess I'll plug this one to the
dangerous space so we talked about
setting like a safe space we talked
about dangerous ideas that will get
people cancelled if it's recorded
that's a June 20th at 12:00 p.m. Eastern
Time you know I receive do that all
right
and this Louis based off a gift economy
we're it's I just revamp the gift
economy website I love it so if you want
to give me the stole or any other
facilitators a gift directly feel free
to do it and we view this dough as a
gift for us to use in this time of need
that being said thank you so much for
coming out today you want a debrief for
like two minutes
yeah sure