[Music]
obviously you've spent quite a long time
inside sort of world of what you called
grievance studies and post-modernism I'm
really interested in what you've learned
during that time and what you think
I mean how important do you think this
or how how serious do you think this is
is a something we need to look at and
what do you think are the main
characteristics of post-modernism or
this kind of scholarship and that well
the main characteristics of it are a
belief in the cultural constructiveness
of knowledge so knowledge isn't
something that's out there to be found
it's something that humans make with
their language and this works in the
service of power so particularly the
postmodern ideas will go against
Christianity but also Marxism and also
science they will say these have own
view power they're accepted as truths
they're dangerous and they want to pick
them all apart so because of that we see
understandings of categories that we've
accepted as distinct as actually
blending into each other the things like
facts and fiction reason and emotion
we're not separating these in
post-modernism there's that really
intense focus on language as as
dangerous as a constructor of things we
and we've got quite a loss of both
humanism and individuality we're not to
see each other as fellow human beings
with individual characteristics that we
can like dislike agree with disagree
with now it's all about knowledge as
attached to identity so a black person
will have authoritative knowledge on
racism and she just has to be believed
of course the problem with this
immediately is that if you have to black
people and ask them a question they're
not going to agree because they are
actually individuals so that's what
we're seeing quite a lot from from
post-modernism I think it is a serious
problem not in the extent that it's a
majority belief but I think it's it's
coming into wider society we've lost
quite a lot of the X
to give evidence for a claim to make it
reasoned and to be able to talk to each
other on them on the basis of ideas
we're seeing more and more that people
are asking more who are you a straight
white man to to address this issue
that's in complete contradiction to the
liberal marketplace of ideas so I am
concerned about it but I think what
worries me most is that people don't
really understand how it works because
it's so counterintuitive and I think we
need to break it down and make the
people able to get at it and then we'll
be able to counter it do you get a sense
that things are starting to shift
because there's it's certainly seem that
there's more awareness of this in the
culture than there was before and do you
get a sense that things are starting to
shift and and people's minds are
starting to change around this yes I'm
just worried about where it's going to
shift to because since about 2010 but
really escalating over the last few
years the social justice ideas have got
stronger more assertive and clearer so
people can get at them that's the good
thing we can now see what they are and
we can argue with them without being
accused of straw Manning there's no
obscurantist language or ambiguity it's
very clear and the bad thing about this
is that it's it's highly contagious
young idealistic students particularly
can grasp this and and absorb it but I
think that that does move us into the
stage of of pushback of culture war
rather than cultural confusion which has
been what we're seeing so my concern at
the moment is that I think there's going
to be a big pushback at social justice
and I want it to come from the liberal
left rather than the populist right and
I see at the moment people surging
writers in the UK and the u.s. we've had
a surgery we have conservative parties
in now people are expressing less
confidence in left-wing parties and I
think this is partly to do with the kind
of social justice ideas that are coming
from them so I want the liberal left to
push back at them otherwise I fear that
the anti intellectual right the populist
right could become more attractive to
more people
it could even push back racial equality
gender equality
LGBT equality and that is is what we
want to try and stop what I do what does
that look like a pushback from the left
and the center left I think it looks
like an unembarrassed assertion of
belief in the marketplace of ideas in
science in reason in evidence in
progress you know it's supposed to be
embarrassingly naive now to believe in
enlightenment ideas and that's because
they are presented so childishly and in
sort of it sort of caricature by the
social justice left but actually if we
are looking at how these I'd what these
ideas have done for society the idea of
universal liberalism of requiring
evidence to make a truth claim of
requiring our arguments to be reasoned
these are not embarrassing ideas and the
progress they have made is measurable so
we need liberals to be confident enough
in saying I don't accept your
epistemology I don't accept your ethics
these are the ones I do accept and I
think that would cause reasonable people
who have gone right to come back I think
that's all we can do to win them back
and isn't there a really difficult
needle to be threaded here because I'm
assuming when you say we need to push
back into these social justice ideas
what people were hear you saying is I
want to push back against social justice
isn't that the catch-22 that it is
that's why and we've written so many
pieces like no identity politics does
not continue the work of the civil
rights movement it's actually being
helped at the moment that so many social
justice people are critical of
liberalism so they're not calling
themselves liberals and in America lit
that they tend to lump liberal with the
social justice left and that's a bit
more confusing but over here we're doing
better with distinguishing liberals from
identitarian but you just I think we
just have to keep spelling that out very
clearly and this is this is what James
and I have done in our book at the end
we do believe that racial equality
matters we do believe we are not there
yet
we don't believe this is the way to do
it so I think we just have to keep on
spelling out you can you can focus on
social justice you can think the society
is unjust and you want to fix that
without going for a social justice
movement approach which is rooted in
postmodern ideas so is the problem not
with the ideas but with the ideology or
is it in the ideas but at the root cause
we're with them they want racial
equality they want gender equality so
that those core values are there they're
shared by everybody on the left and
quite a few people on the right so it's
not those that are the problem it is the
way of distinguishing what is a problem
and what isn't the way of reading
assuming that racism will be in
everything assuming that sexism will be
and then reading things in order to find
them and you know wanting to censor
people wanting to have culturally
relative ethics ignoring the individual
the individual and that and the whole
sort of humanist ideal that's that is
the problem that I think it's clear is
just going to make more divisions and
make it harder to address any problems
that are there I mean I do see a lot of
my friends who are in a lot of these
kind of activist communities that were
sort of very heavily social justice
ideology influenced starting to realize
at the very least it's tactically not
working that it's creating the the wrong
in like you could argue that as heavily
influential in the election of Trump you
could argue it was heavily influential
and brexit this sort of sense of shaming
and kind of judging a lot of people who
didn't think the same way about social
justice and diversity issues I do see
that happening I do wonder whether it's
going to be fast enough and what the
medium term because the medium term
effect looks almost certain to be the
re-election of Trump as far as I can see
because what you're seeing in America is
just this doubling down on the left of
oh wow it's far more racist and sexist
and bigger to than we ever realized
while it seems quite clear to me that a
lot of the reaction is anti political
correctness that's why people
voting for Trump so I do see that
happening in some of these communities
but I also wonder if it's going to
happen fast enough I have a bit more
hope for the UK because we have a
stronger Socialist Left it's been bigger
and and more well-established and it's
getting more positive towards the left
liberals there is productive
conversation going on between centrists
left liberals and economic leftist
socialist lefties so I think that we
could between us push out the
identitarian left I think that could
happen I'm not sure that could happen in
the u.s. because they have a different
relationship with socialism they have
the whole red scare thing going on there
they are their economic left hasn't got
the prestige to actually stand up and
push back at the identitarian left and a
lot of Americans centrists and
right-wingers can't even don't even know
there's a difference so I think it's
much more messy there I don't think this
is going to be a quick fix in the US and
you're a professor of philosophy at
Portland University you're probably best
known for Portland State Portland State
University are probably best known for
the what's called the grievant studies
papers can you give a little bit of a
background on that what and how how
would you introduce yourself well before
I did the grievance Studies thing I was
heavily involved in the atheist movement
and so to understand the grievance
studies I think it's really important to
understand the rise and fall of the
atheist movement so grievance studies we
submitted us James Lindsay Helen pluck
Rose and I over 10 months wrote around
250,000 words in 20 papers and we
submitted them to peer-reviewed journals
to test the process to whistle blow if
you will to see if intentionally broken
absurd papers would get published and
seven more published or and accepted by
the time the Wall Street Journal found
out about it and then we came clean and
seven more were
review and the idea there was to expose
shoddy scholarship corrupt scholarship
agenda-driven scholarship but one of the
things we realized from coming from the
Atheist movement was that social justice
with an uppercase s and uppercase J had
it really is a parasitic ideology and it
had woven its way ironically enough into
the Atheist movement and caused schisms
and fractures within that movement and
so what we did was the purpose of
writing those was to test our own ideas
maybe these folks are onto something
that we haven't figured out maybe they
really there really is something there
and the way to do that was to call pen
testing penetration testing to see if it
works so we wrote those papers and then
we now have our answer to that question
because I mean that there I've seen sort
of strong criticisms of that I think
there was an editorial in The Times
Literary Supplement maybe and some
people saying that what you proved
wasn't what you said that you've proved
and I'm sure there's there's other
people who've questioned what you did
have you had any dialogues with your
books about impossible conversations if
you had any dialogues with your critics
over this dialogues no I mean I've been
brought up on trial and I would been
brought up three times and I'm about to
be brought up again for additional
ethical violations and charges and that
conversation starter that conversation
remains on the table when we did the
James - more of that with Helen pluck
Rose and Heather Haim and I at PSU we
invited folks from the Women's Studies
department to come and have that
dialogue they didn't we invited them two
days later to come with Helen pluck Rose
and James Lindsay and myself
they didn't come we invited them two
days later a February 19th with James
Lindsay and Helen pluck Rose and myself
to come to that conversation they didn't
when we did the mythos is Milwaukee
event we tried to find someone from the
Women's Studies departments are people
who have published in this area
specifically or any adjacent areas and
grievin studies we couldn't find anybody
to have a conversation with us and that
is on the table that offer to have a
congress not a debate but a conversation
although the mrs. this Milwaukee was a
debate but we can't find anybody to have
a who's willing to have a conversation
with us and one of the things we talk
about in the book is you can't force
someone to have a conversation with you
if you they don't want to have a
conversation that you can't you know
kidnap them and stick them at a table
because this I think is a really good
place to start because we're actually
talking about a real world example of
either impossible conversations or those
conversations not being had and what why
do you think that no one wants to talk
to you about this it could be that they
view me as an inherently disagreeable
fellow it could be fear of losing an
argument it could be platforming which
is another idea that's very common we
don't want to give someone who has a
different belief a platform it could be
my strongest suspicion is that these
folks don't know the other side of the
argument and so they've been
indoctrinated they don't value open
discourse dialogue reasons Socratic
interactions they look at education as
an ideology mill and their agenda driven
that's my strongest conjecture
I'm not positive of the percentage of
the role like in a pie chart like how
big of a cut of pie that would be but
I'm fairly confident it's a sizable cut
of that pie so you're you're basically
asking for someone to discuss with now I
hope someone does come out that's
basically what the letter wiki project
is about having those conversations and
matching up people with opposing views
so I hope we will call someone out now
I'll try and put some of the criticisms
that someone might raise to you and but
I think it would be much better if
someone from that that environment came
oh let me pause you right there and say
not just anybody because people say well
you're punching down why haven't you had
a conversation with someone who's
published in these areas
so I'm happy to have a conversation with
somebody who specifically published in
the journals in which we hoax might not
be exactly the the best word but the the
person with whom I'm having that
discussion they need to they can't be a
random person so they need to have some
qualifications to be able to speak in
the area and that looks like ideally
that they would replicate what we did if
you have you know a bunch of
peer-reviewed publications in the
journals in which we publish
Hypatia would be a great one then Helen
pluck rose James Lindsay and myself my
fellow co-authors would be happy to have
that conversation with you and I've seen
you on Twitter talked about the fact
that you find it quite peculiar or or
unusual even a got enemies house how's
it been for you over the last kind of
couple of years of they're having more
increased prominence with the grievant
Studies thing and realizing a lot of
people are not happy with that it is it
is quite difficult in in some ways I
mean I I can deal with people telling me
I'm on one side they tend to tell me I'm
a Nazi and a fascist on the other side
they tend to point out I'm fat so I can
I can deal with those kind of random
insults but there are committed stalkers
so it's sort of and I have to block a
lot of people and then there is just
this kind of collective of people who
just really seem to put an awful lot of
energy into misinterpreting everything I
say presenting it in the least
charitable way screenshotting things out
of context and it just really is quite
disturbing to know that there are people
who will put this much energy into
attacking things that I don't mean I
haven't having it said and would
actually be delighted if something
terrible what's happened to me that
that's quite an uncomfortable thought
and I'd somebody came back to me when I
said this on Twitter and she said we you
get what you give you're a deeply
unpleasant person I thought that isn't
really true if I got what I give what I
would get is
people telling me that my my pistol
knology my ways of knowing are wrong and
that my ethics are wrong they would be
polite they would respond to what I
actually said I could deal with that
what I can't deal with is people today
yeah today apparently I
I supported Nazis because I said that
nearly everybody wants good things for
society and so that was taken off from
runway and it's it's just really
difficult to took it bothers me I think
the other two are better at ignoring
than I am I feel like if something is
being presented wrongly I have to I have
to put it right and that's something
I've got to stop doing there's one other
thing I'd like to raise about there's a
lot of I see a lot of accusations of bad
faith being lobbed around and yeah
grifter and bad faith and also I mean
I'm interested I unpack that I also see
the accusation of bad faith it almost
from people on in the center and maybe
the center right and it almost seems the
equivalent of the kind of no platforming
coming from the left do you do you think
I mean my sense is that if someone is
genuinely arguing in bad faith surely we
can we can have a discussion and that
that will be exposed if that's the case
I have no problem with I know this is
sound weird but I have no problem with
someone arguing in bad faith that that's
not my problem
look so let's oh you just said a huge a
lot so let's unpack that the first thing
you said well my response that we said
was grifter so that's a term I'm accused
of grifting constantly and when I first
heard it I was so baffled by it because
I thought it was you receiving some kind
of remuneration financial money or
something and I was baffled by it
because I did the grievant Studies thing
for no money that New Atheism I didn't
app atheists for no money all the stuff
I don't have a patreon I don't have a
PayPal I haven't taken a penny for me I
could not understand where this grifting
accusation came from and I keep thinking
well just maybe I don't understand and I
was incorrect
I didn't understand it I was correct
that I didn't understand it
so grifting means the and correct me if
you want to throw out another
interpretation of this it means that
there's some idea in the zeitgeist that
you have latched on to not because you
happen to believe it but because you
think it gives you social and maybe even
intellectual currency to advance that
idea so the the problem with that is one
it assumes that people know your
motivations that is the only you can
know your motivations the other problem
with that is it's a convenient excuse to
not do intellectual work to engage their
arguments so someone has just said
something they've made an argument
grifter or Nazi right so you you we have
a little label a smear label we play
someone in a box don't have to engage
it's a way it's an anti dialectical tool
that people use to avoid argument or
engaging ideas at all so that's the
first thing the second thing you said
what was the second thing again is it a
bad faith yeah the arguments in bad
faith yeah or refusing to engage with
people because you you've already pre
decided that everything that they're
saying is in bad faith which I've seen
on all sides of the of the aisle yeah I
think ok so let's take a look at that if
refusing to engage with somebody because
you believe that they're a bad faith
actor is one thing but engaging with
someone you believe is acting in bad
faith is another so the problem I I see
the more egregious problem by far of
refusing to engage some someone because
you think they're acting in bad faith in
my experience I have found that that is
because people are intellectually afraid
there's a kind of fear response so
that's why they don't want to engage and
they'll use anything as a convenient
excuse to justify not engaging yeah yeah
I'd agree with that with the with the
the examples that I'm thinking
about and I also wanted to ask as well
because you're you are quite quite
heavily criticized on Twitter I saw a
few kind of backwards and forwards and I
know that Eric Weinstein and Sam Harris
have talked about this quite a lot that
actually be again especially Sam is
obviously attacked quite a lot and he
feels that he's actually his sense
making is getting worse and worse
because he's finding it more and more
difficult to distill the good quality
criticism from the bad quality criticism
do you worry about that do you think
that might be happening to you as well
I worried deeply deeply about that that
is one of my primary concerns one of my
primary concerns is I've gotten so much
rage and hatred that I've just tuned
those people out but yet I desperately
need those people I have to have those
voices - that's the corrective mechanism
in my head that takes in that of
delusion but when everyone is telling me
I'm a moron a grifter and a Nazi
constantly it it's we all need that
feedback to keep ourselves in check and
as much as I have tried to not invoke a
defensive posture I even find myself
tone policing things and I can't stand
that about myself but yet I don't know I
really don't know what to do about that
because everybody myself included you
know when you take strong stances about
things you absolutely need feedback from
the other side but when that feedback
come comes in terms of as Nietzsche said
you know philosophizing with a hammer
when you're just getting hammered all
the time it's very difficult to
sincerely reflect on your to take those
comments and sincerely reflect on those
those ideas so I'm deeply concerned
about that do you have any thoughts of
any solutions to that wiki letter
there's one having a place where you can
go where the conversations are more
civil I'm also deeply concerned that I
have muted people who
I really would like to hear what they
say but all I'm getting is sworn out and
told them and moron constantly I don't
really know what the solution is other
than listening first and being willing
to have conversations with those folks
and then I think that does get back to
this idea that when that people are
acting in bad faith and when you go to
have a conversation with them it's it's
meant as some kind of a trap to
humiliate you as opposed to really get
to the root of the problem
I don't really know on a large scale via
social media I don't really know what to
do about that and what would you say
what was your kind of journey to
becoming concerned about this or
becoming really aware of this but I went
back to university quite late and I
studied English literature and we
learned post-modernism and I immediately
had a lot of disagreements with that my
my tutors to their credit were very
patient with my disagreements but I I
found it increasingly difficult to do
anything that didn't use theory so we
were taught ways of reading and so you
can read a text through a post-colonial
lens or through a feminist lens and the
idea is confirmation bias pick out the
bits of the text that fit your narrative
make it work and this this is a good
thing so I was quite concerned about
that then at postgraduate I was I was
reassured that one of my professors said
to me we're not doing post-modernism
it's silly however when I then attempted
to write an essay about the benefits of
evolutionary psychological literary
analysis I by doing a reading of a
fellow I was told that I was very
problematically destiny women to a
beauty myth and that the their studies
that I'd shown which says racism is not
innate and can be overcome by shared
goals was actually very problematic to a
black communities in America I was
talking about 1601 in England but these
ideas they they couldn't be
they weren't allowed so I got the lowest
grade I'd ever got with anything that
was made clear to me that if I tried to
bring science the biology into things
that autumn I didn't instead use the
approved types of theories that I
couldn't get a masters and who who are
the sort of central thinkers and central
ideas of post-modernism I mean a lot of
people probably aware of it through
Jordan Peterson kind of talking about it
a lot and he mentions Foucault and
Derrida a lot but but I think you'd
include a few thinkers who've come after
them will you yeah we see the three
waves of it so at the beginning yet
there was Beaudry of light our Foucault
Derrida and and several others and they
they came from different places but they
had the same kind of ideas about power
knowledge and language then in the late
80s there was a second wave of this
because the first lot they were fairly
aimless they were despairing they wanted
to pull things apart they didn't have
any plans to put them back together
again so in around 1989 1990 we had
Judith Butler we had kimberlé crenshaw
we see him post-colonialism Gayatri
Spivak and homi Bhabha and people these
kind of theorists who are suddenly
putting post modern ideas post
structuralist ideas specifically into a
kind of activism so kimberlé crenshaw
is the best for this because she was so
explicit about it in her foundational
text for intersectionality she
essentially what she described it as
contemporary politics linked to
postmodern theory and she said that what
was good about post-modernism was seeing
everything as a cultural construct and a
construct of power but we can't have
everything being constructed some things
have to be real some things have to be
objectively true if we're going to
anything so - this next wave of
theorists there were still the cultural
constructivism but the systems of power
and privilege were objectively true so
this has now made a way in which people
can can do activism can do scholarship
they assume that it is always there
there is always a power imbalance
between people with different identities
and the idea is to get at it look at it
and pull it apart and that works in
different ways in the different fields
and then at around 2010 we've seen a
further solidification of this and it's
got much more it's got clearer we
haven't got that sort of obscure
language and much more assertive and so
we see in the work of people like
Barbara Applebaum and Alison Bailey and
Robyn D'Angelo there is just an
assertion this is how it is you are
white you are racist you can't help but
be racist you know this is absolute
certainty which wouldn't have come with
the original postmodernist they were
radically skeptical and uncertain of
everything so it's a kind of
solidification of post-modernism I'm
hearing some echoes of what Jordan
Pederson says about post-modernism which
is that postmodern limited it
post-modernism itself doesn't give you a
value system so what they're doing is
smuggling in Marxism and he talks about
neo Marxism and post-modernism being or
post-modernism being a new disguise for
for neo Marxism do you agree with that
or do you disagree I disagree with that
you won't find any economic or class
analysis in the kind of thing that we're
we're seeing at the moment and that that
really is at the bottom of of Marxism
rather than smuggling anything else in
what has happened is that ideas have
solidified so it has become more
totalitarian but it isn't it's not it's
not hiding anything else that the
Marxists and socialist materialist
scholars are really not very happy with
the post modernists at all and there's a
constant battle going on between it
the two of them because the one the
Marxists they want to look at economics
they want to look at class they want to
look at law and solid things in society
material reality and society of it's
affecting people and to them all of this
focus on race sexuality and gender is a
bourgeois attempt to remove the issues
from the working class
take them into the universities and then
squabble about higher earning people and
who's doing better than than each other
so the Marxists really are not fans of
post modernists but the other way round
the post modernists will occasionally
cite Marxists or give credit to Marxists
because anti capitalism is one of their
their aims but it's not a dominant one
there isn't much support for
working-class white men because I
because I would argue I mean I'm
interested in this as well that what joy
and I wonder whether this is a kind of
terminology things I think what Jordan
Peterson here I'm talking about is the
idea of equity the idea of collectivism
and I wonder whether there might be a
common that is not the neo-marxist um is
in forming post-modernism but there's
some sort of common ancestor or some
common habit of thought which wants
equity which once - yeah so it's not
that there is actually Marxism it's that
there may be some common ancestor or a
common way of thinking well I think I
think there is in philosophical terms
which which I don't get into because I'm
not that one informed on it but there
certainly Hegel in there with his whole
sort of slave master things so that that
underlies both of whom that could be a
common ancestor we have got the idea of
oppressed and oppressor classes and
about power structures so it isn't I
think that the first post modernists
were disillusions
Marxists but it has gone in a completely
different direction with different
methods different ways they're obtaining
knowledge and so I think it is less
useful to point out the common
commonalities
as to point out the differences because
if you try arguing with a postmodernist
on Marxists grounds they're just going
to agree with you they don't they don't
believe what the Marxists believe so it
really is quite important and it's not
that difficult to understand how
knowledge and language and and power are
conceived in post-modernism itself and
is there an issue here with so we've
talked about the tensions a little bit
in the dialogue itself and the idea of
having these open dialogues or having
these conversations for example on
letter and elsewhere that the hardcore
postmoderns we've done a postmodernist
don't actually believe in that as a way
of arriving at truth can you explain
that and Peter said something
interesting in the interview with me
which is that he would prefer to argue
with any religious thinker because they
are they are at least schooled in the
arguments against their perspective like
they've every every theologian would be
able to put both sides of the case
whereas he's not sure that most post
modernists are no I mean that the
problem that we're seeing now and
particularly in the last 10 years is
that there is a belief that anybody who
doesn't agree with the ideas of social
justice is capital S capital J the
movement is either fragile or trying to
preserve privilege if your understanding
of how truths in society works is that
there are all these different discourses
and some of them are just accepted as
true and then they run through everybody
anybody who tries to argue with you will
simply be seen as not having overcome
this discourse not having become woke to
it so you cannot really argue with that
and in in our book what we look at three
cases of this in which it is argued very
straightforwardly that anybody who
disagrees that society is formed this
way is shouldn't be engaged with they
haven't understood they're ignorant so
there are these words like like white
ignorance and white fragility and
they're all sort of built to
to explain why this agreement isn't
valid so we've opened D'Angelo in
particular white fragility the ways you
can show you are fragile
there's there's three of them it can be
by disagreeing with her by leaving or by
being quiet therefore the only way not
to be fragile is to stay put and agree
that she's right this isn't something
that a marketplace of ideas come come
work with yeah and I want to pick up you
kind of hinted at it there and I think
we we discussed the other day why you
think this is so dangerous why you think
that the intersectionality code is so
dangerous because it actually shuts down
these dialogues that's exactly correct
there is no first Peter 3:15 there's no
apologetic not I'm sorry I'm sorry for
the faith my faith but a defense a
robust defense of the faith that's why
there can never be an analog of a
William Lane Craig of intersectionality
a great defender of intersectionality
because well they don't value dialogue
they don't value discourse they don't
it's a different value system that they
have coming into it they also don't tend
to hold to the correspondence theory of
truth so that beliefs stand in some kind
of isomorphic relationship to truth they
they don't and most importantly they
don't study the other side of the issue
they don't learn about what are the
arguments against intersectionality
where it's any literally any every
Christian apologists will do that
they'll know the arguments for and
against atheism inside/outside and
backwards and why they fail now why they
think they fail so they'll be able to
articulate that intersectionality and
those proponents of intersectionality
don't have that value I mean that's a
really interesting point but not really
considered before I just wanted to
unpack the first thing you said there
about the I think the religion
comparison is really interesting because
it does it does illustrate I think you
said to me before that every every sort
of junior and theology and theologian in
a seminary would know the arguments
to to rebut the the kind of atheist case
but that's not the case with
intersectionality not even those at the
top of the top of the pyramid they don't
learn the other side of the issue and
they don't learn it by intention and
design and because they don't learn it
they certainly don't teach it so it's
again it's an ideology mill of
self-replicating dogma but making
matters works it's become
institutionalized a sliver a very small
group of people have managed to
institutionalize their dog and I throw
out the university system and it's
literally literally crippling the system
the system is hobbled and crippled by
third-rate ideologues to be blunt and
what are you hoping for going forward I
mean I think you've sketched out a lot
of your fears going forward what are you
hoping for going forward I'm hoping that
we can get a kind of I kind of push back
from from the middle that liberal
leftist and liberal righties people who
value science reason and evidence and
consistent principles if give equal
opportunities for everyone can actually
push back the people on their own sites
that are causing the problems that they
can and say to the populace no this
isn't an ethical conservatism that I
want to say that we can say to the
social justice activists this is not
action for social justice and we can try
and push it out and and have what I
would like is a left-wing party that
respects reasonable conservatives but
you know something that that isn't this
current polarizing madness Helen thank
you very much for making the time yeah
thanks for talking to me
rebel wisdom is a new sense making
platform bringing together the most
rebellious and inspiring thinkers from
around the world if you're enjoying our
content then you can help us make more
by becoming a subscriber which will give
you access to a load of exclusive films
also you can then join our group zoom
calls to discuss the ideas in the films
and you can send us ideas for questions
for upcoming interviews we're also
looking for talented people to help us
out with editing graphics music that
kind of thing and if you're a regular
viewer you'll know we talk a lot about
the value of embodying or actually
living out the ideas that we talk about
so that's why we run regular events in
London check out the links on the
website for more and hope to see you
soon
you