howdy this is Jim rut and this is the
Jim rut show this is the Jim rut show
I'm Jim rut your host today's guests is
Simon de deo Simon is assistant
professor at Carnegie Mellon University
in the Department of social and decision
sciences he directs the laboratory for
social minds he is also external faculty
at the Santa Fe Institute Simon could
you give us a brief overview of the
department and your lab all right well
thanks Jim social decision sciences it's
Department here at CMU where we mix
together the economic and psychological
so we're interested in how people buy
and sell obviously we're interested in
how businesses work how markets work but
we're also interested in how the mind
works and in particular how the unusual
workings of the mind intersect with the
markets in ways you might not expect we
tend to think of ourselves at least when
we operate economically as rational
people money is on the line and so we
should behave well we mostly don't
behave well particularly when we're
confronted with situations that are
somewhat counter to the things that our
culture evolved to handle so out of this
comes behavioral economics and this
comes Thinking Fast and Slow behavioral
heuristics and we're interested in the
ways that those things go right in fact
a lot of the snap decisions we make
actually are pretty good and we're also
interested in the way those things go
wrong I come out of the Santa Fe
Institute and when I was a postdoc there
I wanted to study the ways in which the
way we think scales up to the way our
cultures work and at the time we did not
have access to a psychological lab we
couldn't do tests Mechanical Turk was
pretty young and so I ended up turning
to large-scale archives so things
sticking around in places that
historians tend to look as opposed to
psychologists from there we ended up
working mostly in text because we don't
usually keep very structured records of
stuff that happened in the past we tend
to write down things that people say so
the lab today we work on a range of
projects some of these are contemporary
so we look at online behavior we have a
big project now on the men's seduction
movement with Chloe Perry we have a
project on the evolution of mathematical
theorems so in fact now mathematicians
are able to prove their
essentially by writing a computer
program so we can look at the syntax
trees and out of that we understand
something more about the proof that the
square root of two is irrational and we
work with some really big and deep data
sets so a big paper that we had last
year was on the French Revolution people
kept records and transcripts of the
debates that were held in that
Parliament we've looked at the long time
school evolution of the Criminal Court
system the bureaucracy of the court is
much younger than the need to actually
solve our problems to punish people who
do wrong and to redress things in a way
to keep society going and so in fact
most of the way we did justice certainly
before let's say the 20th century was by
talking to through so in each of these
cases were looking not at a spreadsheet
so much as a set of manuscripts and
those manuscripts can get very very big
so in the case of online behavior we're
running a model right now that has 100
million bulletin board posts and close
to half a billion words French
Revolution that long ago 40,000 speeches
hundreds of thousands of words and so
you might say we do data science but a
lot of what we do actually is much more
focused on the cognition of that process
so the way people think and how the way
people think scales up into the way of
culture things extremely interesting I'm
my professional life back before I got
involved in science most of my projects
were involved in text also we were
always in a say back in the 80s in a
small corner of Technology people
dealing with text right I know I wrote a
couple of full text search engines back
in the day I wrote an automated spell
checker in the early days really crude
automatic tagging systems for my topic
etc and only in the last 15 years has
text processing really come into its own
yeah I think 2010 maybe we had
algorithms that came out in the early
2000 so famously something called topic
modeling and just the ability to use a
computer to process a large archive when
it's sitting on your desk really changed
things even interact directly with some
of the objects that come out of those
algorithms it's funny in the end when we
want to get something done we usually
come
talk it over right there's a reason
there's the financial district and it's
not just the light speed travel time of
a of a market trade we think of
ourselves as computers but I think we're
more talkers than calculators I think
that's right
we're not very good calculators because
we know a dollar ninety five calculator
can beat our ass right but so far nobody
has been able to automate this course in
a way you know good enough to fool
another person
I think machine has trouble making a
restaurant reservations and the other
one not quite linguistic but it's kind
of procedural as the Wozniak test for
artificial general intelligence Steve
Wozniak the Apple guy proposed one track
which I like which is to be able to take
your robot plunk it down in any random
kitchen in America and have it
relatively seamless figure out how to
make and actually make a cup of coffee
it's something most humans could do
without any great distress right it's
the kind of multi-variant
pruning rule kind of problem that you
know if a robot could do that we'd say
pretty damn smart quick question on the
text processing do you work with the
linguistics technology people and
Carnegie Mellon has probably the bastard
arguably the bastard number two
Department I would say the best chip so
LTI language technology it's a fantastic
place and you might say they build the
Jets and we fly them so we're much less
interested in the high tech side a lot
of our algorithms that we use or maybe
even 10 or 15 years old that's something
you want right so if you run a chunk of
Russian from in 1894 a machine you want
to have a pretty good understanding of
how that algorithm works so when I watch
what comes out of those places super
exciting and at the same time untested
so if something comes you know straight
off the assembly line at the skunkworks
right you're not gonna take that into
battle just yet so we work with a b-52
much more often it makes a lot of sense
of course that is the problem with a lot
of state-of-the-art machine learning is
that so much of it is now neural nets
right and hence a black box and doesn't
have the visibility the old-fashioned AI
and linguistic processing item which
frankly the end of the day was a
bazillion if-then-else rules right
we no longer have the ability to even
look at the code and say what its gonna
do I mean this is this is a big problem
it's a problem for science right so for
example if you run Russian through one
of these algorithms Russian it's a
highly inflected language and we don't
really know what its representation is
internally when it's speeding up the
other side instead of semantic claims
it's a problem for science also a
problem for Policy right so machine
learning is incredibly powerful it can
help us make better decisions but in the
end we want to be able to ask the people
who govern us the why questions like why
didn't I get a mortgage what's your
problem why did you pull me over and a
machine learning algorithm a it can't
give us a straight answer or at least
not a neural net machine learning
algorithm yeah yeah I would always want
to keep this clear at the moment the
field is highly concentrated on neural
nets personally I believe it's over
concentrated in the same way that
particle physics was over concentrated
on string theory 10 years ago and I'm
already starting to see in my
conversations with AI people that
there's a renewed interest in things
outside of deep learning deep neural net
neural net reinforcement learning
paradigms but a lot of people when they
say machine learning now are
automatically linking it one to one with
black box and neural net type systems
yeah so you know Gary Marcus is a great
proponent of what we I guess we still
call a good old-fashioned AI right
symbolic representations I will probably
get to this in our conversation Jim
right but this is perhaps the difference
between biological evolution and
cultural evolution we're really good
we're getting better now at building
machines that can do things that we
evolved to do hundreds or maybe millions
of years ago recognize objects avoid
obstacles we're not so good at the kinds
of things that we think are hallmarks of
our species we're not so good at
programming machine to reflect upon
itself for example we're not so good at
programming machines to communicate to
another machine for example in a way
that doesn't require a set of protocols
and a really precise specification of
the inputs
I like that that if I heard you're right
if so it's the first time I've heard
this suggestion that perhaps neural AI
is analogous to biological evolution and
symbolic AI might be analogous the
cultural evolutions I get there right
yeah it's I mean it's pretty hard to
learn to drive a car it's something we
learn maybe you know in our teens or in
our 20s there are things that children
do well before they can drive a car very
well than a machine still can't that's
an interesting one right it's it's a set
of feedback mechanisms much stronger
than the mechanisms you'll find in a
design system like a car interesting
interesting
yeah I've also been involved with some
symbolic AI of late for the last several
years have been affiliated to a greater
or lesser degree with the OpenCog
project been Gert cyl and his crew and
they've been working for many many years
on a symbolic form of AI but it's open
and that can also include neural net as
inputs and then essentially the symbolic
components can orchestrate non symbolic
component some sense is what we're
trained to do when we grow up right we
have instincts we have things that work
very well in a world that is no longer
around and we go to school and they
teach us a couple of symbolic
representations that help us get through
exactly in fact the model I've been
using think about how this intersects
your cultural versus biological is that
the neural net components approximately
congruent with perception right and that
symbolic components are more or less
analogous to Kinnaman system to type
thinking right and then the system one
type thinking is something in between
which is a little bit less clear to me
we've learned a lot about system one
from deep learning I think that's I
think that's right
one of the things that's quite amazing
is when you pipe a image or a video
through one of these neural networks the
kinds of things it does on the way to
producing an output is very similar to
the kinds of things that happen in the
visual system and the layers that take a
retinal image and pump it all the way up
into an interpretable
I'm very happy to see just the last year
and a half more and more people
expanding their perception of what
machine learning can be and starting to
put a little bit more emphasis on some
of the non neural net components at the
end of the day my hypothesis is it'll be
both as always right what's the answer
in social science both right both in
everything almost like a nurtured nature
right people get so tied up in nurture
versus nature so you idiots the answer
is obviously both we wouldn't have the
concepts Jim if they weren't constantly
relevant that's probably correct
all right that's a wonderful
introduction Simon's a very interesting
guy as you can as you can tell right
this is a next topic we're gonna go on
to something that I think I'm gonna make
a feature of this show at least for the
guests that have a relevant background
and in addition to is very interesting
work in data and society and cognition
way back yonder Simon was an
astrophysicist right guilty right and so
I'm gonna have him talk a little bit
about the Fermi paradox for those of you
who don't know about the Fermi paradox
the name Fermi
for it goes back to Los Alamos where
they're making the nuclear weapon first
bomb during World War two and a bunch of
really smart famous guys were sitting
around the lunch table speculating on
how many intelligent species there were
in the universe and Fermi what the hell
was his first name
Enrico Enrico and Rico Fermi comes up to
them and says okay where are they right
and ever since this perspective has been
called the Fermi paradox which is under
some reasonable sets of assumptions you
would assume there are many many
intelligent species probably more
intelligent than humans because they
could have been around a lot longer out
in the universe and yet despite our
looking for the last 60 70 years with
growing levels of sophistication we have
seen absolutely no sign of them and
there's a long list of thoughts and they
kind of fall basically into two big
categories one is they're not out there
for some reason that's not obvious or
maybe is obvious if you think about it
and then on the other side is they're
out there but they're not showing
themselves or they exist in a way that's
not easy for us to the
TEKT and I've been fascinated with this
question even before I knew the name of
it since I was probably 12 years old and
I read everything I can on the topic and
try to keep up on it and I thought Simon
would be a great guy to give his
thoughts on the Fermi paradox where are
the aliens aren't there any I think you
set me up pretty well here Jim right
because there are two large schools of
thought for those who think there's no
one out there
Andrew Samberg has a really terrific
paper where he takes essentially our
best after physical knowledge sticks it
through a Bayesian machine and he got
the other side claims this is a 15%
chance given our best knowledge that
there is nobody out there at least not
in our galaxy anders takes the Drake
Equation and just tries to factor in our
uncertainties and our uncertainties are
extremely large though not a bell-curve
distribution right it's not that we know
these facts plus or minus one we
probably know them plus or minus a
factor of 10
so that really changes once you
understand how weak our knowledge is of
say even something like planet formation
you can get a lot more skeptical about
the idea that they should be out there I
think they are out there Jim and I think
they're actually here in a funny sense
we know that if you stick an organism in
an environment and have it evolve
we're pretty confident that it's going
to look reasonably similar to the stuff
we have around here the visual system
let's say of a bird is at least in its
mathematical properties very similar to
the visual system in a human being and
we were just talking about very similar
to the visual system in a self-driving
car so at that level I think that
they're around or if they were around we
would be able to spot them pretty
clearly but once you go to the symbolic
level once you ask who are we as
thinking species you can't build a
faster than light drive with a deep
neural network I think you and I would
probably agree on that
once you evolve the symbolic
representations that you need to get
things done all bets are off when a
machine or a human being or any kind of
creature can reflect upon itself
what comes out the other side is
completely unpredictable the mines that
we would encounter would be to my mind
things that we would have a great deal
of trouble recognizing so I think we
would have a great deal of difficulty
recognizing the very things that we're
looking for if we could go to a planet
with life on it I think we'd spot it
pretty quickly we'd have an out of
equilibrium system there would be
something like oxygen there be a set of
batteries probably coming out of their
nearest arm but if we look for the
symbolic products which is what we do
when we we turn on a radio telescope
when we run something like the search
for extraterrestrial intelligence we
look for radio signals we're looking for
signals that would be created by
something similar to a human mind if the
monkey says David Brin would describe
the monkeys got uplifted if the Dolphins
got uplifted we would probably you know
ruff gasps we'd probably be able to spot
it but I think if we saw a communication
from a living organism that had evolved
beyond our planet I think it would
probably drive us mad and my guess is is
we're running some pretty good filters
to keep us outside the realm of being
able to see them the psychologists
wonder a little bit about this right why
do we have such a theme of alien
abductions you go back further and
further and you look at me these are
essentially religious experiences that
people have those experiences tend to
drive people a little bit rather than so
like I say I wouldn't be surprised when
I was at Arecibo we had Serendip the
search for extraterrestrial developed
industrial populations right so this is
a very ambitious project my guess is
we're getting a lot of signals from the
guys out there and we just don't quite
know what to look for interesting I mean
I'm kind of surprised that there aren't
mathematical techniques to be able to
distinguish noise from signal
irrespective of how it's encoded so this
is a great one actually Chris Moore at
the Santa Fe Institute this was a paper
I think he wrote when he was quite young
the most efficient encoding the best way
to get data from one place to the other
given a particular
where transmission power is also the
maximum entropy distribution and what
that means essentially is that if
somebody's really good at communicating
it's going to look like a warm light
bulb there's a lot of inefficiencies in
the way in which we transmit information
right now if we're really good at it if
we're able to compress what we want to
say efficiently out the other side it's
actually going to look purely random
interesting it's thinking out loud here
suppose the Society's a billion years
old
and has essentially codified huge
amounts of structures of thought right
and so essentially communication is
really sending codes to a lookup table
in this vast tree structure of thought
and knowledge and codes do look exactly
like noise that they're well designed
exactly I mean if there's any pattern in
communication you should be able to use
the pattern to make the communication
shorter if you have a repetition you
don't repeat you just make a notation
yeah the Society's been old so I'm going
to think about if we were able to codify
everything we knew over a billion years
and everyone in the galaxy shared this
semantic net right probably not too much
it hadn't been explored in a billion
years other than the recombinations of
the things in the trees this is a great
point right so one of the things that
comes up when people talk about the
Fermi paradox is the incredibly short
time scale of cultural evolution
compared to biological evolution it took
us a long time to get from the sponges
well this is something David Krakauer
talks about right we spent a long time
as sponges before we really got our
multicellular act together but we went
from you know a lifespan of 30 years no
written language no cities no culture up
to where we are today mastery of quantum
mechanics mastery of the electron and
not even the blink of an eye it's a time
scale on which biological evolution has
almost no handle maybe lactose digestion
right so the Fermi paradox says we'll
look you know if you pick a civilization
at random it's really unlikely that
they're going to be in this very early
childbirth phase so you know chances are
they are millions of years old we have
trouble predicting the next 10 years so
I think on the one hand people say
they're so old that
you know flying around the galaxy and
warp-drive that may be true but the
thing that's just as old is not their
technology but also their culture and
their minds and we have a lot of thermal
sources sitting out there in the galaxy
we have a lot of things that look like
warm stuff and maybe some of those are
broadcasting interesting you know as a
typical 12 year old nerd I of course
assumed they had to be out there right
and all along I always assumed they had
to be out there until I started
seriously researching the Fermi paradox
and the arguments on both sides here's a
couple that make me go hmm this is a
actually I kind of refined this idea in
about a 4-hour conversation with Stuart
Kaufman one time which is you're
obviously familiar with the era
catastrophes and evolution when error
rates are too high for our audience in
an evolutionary system you copy things
into the next generation and you copy
them with a higher lower level of
fidelity our current DNA system is very
good it's only a few errors per billion
until you get to that rate something
close to that rate evolution doesn't
work very fast you can't evolve a very
complex structure with a high error
rates called the era catastrophe I don't
remember the exact threshold level where
you have to get to before it evolution
to take off but it's pretty high and so
this conversation with Kaufman was all
right just do what I by autocatalytic
networks right which is Stuart's
theory on sort of the pre evolution of
life that network can replicate
themselves and become a standing
chemical wave essentially but I said how
do you go from low fidelity copying to
this massive machinery we have in our
DNA to have high fidelity copying which
then allowed evolution to really ratchet
itself relatively rapidly as far as we
know all the life that we know about
today all the way back that archaea you
know the most primitive bacteria they
all use the high fidelity copying DNA
system how did we jump from
autocatalytic chemistry you know
chemistry in a warm pond to this very
complicated machine
and maybe it's exceedingly rare there is
you know filters we talked about right
there are big lucky accidents in the
modern era some of our big lucky
accidents are course cultural the Cuban
Missile Crisis ended as with the whimper
not a bang I think of evolution right as
a conversation among a bunch of
organisms right we're all sitting around
a table we're talking some of the ideas
are better than others and maybe one way
to think of the era catastrophe is how
do you keep that conversation
sufficiently on track and if you keep it
too much on track if if the ideas aren't
coming if people are simply rehearsing
and repeating what's come before nothing
happens but if that group starts moving
too quickly it becomes chaotic you leave
the room at the end of the day and
you've got nothing done and so there is
a balance there's a balance between
change and comprehensibility there's a
balance between making sure your body
plan looks roughly like my body plan
right the old joke is you know if a cow
gives birth to a calf and you've never
seen a calf that looks like that before
it's not going well for that calf right
so we need some stability but we also
need evolvability we need the chance for
things to change and that change is
always stressful most mutations are
horrific events for us but once in a
while someone takes a hit for the good
of the species
so to speak and off the other side we
get something new great well I think
that's it for Fermi paradox we're not
going to solve it today but very
interesting topic but let's pick up this
idea of noise versus coherence right and
let's talk a little bit about social
media right and I know you've done some
work on block lists if you could tell us
what block lists are and how they relate
the social media and maybe some
speculation about their goods and/or
they're not so good right so you know
we're a 99% speculation lab right and
then maybe once every hundred days we
actually get something done social media
just on the biggest scale right Jim is
evolution sped up by factors of hundreds
tens of thousands and that's happened
very very quickly you know Wired
magazine I was a junkie
the stuff in the 90s Wired magazine it
puts out an idea right you know
William gives some rights that article
and you read it and it blows your mind
and you do something with it but in
order to get the feedback into that
system if I want to take Gibson's idea
and do something with it
let's say I read a letter back to Wired
okay that you know the magazine comes
out I go to the store I buy it I write
the letter I mail it in wire decides to
pick it up they write something so you
know it takes about a month let's say
takes about you that's the time scale in
publication we're now down to time
scales a minute right you know if
William Gibson's on Twitter and he says
something I can get right back as soon
as I see it 53 seconds after he's
written it and so if you look at what
the time scale factor right so you know
by how many factors have we sped up
cultural evolution to go from a
timescale of a month to go to a
timescale of a second or a minute if we
had sped up biological evolution by the
same amount we would have gotten from
the dinosaurs to us in about 5,000 years
so I think we're I don't think we're
ready for what's unfortunately or
fortunately already happening we're well
beyond the kind of world that we were
used to in the 1990s and social science
has to change we can look in the past
and what we see is a movie on incredible
slow motion so social media when I study
social media I feel a little bit like
somebody studying the DNA replication
mechanism right in order for an organism
to make a copy of itself has to do all
sorts of fun things and all sorts of
unpleasant things and you know that
happens with nine months six months
twelve months depending on the species
nowadays not only does it happen faster
but we're developing new mechanisms
we're inventing new ways to make those
copies new ways to keep those copies
faithful new ways to make those copies
to break them and reform them comment
here when we go back and compare wired
to Twitter let's say you write your
letter back to Wired something is very
different in that model than the current
model which is there's a curator in the
loop as a filter there could be a
hundred to
hundred letters into Wired they might
publish one write on Twitter
everybody gets their say right good
batter and different there is much less
curation going on at least in the raw
sense perhaps what we're searching for
our emergent Bottoms Up curation tools
that allow us to mold the social media
environment so it is more positive than
it's been today it's right you might
think of Wired as an incredibly well
engineered multicellular organism right
there's a head there's a stomach in
accounting in some sense we've devolved
right we've broken apart some of those
institutions and we're much more like a
soup that soup ran from let's say the
Usenet era probably into the reddit era
but and this gets to your question both
directly after a long detour what we're
seeing now I think is people
rediscovering mechanisms to produce
stable institutions that last 10 years
and perhaps even a hundred years so for
awhile for example we worked on
Wikipedia Wikipedia is as probably with
the financial markets Wikipedia is
something that works in practice but not
in theory and we don't have a good
theory about how they created an
incredibly stable and largely functional
institution it has the same problems
that any government has it has
unfairness it has rebels that has
protests but Wikipedia probably was the
first example of the post soup era for
social media for social interaction
online we had maybe okay early 90s
people imported the structures from the
institutions around them which were
mostly university institutions people
were online because they were at a
university they got their account there
AOL comes along and the system
completely decomposes right so those of
us of a certain age talk about eternal
September the day when the new people
came and they never stopped coming
Wikipedia was able to handle that new
era and we're very curious about
essentially what we think of as a common
law system that emerged it's not a
Napoleonic top-down code Sibyl it's a
much more informal way of resolving
disputes but not just resolving disputes
keeping the system
running finding ways to provide
restorative as opposed to retributive
justice so okay let's go into Twitter
right so Twitter is in some sense even
more difficult to run than Wikipedia
Wikipedia always had a goal right no one
was quite sure what that goal was but
they all knew they had a goal and
sometimes they fight over it it's not
quite clear what Twitter's goal is and
so out the other side people have
produced mechanisms for forming
societies for forming groups that are
reasonably stable even in the absence of
a of an idea of where this is all going
one of the things that we noticed and
this is partly just being online but
it's also partly talking to people what
we call qualitative research what we
noticed is this new phenomenon of
bottom-up censorship we're used to let's
say Facebook or Twitter cutting people
out of a conversation their corporations
they have to do it right you can't have
a free speech zone online if that
company also has to answer to
shareholders and to the people who could
sue them if they have to answer to the
advertisers it's just not possible right
it's not the Agora it's something far
more like a cafe right if you go into a
cafe and start saying some weird stuff
you'll find yourself kicked out so we're
used to the top-down censorship what we
started to notice was the creation of
what are called block lists so on
Twitter you know give a few and I really
get into it at some point you might
decide to block me right and so blocking
is the individual level version of
disappearing right you tell Twitter
erase Simon completely from my
experience I never want to see him I
never want to see people reply to him I
never want to see him retweeted I don't
want to see commentary on anything he's
saying and by the way if he wants to
talk about me the game over - right so
he can't see me as well as I can't see
him so this is something Paul skele so
Twitter friend of mine talks about he's
a classicist right the Romans did this
right you'd do something bad enough they
just they scrub you that you can't
mention their name any document any
statue of them is done so you can do
that on an individual level and you know
if you have people who think the way you
- and who are equally irritated by me
they might also choose to block me what
we saw emerging were these shared lists
these shared black lists that people
were creating so let's say I'm a member
of a particular community I don't know
let's say I'm a hardcore Democratic
Socialist American guy right or let's
say I'm a hardcore you know Jordan
Peterson Joe Rogan titrant instead of
going through the trouble of eliminating
from my life the people who disagree
with me and in a way that I find
upsetting I could look at what my
friends are doing I can look at the
people who are blocking them and I can
essentially say look give me your list
and I'll just copy it over and so now
what you have is not an individual level
decision but in fact some kind of
distributed curation of a filter bubble
so we knew Facebook was creating these
we knew that Facebook in order to keep
you online was presenting you with
information that you wanted to encounter
the friends you agreed with we didn't
like it we thought this was a problem
and what we see now is people creating
their own bubbles and they're creating
those their own bubbles by consensus
they're not just Fanning people but
they're giving other people the
opportunity to ban exactly the same
group so they're forming in some sense a
negative community negative in the sense
that they don't know who's in it but
they certainly know who's not in it I
don't think we know yet what those block
lists are going to do we have science
fiction stories of this we have cases
where a community shuns someone puts a
scarlet A and kicks them out into the
forest well here we go right let's see
what happens Jim let's see what these
distributed village style mechanisms
will do when they happen not on the
scale of a hearth or novel but on second
time skills interesting first I'd like
to remind people that the online world
didn't start in the nineties thanks Jim
I
I actually would work for a company
called the source in 1980 which was the
very first consumer online service we
had essentially everything that's on the
web today at 300 baud character mode
only ten dollars an hour just about as
fast as you can type and we quickly had
tens of thousands of customers and
eventually hundreds of thousands because
there was nothing else like it in the
world
soon CompuServe came along and so it's
just useful to remember there's someone
should write a book on this the
prehistory of online because there's
actually several generations before AOL
even prodigy the Delfy I think Adelphi
yeah yeah well say you know Jim this is
this is great right it's a great it's a
great story I remember I gave a lecture
on Wikipedia and I had a young guy come
up to me who had collected a lot of the
old bulletin board systems and in fact
they had these were things he dialed up
right they were the local kind of things
to remember from the wargames era and
they didn't even developed a packet
switching mechanism people would dial up
that all the systems would dial into
each other and share things they're a
little bit like Usenet no centralized
server one thing I'll say Jim and this
is you know for you and your your
colleagues who are in that world we're
losing all those archives that stuff is
disappearing because when a company
shuts down there's really no incentive
for them to spend any sort of money
creating an archive saving it to disk in
a sustainable way that we can look at
we're doing work right now even in the
90s looking at the early Usenet postings
this is to get a handle on the origin of
some of these these online seduction
community sees men seduction communities
and we can't get stuff from let's say
1993-1994 some of its held by Google we
convert you know we have some guys who
maybe shouldn't be scraping Google the
way they're scraping it but this stuff
is is disappearing in a way that stuff
didn't disappear in the 18th century
right that's very intricate I have a
very interesting example very good hit
me yeah I've been an active member of a
probably the oldest surviving commercial
online community called the web
yes well in 1985 especially a spin-off
of the whole earth review Stuart brand
Larry brilliant that crew I've been a
member since 89 so I'll be my 30th
anniversary this year until recently I
was on the board helping them keep their
 somewhat straight but anyway
somebody recently suggested that I
talked to the British Museum who was
saving these old online services
unfortunately I reached out to the
archivist and he said we only have a
remit for British sites so I need now to
think about who probably Library of
Congress because the well is continuing
to dwindle it's kind of becoming the
Colonial Williamsburg of the Internet
it's still a very interesting place to
us the highest quality discourse but
it's only a few thousand people a couple
thousand people now and eventually
actuarial science will take its toll and
it may well close someday and it would
be a horrible shame if the well archive
is not preserved the Sumerian things
came out of it including the e FF Wired
magazine Craigslist we're all ideas that
were brooded on the well back in the
very early 90s when it was almost the
reactor where ideas about what the
internet was gonna be 90 91 92 were
happening I should say so actually an
old colleague of mine Jamie Murdoch we
work together as academics so Jamie
spent some time with the internet
archives so there are some nonprofits
that run this stuff you know a big trunk
is he put something on a cd-rom and it's
gone in 15 years Internet Archive has
the servers has the reliability that you
need but even the curation is hard it's
really difficult to scan through a
million things threaded together with
some ad hoc database system that was
invented by a guy in between you know
hanging out in the mission I was on the
East Coast in the 90s and we had the
dirtier meaner grittier grungier version
of the well called nine box so mine box
was a local system to the New York City
area round about 1996 I logged onto mine
box ad there was just a message on the
screen that said we're shutting down
good luck we'll refund any stuff that
you've sent us pro rata the guys running
right as far as I can
they got into some pretty heavy drugs
and so the discussion boards we had
there you know we had the iron cross
symbol of tyranny which was what
happened when he posted something that
was too insane or too crazy even for my
inbox but as far as I know that that
world of and these were some of the most
interesting intellectuals in New York
but also some of the craziest
drugged-out people in New York I think
we've probably lost that forever now
I'll say I'll just tell you started
about this gym you know on my wall I
have a pamphlet from the French
Revolution this is a piece of paper
that's stuck around since 1792
pick it up on the banks of the sin paper
sticks around I can look at it I don't
need a special interface to read that
thing we don't have the kind of
interpret ability and readability that
we got from paper and colleague of mine
Tim Hitchcock says look you know 20
years 30 years go by we'll have a better
way to preserve this but you know these
are the Babylonian tablets and they're
getting broken yes it's something we're
thinking about I'm gonna give some more
thought on reaching out and see who
might preserve the well so interestingly
I was gonna reason I thought about the
well is we had a precursor of block
lists ah well it was written on it's got
a web interface but the underlying
mechanism is a command-line UNIX system
and about 20% of the users still use the
command line I've almost thought it'd be
funny to offer a channel on twitch to
show kids today people are actually
doing work on a command line logging
into PI right and doing using a thing
called picot span which is what the well
actually runs on the web thing is kind
of a magic fingers beast on top of Pico
span but anyway because it was written
in this crazed Sicily users could
augment it and add new functionality and
one of the things that was developed
probably in the early 90s 1993 I can
look it up and find out when exactly is
called bozo filtering you could create a
a file in your directory called dot Bo
so I think it was and you put the
username everybody has a eight up to
eight character username you know thing
right no spaces allowed my username is
mimetic double though just mimetic on
the well I'm eme t I see and you put
somebody's name and a bozo filter and
when you're reading they're essentially
the forums it'll say blah blah mimetic
Donna time date etc and then in line
I'll say this comment has been bozo
filtered right so it's not a complete
make you disappear but it makes your
content disappear in the context of the
discussions and you can unbowed people
you can bozo them as we would say it was
actually quite funny I will say I took
the position from early on I will never
bozo anybody and I never did all right
this goes all the way back to you know
basic psychological drives right when we
talk we want to be heard and you look
online and when people discover that
they're blocked it's a painful thing and
you would think I mean just sort of you
know if you're a purely rational guy
it's like somebody hates me so much they
don't want to hear for me well I
probably don't to hear from them either
right you know screw you too buddy but
there's something really deep in us the
need for recognition this is you know
the high Galleon story right the the
story of history is the story of us
figuring out ways to recognize each
other in increasingly sophisticated and
sustainable ways we had that we had the
bozo filter at mine box dark her name's
called the kill file right
and I wonder Jimmy know a the thing
about the block list right is that they
can circulate and so I abetted new bad
ones you were talking about it cuz I'm
interestingly though I follow the stuff
fairly closely I did not know about
block list until I looked on your site
and saw that you had done some research
about kind of a light kemal on okay this
is a whole new level of evolution in
that these things are replicatable
they're mimetic right and so what does
that mean well I mean if block let's
keep going and you know most of us we
said this about biological evolution
right most ideas die there's a reason
they didn't do it that way
the idea of block list particularly
since you tell me that this has been
running in the well since the 80s and
this might end up being a permanent
feature of the online world
you know if the online world is where
culture is happening now this may be a
driver it may be something that that
fundamentally influences the way in
which we create ideas and the way in
which our culture evolves I will say my
initial reaction to it was I find it
preferable to the top-down censorship I
mean you said yes we have two halves or
we will have censorship on the platforms
yes at the limit but I suppose my own
gut level reaction is that we ought to
encourage that to be as little as
possible and then again this is a huge
tension right I'm in the middle of a
number of Facebook arguments about this
right you know my own list is we should
ban calls to violence against anybody
right either personal or by group
platform should ban discourse that is in
bad faith now this is unfortunately
difficult which is this person post
something they know to be untrue but
they do it anyway and they don't do it
satirically you know the Pelosi thing
could have fallen into bad faith though
those who retweeted it or posted a link
on Facebook may not have been bad faith
so it's very complicated
third is misrepresentation of who you
are and this gets into the vaster
question of should there be an anonymous
posting or not right now Twitter being a
cesspool of anonymity Facebook at least
attempting to produce an emergent
network identity of some reasonable
vitality which of course they're always
fighting infiltrators and oh yeah and
then the fourth this is again tricky
poppers paradox of tolerance right which
is perhaps we should encourage the
banning of people who want to suppress
free speech or to reduce the civil
rights of identifiable groups but other
than that I would be in favor of
tolerating pretty out-there stuff it's
an interesting way right I mean the
American legal tradition right Sullivan
versus New York Times we have a sense
that malicious lies are grounds for a
suit we have in some sense a good faith
exception I spent time in Britain
Britain does not have a robust free
speech tradition you can get arrested
for
saying things that are racist you can
get arrested for saying things that are
homophobic the Official Secrets Act I
mean there's a whole lot of things yeah
you sign the wrong piece of paper right
and I find at this point in time I find
written to be an increasingly
uncomfortable place to think and to
speak it hasn't stopped anything it
hasn't prevented the emergence of really
extreme views and really extreme
expressions of those views what it does
do and maybe this is just me being too
much of an American it has what we call
a chilling effect even the knowledge
that somebody out there is evaluating
what you're saying is something that
prevents you from thinking clearly it's
something that prevents you from
exploring ideas right out to the edge
the distributed nature is tricky to
write and this is something that happens
much more in Britain in the United
States although it happens and you know
the most British places like New England
liberal arts colleges is deep
platforming or no platforming and this
is something where you know people show
up and scream and bang drums and and
chant to prevent a speaker from giving a
lecture and people that you and I would
think of as you know radicals but
reasonably innocuous radicals in the
sense that no one's gonna kill anybody
because of what Camille Paglia says
right no one's gonna kill anybody
because of what Germaine Greer says and
yet both of these people have been no
platformed or at least in the case of
Amelia's case said people have attempted
to no platform them you can't stop an
army with a law very well at least and
so if there is going to be some
consensus at least within groups of the
limits of speech it's gonna have to be
something that itself evolves the
paradox of Tolerance is something that
sits out there but even just getting to
tolerance is a huge achievement for a
group I must say I am very disturbed by
the deep platforming movement right and
the high high irony that perhaps the
hottest deep platforming Center is
Berkeley right the home of the
free-speech move rehab peace movement
and again this you know these people you
might disagree with them but it's funny
it's left and right it seems to be you
know it's like getting the flu right
it's unclear what you have to do wrong
to end up in a situation where you can't
speak on the campus of a State
University like how bad it has to be I
think people are usually surprised Jon
Ronson had a great book you know so
you've been publicly shamed I mean we
have not just the big figures not just
the people who've written books
I think Peggy Lee by the way came out of
well she was on salon for many years and
that came out of the well that was one
of your spin-offs but you know people
who are far less you might say important
in the and the kind of are you gonna
make the New York Times sense also fall
victim to this it's hard to say where
that impulse comes from and maybe the
better way to say it is we have that
impulse it's hard to say why it's been
weaponized and magnified in the way see
see online I think it's extraordinarily
dangerous and gets us inching towards a
possible civil war right I mean
literally I mean you start trying to
shout down someone like ben shapiro or
you know charles murray
i mean whether you agree with them or
disagree with them they're within the
context of reasonably serious speech and
they're not threatening anybody they're
not operating in bad faith as far as i
know and the other side starts to apply
the same rules where does that end up it
ends up with blood in the streets in
fact i wrote a short story called blood
in the streets guys you can find on my
medium account under jim rut that talks
about it's actually two linked short
stories about a series of backs and
forth between an Tifa and trump
supporters that essentially ends up in a
the beginnings of a civil war so it
could happen back in the day we had a
pretty clear dividing line between north
and south here in pittsburgh I used to
teach at Indiana University the
geographical separation of the people
who would start shooting each other is
on the order of yards as opposed to
hundreds of miles it'd be more like the
Syrian or Spanish civil wars it would
been around
you at civil war you know the Spanish
Civil War had at least 10 factions the
Syrian civil war many more than that I
think I you like to think that Americans
are too sensible you know we're as a
country I think ideologically pretty
weak and of course it's what drives the
people on the far left and the far right
kind of nuts right weird we're not so
quick to sign on to ideas we're pretty
quick to sign on to ways to exploit
people economically and those go pretty
far and of course they go back to the
founding but I think this one is
hopefully going to be more comedy than
tragedy now that would be very hopeful
and very good alright let's move on to
our next topic
someone Simon and I both know reasonably
well Murray gell-mann one of the great
scientific minds of the 20th century
recently died I guess was last week and
just an amazing character when I showed
up at the Santa Fe Institute in 2002 and
Murray at that time was probably 70
something like that and was still
probably the second smartest person I
had ever met who counted again who's who
beats Mary Smith and this is at age 70
right and I'm not talking about you know
waited for age I'm talking about
absolute smart right and if you know
that Eric Schmidt he's like ah I tell
people you know you want to know what
humans 2.0 might sort of look like go
talk to Eric right yeah well Eric Eric
if he's if he's hearing this he's
squirming in his seat because you know
these these advanced mental technologies
also come with a high level of humility
in his case you know Murray is I mean
it's you know I a lot of us we were very
sad to see Murray go I showed up at the
Institute and Murray was sharp as you
ever wanted somebody who loves it
not just won a Nobel Prize but one sort
of one of the you know if there was a
Nobel Prize for Nobel Prizes I think
would have had a pretty strong shot at
it you know there's there's the classic
Apollonian diet ICN split right we have
richard fineman on one side and we have
murray goemon on the other and in terms
of people vying for the image of the
particle physics the physics style hard
science personality they were both very
larger-than-life right I think we under
ate Murray as just in terms of pure
personality you know phiman he played
the bongos he picked up women he was you
know everything that you wanted out of a
madman character Murray was extremely
cultured guy right
Simon was somebody who essentially
thought culture was literature art music
of any level of refinement was
fundamentally a feminine occupation
right fivin was with somebody who you
played dancer the Dacey's he couldn't
handle it Murray was somebody whose
ability to think through and appreciate
art and literature the products of the
human mind was I would say just as much
off the scale Murray was somebody he was
involved in the MacArthur Genius grant
for many years he was one of the first
members of the board and you and I both
know him Jim Cormac McCarthy was one of
the first recipients of an award that
changed his life he'd written suitry but
he his greatest work was in the future
and without question Murray was involved
in that decision we never know right
these guys are pretty secretive about it
but to be able to spot a talent like
Cormac McCarthy that early Richard
Fineman gonna done that right I mean
Mary was he he had a vision that along
artistic lines along human lines that I
think I've never seen a scientist with
that with that level of ability we love
the the wacky fireman character right we
love the fact that he had a really thick
Brooklyn accent Murray can rub people
the wrong way who used to rub people the
wrong way because he also to a great
deal about your mind as well but I think
he's Murray I think is due for a
reevaluation in the coming
I was always amazed at his breath he has
a dinner companion he could talk on
almost any topic in amazed as you say
both cultured and erudite at the same
time right to this degree there's a
difference between the two but the other
interesting thing about him and unlike
other some other characters like that he
was happy to admit he was wrong on three
occasions when I was having a discussion
with Murray he somehow wandered into one
of my patches and made some strong
statement and I took him through the the
thinking and the logic in the evidence
and he said you're right I was wrong
three times I mean you know people of
Murray's sort to do that I mean he
really is was intellectually honest in a
deep and fundamental way as well as
unbelievably broad I mean there's almost
no topic you could bring up that Murray
didn't have a reasonably informed
perspective and a surprisingly large
body of information about how you kill
your crusher like you know Barry got a
defined wines right forget it right your
duck right I'll just I'll drink Jameson
you know it's Murray I think in the
modern era right we have and you look at
people online you look at people in the
newspapers I think the basic split here
is between debaters and thinkers it's
really fun to watch a really good
debater just crush something right but
if you are good at debating you're good
at defending a set of ideas that may be
wrong and the the way to lose the debate
is to say well Chris hasn't thought of
that you might be right that's not a
debate move that's gonna keep you on a
podcast it's not a debate movies gonna
keep you on a TV show
Murray was not a debater right he was
not somebody who'd come in with an idea
and you know walk all over anybody he
was a thinker and he was somebody who is
great to have at a dinner party great to
have on a long hike but he's not
somebody who would have the you know 50
million follower account on social media
I think that's probably correct though
he did have one
item that I was aware of that he was
very doctrinaire about which his hatred
of mathematicians came from I don't know
because obviously the boy was
extraordinarily talented now in
mathematically with in any kind of
discussion about mathematicians he like
throws well this I mean you know that's
one thing he had firemen had in common
Marie I mean okay what a Marie Jeremy
did many things I think sis of course he
he developed the mathematics behind the
structure of the proton right he
discovered discovered invented whatever
you want to say quarks my understanding
was I mean so he used the chunk of
mathematics Li algebras it's called my
understanding is Marie just had to dig
that out of a squirrel's of ancient
wisdom right the mathematicians the way
they deal with the objects that
physicists love is it a profoundly
bizarre and unpleasant way I was a
physics major in college and being a
physics major you think you know
everything and so a bunch of us took the
most advanced mathematics classically
allowed to take math 55 and we've
studied what's called real analysis
right so it's just stuff you draw right
it's like curvy lines straight lines
with an x and a y and as a physicist you
understand those things very well and so
I was like well how hard can this be
we had a textbook we called it Rudin
after the author and you know you would
not believe the bizarre and unpleasant
things mathematicians will do to a
function and completely useless right
for anything that we cared about right
completely useless for the structure
factor completely useless for the
function of economics the function of a
market really useless for writing a
computer program so I mean you know I
guess they have fun you know they're you
know talking about alien species that
will drive you mad there one of them I
love it so Oh Minnie Murray I met well I
mean there's you know five in there
there's a there's a there's a famous
theorem of the mathematicians discovered
which says that you can take a sphere
and cut it into pieces and make two
Spears of exactly the same size as the
old one right I like what right like
that's that's you know that makes that
doesn't make any sense because how do
they do it they do some you know crazy
construction that involves transfinite
numbers
and five and said we mean it looks
here's her made of atoms right and I can
count the atoms and I tell you they you
know unless some very you know
high-energy things happen that number
states conflict right so Mary's distaste
for that gag is not something restricted
to just one or two I love it all right
well Marie farewell one of the greatest
people I'll probably ever meet and some
time very well spent with Marie over the
years let's next go on to cultural
revolutions sort of broadly construed
over a very long time period yes so
biological evolution what does it do one
of the great one-liners is that your
body is a really great model of the
world that you encounter right you have
feet that you walk on because we have a
gravitational field that we sit in you
have a bilateral symmetry as opposed to
radial symmetry because you don't live
underwater right you know you have a
left hand on the right hand but not an
op hand in the down hand so you can
think of yourself as a story about the
world and in particular story about the
physical world the chemical world and to
a great extent now as a model of the
biological world as well so your your
body is has a really good theory about
small things that make you sick as well
that's biology right that's the physical
stuff that you really can't change very
well
you can replace parts of a gym right but
by a larger your body plan is fixed so
what is cultural evolution what does it
do for us the underlying mechanism is
the same Darwin spotted this really
early on the underlying mechanism is we
talk we listen we repeat we change we
alter the DNA mechanism for us is the
human brain far more complicated right
your DNA has these ribosomes they they
make a copy or they they translate the
internal representation into proteins
your brain is the ribosome for culture
it translates internal representations
into actions behaviors and speech it's
far more complicated but underlying all
of that is the sense that
most of what we see around us is the
product of we know not who right
who-who made this language who made the
idea of a conversation
who made the idea of a building with
Windows and with mortises and handles to
what extent they're reasonably adaptive
as we say right windows keep the heat in
and but the rain out and let the light
through but you know they can't get too
big or you the room will get too hot so
in some sense a lot of our culture is
adaptive and there's some really fun
stories of you know the the ways in
which even things as basic as our
language are adaptive to the climates in
which that language evolved Italian has
a different pattern than Swedish in part
because Italians are speaking in a
country that's much warmer you don't
have to be in such close quarters you
can stand further apart it's also
probably why we gesture a lot as being
half italian-american because you know
when you're that far away from somebody
and that on the patio right you need to
really really need to show what you're
saying so you know some of this is it is
adaptation to the physical world but
some of it is adaptation to the very
nature of knowledge I secretly as an X
physicist I'm a plate inist right I
think there are underlying structures to
the thanks Jim yeah people can't see
here your large Italian gestures right
now but you know when I look at the
development of let's say of political
systems are working with Alexander
Barron and a group in Indiana when we
were studying the evolution of discourse
in the French Revolution how they're
working out how to run a country I see
them as doing two things right one is
responding to the you know the
necessities on the ground responding to
the fact that you know once you decide
to hold the revolution somebody's got to
run the pension system and if you
dismantle the church someone's got to
keep records so that all the gold
doesn't disappear into someone's pocket
this is one of the people on this papers
Rebecca Spang who's historian and I know
her view on the French Revolution is in
part the idea that we've neglected some
of that stuff right well yeah
rack you know think about the stupid
 that we did in Iraq right literally
the money did disappear the pensions
were gone they go yeah they go back to
the City of London mostly exactly right
so yeah so you know some of that stuff
is adaptation to circumstances right the
holder evolution I went declares war
that you've gotta run there's got some
problems but I also see the story of the
French Revolution the story of the
Soviet era something we have under study
right now through people's Diaries the
evolution of theater I see these things
as in part humankind's contact with
basic objects of sense and knowledge
that there is such a thing as alley
algebra out there it's not simply a
social construction that's propagated by
the fact that Marie was supercharging
and had a twinkle in his eye right that
what we see is our adaptation to the
invisible we see in the French
Revolution for example people
encountering some of the most basic
ideas of ethical behavior unlike the
Americans the French hold a revolution
and one of the first things they do is
bring slaves to us today this is
something that we expect people to
understand we don't think of slavery as
something that hey one context is by
another context not so fine so when we
look at what people are doing what I'm
most interested in is the way that they
deform their minds in response to the
invisible expand on that look okay
a lovely statement okay so all right so
here's one right this is this is unusual
project we have with Kent Chang so Kent
joined us I said what do you wanna work
out and Kent say you know I want to work
on theater and I want to work on the
fact that theater is famously a endeavor
that gay people are drawn to in
particular gay men right and I'm
interested in the idea that let's say
take someone like Oscar Wilde right as
gay as they come Oscar Wilde writes
plays that are heterosexual romances
right famously The Importance of Being
Earnest
is on the surface about two men who fall
in love with two women and they're all
nuts and they're all you know eating you
know cucumber sandwiches with the edges
cut off and what we ended up looking for
is the ways in which Oscar Wilde is
encoding human relationships that are
fundamentally different from the surface
that he's describing right on the
surface these are really normative I
would convention convention top recently
our local shake we have a great
Shakespeare Theatre in Staunton Virginia
the American Shakespeare Center and they
also occasionally put on other plays and
they happen to put on The Importance of
Being Earnest about two years ago I'd
never seen it and it was like alright
this is like a beautiful clockwork piece
of machinery right I mean it's an
unbelievable play and I think you know
clockwork is a nice point right you look
at a clock face and you know there's
something behind it it looks nothing
like numbers and enhance right so you
know what is Oscar Wilde doing well like
the the simple thing to say
and both Kent and I think this is is not
the case but the simple thing to say is
you know there's a lot of subtle code
sitting in here right you know there are
some bits of slang that if you were a
certain type of guy and you were you
know in a certain social world you
understood that he was saying a couple
things that were not exactly the
straightest things in the world but we
think it's pretty limiting to view
something like The Importance of Being
Earnest as simply an encryption of
something else what we think he's doing
and we see this in not just in earnest
but in a long tradition that includes
some people like Tennessee Williams we
see wild imagining new ways for people
to be together and not necessarily
sexual right we see Oscar Wilde is
working out the terms of a male
friendship for example and you know
Wilde when he began was not with
somebody who thought mostly about how
people relate to each other so what we
see him doing is finding ways or
describing and implicitly projecting
onto the stage modes of being that today
we might even take for granted so for
example the idea that
the idea that people sexualities are
more fluid than we would expect is
something that we see there we see both
examples in the two main male characters
whilst discovering something he's
discovering in those plays he's
discovering facts about how humans can
be together how humans can form
relationships these are possibilities
that he both creates and runs across
Daniel Bernstein who writes his library
to Congress has written a couple books
great a story on it he has a book called
the creators he has a book called the
discoverers write the creators are the
artists and the discoveries of the
scientists Oscar Wilde in one sentence a
creator impressed I got it right but in
another sense I think we can view
artists also as discoverers they learn
things about our minds and tell us about
our minds in ways that have massive
downstream consequences they they don't
just you know it's Kurt Cobain didn't
invent wearing flannel you know that's
something that disappeared but he also
created cognitive patterns that enlarged
our ability as a species and in order
for that to happen there had to be some
contact with the real something beyond
just the idea that we all agree to say
the thing that we all agree the same
interesting so that one law we could
talk about an unfolding it seems to me
that culture is at any given time X but
there's an opportunity and it happens
constantly to unfold into new areas
right you know one of the things like
look back at our ear I find amazingly
interesting is how rapidly point of view
about homosexuality has changed you know
Stonewall's was not that long ago right
and now gay marriage is accepted
everywhere and frankly by almost
everybody under the age of 35 right and
I wouldn't would have never guessed it
you know in say 1985 that this could
happen so quickly but it's a broader
unfolding because it actually fits
perfectly well with the Declaration of
Independence right all men of course
created equal women that's add them to
I mean that is why when you think about
it it's an unfolding but it is grounded
in something we already had ever said
has this line I encounter through
Stanley Cavell are new yet undiscovered
America you know we are I think building
things whose consequences we don't
completely understand pythagoras
discovers the fact that the square root
of two can't be composed out of a bunch
of rods that you divide into pieces
right I don't think that Pythagoras
would have anticipated where I would end
up celia Hayes is at Oxford is somebody
that we've been strongly influenced by
she's a great book that just came out on
which causes cognitive gadgets there's a
trend right now it's politically popular
trend to overestimate the power of
biology in influencing human behaviors
so evolutionary psychology is only
partly a science it's gets some things
right but it misses a lot and Hayes is
wonderful because she in some sense
squares the circle right culture has
lifted off from biology at least 5000
years ago what you and I do is in no way
sitting inside our genes and it's more
than just the adoption of a particular
let's say particular language it's more
than just the adoption of a particular
set of chord sequences and a piece of
music it's also the creation of the
conditions of possibility for those we
don't just invent music we invent the
idea of music and haze I think has a
very good account of how the conditions
of possibility of culture are themselves
a product of culture something that is
not hard-coded in us you know this
debate goes if you want to get deep on
this it goes back to Chomsky in the
universal grammar jumps he looks at
languages there's no way that this is
something that we invented this has to
be hard-coded I think we're coming
around and partly simply through
empirical investigation I think we're
coming around to the idea that Chomsky
was probably wrong about universal
grammar I had long long conversation
with John Holland about just this item
and he was very strongly of the school
that Chomsky grossly underestimated the
amount of data that the child is exposed
to because he was thinking in terms of
formal instruction and well formal
instruction is part of it that's by no
means the whole thing and that was
probably his number one interest right
before he died was trying to figure out
how to demonstrate Chomsky was wrong
it's I mean this is a great point right
you know Chomsky came at language
essentially as a computer scientist and
he wasn't a computer scientist but if
you look at the early stuff he's doing
in the 60s its yanked right out of the
theory of computer programming languages
if you look in the modern era and this
is something that certainly colleague
Ricard Saleh has worked on it's also
stuff that we see addressed Tenenbaums
lab at MIT
you know Holland I think was more right
than wrong we can learn and we can learn
from a set of data that in the past I
think we would have seen as as too
impoverished as two small children learn
language
so Lee discovers these explosive bursts
and how language fits together he's not
the first person notice that he's
produced incredibly interesting
mathematical model of it though we go
from words to word pairs and at some
point there appears to be a little phase
transition right there's a discrete jump
and all of a sudden we're producing the
kinds of sentences that you know where
there's a continuum from that to a Henry
James novel how that happens is
mysterious but you know someone like
Hayes would say it I would tend to agree
that the very possibility of that
happening was something that we
developed independent of our genes yeah
familiar at all with a very a kind of
classic scholar Daniel Everett no I
don't know dad check him out okay he
takes a very strong argument that
language is a social construct I'm still
working my way through his books and I
am kind of at the may be as I said
earlier on my answer to all these
questions is always both
I do suspect there is something genetic
that allows us to be way more linguistic
than chimps who are but we are very
close to and on the other hand I don't
believe my instinct at least I'm not an
expert in this area my instincts are the
Chomsky's wrong that we don't have a
strong universal grammar with 17
switches which determines our language
if for no other reason that you know
Chomsky's assertion about recursion
strikes me as overwrought right there is
at least one language without recursion
ever it was the anthropologists that
studied that language which is
interesting and further you know if we
look at language in the raw we almost
never see we never see more than four
levels of recursion and seldom see more
than three right and you know being a
computer dude there's a big difference
between universal recursion and you know
a series of nested statements three or
four levels deep it's a great story the
cat who chased the rat who ate the
cheese right this is Cal recursion I
think Jim rates an easier one to process
years ago when I was a student in middle
school we studied laughs right and you
know we read Julius Caesar we tried her
hand at Virgil and at some point our
Latin master said no one actually spoke
like this right these incredibly baroque
intricate inflected sentences where the
verbs are showing up in all sorts of
places this was not how they actually
got things done day to day right Virgil
is constructed a language that in some
sense is sitting on top of Latin right
if Latins the assembly code right the
invented list right so you know the
stuff that Chomsky was responding to and
many ways is something that we built
through our symbolic systems the idea of
recursion how often do we use it
Jim we use it in part for social
signaling to show that you know I read a
lot of stuff and I was educated by
people who read a lot of stuff and
probably my parents read a lot of stuff
too right but you know the transcript of
our day to day getting things done and
including really high stakes things like
going to the doctor or making a trade on
the market my guess is is where
roughly working with a regular grammar
here right we're working with
essentially a finite state machine to
get things done indeed all right let's
move on to our next topic which is
consciousness this is a this is a fun
story for us consciousness is one of the
things that we think distinguishes us
from the animals we can go back and
forth on the extent to which animals
have a consciousness of course the word
itself decomposes in lots of different
ways is consciousness simply the ability
to have a phenomenal experience of pain
for example my computer if I do
something wrong in my computer it might
crash we don't think it feels pain we do
wonder to Sammon feel pain is it okay to
eat a salmon or was it you know having
this sort of the experience that you and
I would associate with being hooked
through the mouth and bashed on the head
so that's that's one notion of
consciousness another one that we get
from in many ways of computer science
perspective but also from a
philosophical perspective is
consciousness is the ability to reflect
on our actions and our own minds both of
these definitions have gotten us into
some really tight squeezes we don't
really have a good story about what the
philosophers call qualia right the idea
that if we're sitting around I'm looking
at a big New Mexico flag here and it's
yellow rain I can tell you it's yellow I
can tell you the configuration of the
lines on it but there are some things we
think that we can't quite communicate to
each other you have to be there we have
like I remember in second grade asking
my teacher is your sense of red the same
as my sense of red yeah hopefully she
just said yeah I mean this is Hume right
I mean we've been worried about those
things for a long time dan Dennett says
you know what qualia its it doesn't
exist and then is one of the great
demystifies it's a bit like a Darwinian
dickish tiny sits around telling you
that all the things that you really
wanted to think about don't actually
exist everything's done I always
described as a very long journey to
nowhere he's yeah he's the guy who ruins
the party right and you know
no discussion for another day it's what
happened yeah that's what happens when
you get a when you get a central
European and stick him in Britain for
too long he gets he gets a bit too
practical for the world but that's one
thing that's sitting out there and I
think while you're real during difficult
times in my life I stopped believing in
qualia so I think it's actually a
measure of how well things are going for
me I think a mentally healthy person
does indeed reliably have experiences
that are first person-centered
experiences that rely fundamentally on
the existence of a subjective perceiving
subject so let me interrupt you you
don't mind if I have a day job which I
don't it would sort of be in this area I
have built metal computer simulations of
very very rudimentary consciousnesses
etcetera Brett ball like 50 books two
other papers and so some thoughts at
least in this area first you're using
consciousness in a way that seems to
distinguish human consciousness fairly
cleanly from subhuman consciousness and
we started going down that road but then
you said there's problems and I suppose
I come from the other view gerald
Eagleman he distinguishes primary
consciousness which is the same
consciousness we share with a dog
approximately the dog is alive in a
scene of some sort it's the same dog
every time it wakes up it has you know
similar attributes similar tastes
similar likes and dislikes and then he
also posits something called extended
consciousness which is that's a little
bit less clear on what that is this
ability to perhaps reflect on our own
consciousness and then I also look
pretty strongly to John Searle and I
really like Cyril and his you know sort
of down in dirty definitions of
consciousness you know he says
consciousness is a lot like the
digestive system you can't point at it
say this is the digestive system you
know it's the lips it's the throat the
liver it's the stomach and then the rut
corollary there is consciousness is like
the digestive system it often has the
same output but and under those
scenarios human consciousness is only a
bit different
than subhuman consciousness it maybe has
one or two new tricks perhaps Terence
Deakins symbolic thinking maybe and then
there's others who think that it's a
very bright line and human consciousness
is nothing like animal consciousness
woody you bring up some great minds here
and when I first started thinking about
this seriously maybe back in college but
then this this obsession kept going for
many many years you know the kind of
default mode for thinking about these
issues is the computational analogy we
are thinking machines whatever we
consider fundamental to our experiences
relates to the performance of a function
that has taken us pretty far right so
you know famously this theory of
consciousness called IIT integrated
information the idea that what you need
is a sufficiently couple set of
reasoning devices and once they're
tightly enough together like swamp Rain
out the other side comes what we like to
think of as consciousness it's some
emergent property sort of like a market
right markets full of fools the markets
pretty smart at what point do you go
from you know a ship of fools to
something that reliably gets us coffee
on the table every day you know it's
certainly a scientific theory it doesn't
it doesn't have to say that there's a
spirit sitting in your head kicking your
pineal gland around but there's also
something still unsatisfying about it
for me Jim and I think conscious is one
of those problems that gets us to the
limits of science as we do it we think
of ourselves as evolved beings there's
no reason we should have gotten it all
right there's no reason that you know
the cognitive gadget of science is
answerable to the world as it is it's at
least partially so we're you know we
build things we discover things Murray
discovered the quarks so it works pretty
well but there's no reason to think that
we're a universal translator that are
our reasoning processes our symbolic
representations can solve every problem
even if they could there's by no means a
guarantee that they have you know our
modern model is you know
no older than 16 25 right science plus
axiomatic systems joined together right
you know big symbols Newton right and so
that's very very recent we talked about
five thousand years ago four hundred
years ago is almost no time at all right
and so even if our tools are universal
problem-solving machines which they
might be four hundred years nowhere near
enough to run to the universe through
the engine and come up with results and
those are two different points of view
but they can both leave us at a current
state where there is a shitload yet
still to be discovered about the nature
of reality think about you look at some
of the smartest people in the history of
the human species right and you know for
me okay
Socrates Plato these are up there you
read something like the symposium where
Plato threw the voice of Socrates is
laying out a theory of knowledge see in
the Republic tune and you know these
these guys are not dumb right they they
have a sense of symbolic systems right
they call that geometry and music right
I don't think that the stuff we do today
at least at the abstract level would be
incomprehensible to these guys and sort
of another way they're completely
comprehensible to us but the further on
that story goes the further on the
symposium goes the stranger and stranger
things get right and at some point you
know Socrates is hanging out with a this
sort of mystical spear and he's climbing
ladders and he's looking at boys the
whole thing right it's something goes
weird here I'm not that weird as you
said it doesn't strike us as even as
strange as science fiction it's that's
true I mean it would get you kicked out
of even CMU right if you if you did this
for too long he seems to go beyond what
we informally think of as you know our
best mechanisms you know what if we took
that seriously right you know you and I
learned yo kick Murray seriously he's
not always right but you can go pretty
far if you take a genius seriously
what's that all about that he's not a
fool he doesn't he's he's not someone
who believes in the little reality of
angels but what's going on right what if
what have we missed and our
computational metaphors what have we
missed in even our evolutionary
metaphors that's some
we didn't get 1625 we didn't have that
took us until literally until Darwin or
maybe his grandfather had to blow it up
consciousness may be one of those things
that we don't yet have the gadget to
understand and explain I think that's
possible and I think because there is so
much unclear clarity about the topic
there's a lot of bad discourse about the
topic it's really amazing and you know
one of the ones I'd like to add to this
is this to my mind wasted argument on
can a computer be conscious right and I
lift pretty much full from Cyril and
then extend it a little bit John Searles
perspective the answer is no because the
consciousness is what a human body does
with the wetware that it has in the same
way it does digestion however I then
extend that to say in the pharmaceutical
industry and in the food processing
industry we have things called digesters
right which are used to grow all kinds
of biochemical feedstocks and you know
food products etc and we can say by
analogy that these things are digesters
used in the pharmaceutical industry and
they're analogous to how digestion works
in the humans in the same way we can
create in computers something we will
call consciousness which is analogous to
the consciousness that is the emergent
phenomena from various bits of meat and
neuron but it won't be the same thing
Cyril stop I just saying it's not the
same thing and I got one step further
but say what we can build things that
are analogous to and you know we go back
to - noni and information on IT right
having done a lot of reading about -
noni and anti - noni I come tentatively
the conclusion that perhaps integrated
information is necessary but not
sufficient right and that if we measure
III on an analogous machine that has
something we analogously call
consciousness it will show a high III
but so all other things that aren't
conscious and so will be human if we
could measure it I sort of split the
difference I say we can talk about
machine consciousness we just have to
realize that it is not exactly
we the same thing as meet consciousness
as human consciousness in the same way
that a digester used in the food
industry isn't the same as our digestive
system but they both do sort of similar
things here's a way to come at this
problem
what are we one consciousness to do and
if we look at let's say the cultural
effects of consciousness we just have an
odd thing to say you go back in the
anthropological record and this is Karl
Jasper's invents this phrase because of
the axial mirror 800 being abroad
exactly right he's got to stretch it you
know but at some point in time in the
history of the species and this happens
you know throughout the globe it's
almost like these little fires lighting
up right you have the upon assad's in
the Indian tradition you have some of
the what we might think of as the modern
books and in the Torah you have you know
my favorites in Greece right you have
the dialogues you have Parmenides a
little bit before you have the emergence
of Buddhism each of these things is a
dramatic shift in the nature of culture
before the axial age the priests were
also the kings or the priests were
fundamentally allied with earthly power
out the other side of the axial age out
the other side of the old testament
Socrates and Plato Buddhism the apana
shots all of a sudden you have people
discovering this notion of the
transcendental people deciding that
there was actually something beyond the
pure of a human biological realm
Jasper's thinks of that as a
consciousness that emerges at the level
of a society and maybe the right thing
to say is you know what when we know we
consciousness we're having this kind of
conversation and this kind of
conversation that's happening in the
context of people who because they had
conversations like this built a
recording device at a university so they
say all right our computers conscious
well one thing I say is okay look I
might run one of these consciousness
assays on the iPhone and okay maybe it
is or it isn't but I want to say you
know where's the great religious work of
the computers right what have they done
recently you know have they had an axial
age have the machines written the
Upanishads or have they had this
dialogues and answer I think no right so
under that test we're the only ones so I
mean I would suggest that using my
analogy the computers aren't even there
yet right the smartest computers in the
world maybe they're at the Shrew stage
right and we don't expect shrews to
write Shakespeare right and so you know
give it 30 years and then your question
may be more valid something these
analogous consciousnesses may well come
up with things that we think of as on
par with our best creations but it's too
early to tell yet I mean this is this
gets back I think all the way to the
beginning of our of our conversation
right with the Fermi paradox you know in
the end the reason we're really keen
about aliens is is you know well we want
to hang out with them right because
we're bored of our stuff you know maybe
the question if that does happen if
these machines do have their axial age
if their consciousness does actually
bubble up to the visible level you know
maybe the question is will they be fun
to hang out with well we have new
playmates on the earth again every nerd
believed yes that there were aliens out
there and every twelve-year-old nerd-boy
least in my era believed we could
eventually build AI so we could talk to
you absolutely right you know when we're
talking about the Fermi paradox it's not
just that they'd be fun to talk to which
they would be or if they didn't kill us
right or the silent Forest Theory right
thank you no the reason everybody is
quiet out there is because there's a
certain number of predators and if you
speak up you will get eaten but there's
another much deeper issue right if we
are indeed alone we have a gigantic
normal responsibility right if we are
the only general intelligence in the
universe we have a greater duty to
preserve ourselves than if they're
relatively routine because we may be a
point of the spear of evolution and it
is perhaps our destiny to bring life to
and on a live universe and if we knew
that to be a fact which unfortunately
proving a negative is extraordinarily
difficult but if we didn't know that for
a fact somehow I suspect it would make
us take everything we do is shitload
more seriously this is exactly the thing
I would expect from a good
self-replicating organism
like do we have a moral duty well I mean
only if moral duties there be are their
species because if we disappear and
morality disappears with us well they
were done right so that's fine this is
maybe their here's the way into this
into this intuition when we study we
look into big archives sometimes we get
famous people and here's the phrase we
sometimes do sometimes we get ordinary
people
this always rubs me the wrong way this
phrase ordinary because we're absolutely
extraordinary there's nothing like a
human mind the differences between two
human minds are so negligible compared
to the difference between a human mind
and a non-human mind you know if you're
a cognitive scientist or you you study
social behavior from a cognitive point
of view it can be an overwhelming
experience to walk into a crowd and not
because the crowd is irrational but
because you're surrounded by this
unbelievable mechanisms unbelievable
creatures it's not implausible that
there's nothing like it elsewhere in the
world or elsewhere in the universe I
think neither of us would be surprised
if a self-replicating organism worked
out that they could use solar energy to
make copies of itself that's not a
surprise right we wouldn't be blown away
we'd be thrilled if we found life on
Mars we wouldn't be shocked it would be
a shocking event to find things with
consciousness things that we could hang
out with or at least we thought one day
we could hang out with if we discovered
that I think we would be shocked there's
something miraculous about us it would
be the biggest news in the history of
the world well it would be you know in
some sense the end of news as we know it
exactly let's go to a last topic and
then let's wrap up one current science
fiction I used to be a true science
fiction aficionado in fact growing up my
main source of science fiction was a
library so I prided myself on reading
every single science fiction book that
was printed and hard copy which wasn't
that large a percentage but it was the
better stuff of it unfortunately over
the years getting it distracted into
many other areas in fiction and
nonfiction tically literary fiction for
my
my fiction reading I have kind of
drifted away from sci-fi I'd love to
hear what is cool in sci-fi today in one
sense I think I'm pretty much in tune
with what everyone's reading right so
touching obviously blew up can we use
translator of six and leo chinese
science fiction has reached the modern
era right that's super super exciting
was the three-body problem rhe body
problem Ken actually is so can I is the
translator for six and he's also a
science fiction writer and I was
thrilled to see he had invented so you
know we have British Victorian steampunk
he has Chinese Empire silk clunker right
so reimagining the legends of a culture
in a way that's not quite fantasy I
think because it's a story about the
technology and not simply the magic
anybody who's who's bumped into science
fiction is gonna bump into this one of
the things that I do with science
fiction and this is partly because I'm
interested in the cultural evolution of
you know the last 10 minutes of
evolution is the fact that science
fiction drives culture it tells us
stories and people just can't help but
make it real right so the Star Trek
communicator is a great example and you
know here it is right you know Apple
health you know given though 10 years
and it will die did tell you if you have
something really deeply wrong in the
tricorder right it's smaller than the
tricorder right did we did better so
science fiction is it helps us imagine
nailed Neal Stephenson there was a great
project at Arizona I was on a state
called the hieroglyph project right and
the idea was that you know and this is a
bit politically loaded but you know
science fiction had got to dystopian and
it forgotten the idea that arthur c
clarke invented geostationary satellites
somebody has to tell a story to motivate
the engineers to build it right because
actually it's really boring building a
spaceship but we are in an era where our
most interesting technologies are social
and so i've started asking people not
what are you reading but what are the
books that people are reading that
account for the cultures they've created
and one of the groups i'm completely
fascinated by are the people associated
not with the university
system but with all the tech money that
floats around out there in part because
of things like the platforming some of
the wealthiest and most interesting
people on the west coast have just given
up on the university ever given up on
the tech schools right so CMU's fine MIT
is fine but they have given up on
liberal arts university and they're
developing parallel systems Peter teal
says drop out of college things like the
singularity Institute now the machine
intelligence Research Institute these
are groups that exist on the from one
sense in the point of view in academic
they exist on the margins right so the
future humanity Institute if you're a
professor at Oxford it looks like a
rented room with a ugly chair but if you
flip that around Oxford is the thing
that's a rented room with an ugly chair
and what we see is people creating a
very different idea of what learning
teaching and research could be so I know
some of these things are fascinating
people I can give you all their names
but they're probably be embarrassed to
be associated with this sometimes people
call this the rationalists you know
maybe after life that's you know there
are some famous characters that surround
that group le zur is one I'm sure you've
encountered him yeah he and I have had a
few chats I could imagine it movable
objects an unstoppable force so okay
what I wanted to know was look what are
I you know great you guys read me yeah
ways exactly right you guys are smart
fine you write some you write your code
in Haskell and you build a blockchain
good job right but you know what are
your fantasies you know what's your Star
Trek what is your account of what things
could be how do you know if you're
falling short of yourself you know I
know that something's gone wrong in my
life if I think George Eliot would not
like me right
so I asked this and one of the answers
is and this is this won't surprise you
right Vernor Vinge right but we think of
her nerve in jazz the guy who invented
the idea of the singularity one of the
books that a friend of mine pointed me
to was part two of a trilogy right we
know is a book called the children of
the sky by then by vinge this is not a
new book right this is maybe a couple
years ago and children of the sky I
think encapsulates the the fantasies and
the mythology of that group
it's a story about they're coming for us
right they the silent Forest was right
and we screwed it up right they're
coming for us and a small group of
people have crash-landed on a planet
that's reasonably backward and what they
have to do is bootstrap themselves into
a sufficiently post-industrial
civilization that they extend a chance
at surviving children sky has encoded in
there is an extreme version of the power
of the mind the idea that if you're
smart enough right from a grain of sand
you infer the Sahara if you're smart
enough from a cup of water you know
Niagara it's something that comes up in
quasi science fictional form for David
Deutsch right in fabric of reality and
beginning of infinity Jonah the sky is
the dramatic version of that it has some
sex
it has aliens that are actually a bunch
of minds all linked together and they
look like pets right so it has a bunch
of tropes that we're familiar with but
the overall structure is this idea that
the universe in one sense is
fundamentally inhospitable it's trying
to kill us but in another sense the laws
of physics drive us inexorably to a
horizon of infinite possibility so if
you're sitting in a polyamorous nerd
commune and Berkeley right now
the children of the sky answers I think
to your fantasies in a way that I use
that word right in a nice way I don't
mean that in a in a psychologically
condescending way it's a mythology that
you can get your teeth into and tells
you if you're doing it right any other
examples that's a good question you know
I brought up David Deutsch right
dorita's are you one of these
unbelievable super geniuses yeah I don't
think he prefer to have his stuff
thought of as science fiction at this
point well you know and so you know the
two books fabric of reality beginning
were faded they're incredibly compelling
books and if you read them I mean he has
one chapter I think it's a beginning of
infinity where he battles his way out of
a brain in the VAT right he explains
exactly how he's gonna show you that you
know you're not living in a in the
simulation it takes on a science
fictional angle one of things I found
really amusing I was reading I think
this is in fabric of reality the earlier
book he gives this proof from first
principles that the matter density of
the universe is
critical that you know Omega if we say
it's called meiosis in Vegas less than
one and you mean you're like absolutely
right the inexorable force of reason is
such that physics must come to know
itself and the universe must have you
know this property in that property and
I'm reading this I'm like absolutely
right and then I remember like actually
it turns out the matter density universe
is not less than one perfect so
something's gone wrong and it is
precisely one unfortunately as far as we
can tell we can tell though was you know
what is dark matter what is dark energy
is it right yeah I take check
my dissertation right these were great
problems David has a centrifugal
intellect you can learn a lot about the
many-worlds hypothesis of the many
worlds theory and you could also follow
it as a narrative as a almost like Olaf
stapleton right it's an update of a Star
Maker where dirt goes on a journey that
takes him in the end to an account of
human nature that suggests that one day
we will manipulate indeed the very
fabric of reality so you know maybe what
10,000 years if we don't hit one of
those great filters or great filters
well thank you very very good
thank you Jeff thanks
[Music]