great okay thank you um well thank you
so much thank you so much and I don't
know if I really deserve this because if
I was I don't know if you picked up
because dude remember the circumstance
in which you agreed to do this like what
what what come before once let me try to
fix my connection I mean I mean I have
I'm gonna have the right connection sure
all right is that better yeah okay I
can't see your face but and weird all I
can see is my face it's very odd
okay it's not a finger there we are
yeah yeah yeah great okay all right
let's go again
so with the context is that the question
the context yeah yeah yeah so I don't
know if you remember the context I'm
afraid I don't
okay right yeah see last week and a half
and I bet there were loads of these
things kind of going on for you as well
right and no no yes oh yeah right okay
so yeah so it was um I was yeah so I was
kind of naming some kind of like sort of
negative stuff that was coming up around
like rebel wisdom have done this
training course and they and I was
getting kind of I was feeling kind of a
bit I've been looking at the whole game
B thing for a while and I was getting
some feelings of like resistance to it
and some of it was around and the the
rebel wisdom course that they were
charging for was one of the factors that
kind of ha was moving me and that kind
of into that resistance I think and so I
was just asked a question on the
Facebook group about how the well
around that whether anyone else had had
was feeling anything similar had felt it
how have they been able to transcend it
if if they're still in the community
gone through that kind of stuff so it
was that that was the question and then
they load loads of stuff happened as a
result of that and I suppose that's the
kind of thing that happens on there
sometimes isn't it is it just the
conversation goes in all sorts of
different ways in to also yeah sometimes
useful sometimes not but right and this
gets actually those it was a nice
conversation yeah yeah yeah okay so it's
coming back to you sort of yeah yeah
okay great cuz well where we got to and
that led to this was was was just around
that question of money or if you want to
kind of go maybe one stage above that
like just finding space to play game be
in a game in the game a world yeah and
one of the things I'd kind of thought
about and I mentioned I responded to you
on on that about was I'd said oh you
know what about some kind of game be
investment fund dedicated just for
create finding some money to kind of
help people create space and you'd come
back and said something really
interesting which was you were thinking
about an AI that that creates a eyes for
so like two steps removed a eye for
landing yeah so that sounded really cool
I'd love to hear more about that like
what's worse going on so it's it's more
succeed that the conversation will they
go back so when you begin the process of
starting that conversation in that group
for me it's happening in the context of
many years of many people contemplating
that challenge right and different
people trying different approaches yes
until you've actually tried something
you don't really know what's going to
happen
and so one of the things that we've
noticed is that there appears to be it's
almost like maybe a dead end or a false
a false economy right in in in in a
particular approach which I'll call
proximal or even maybe even pseudo game
being so these are and the rebel wisdom
thing may actually be a lot of very much
of that sort running and an effort that
is coming may be very much from a game
be intent and maybe even including
people who are themselves endeavoring to
go in that direction and in many much of
their lives are working that way to
create a zone of cultivated security to
get money yeah by providing a service in
that vein right or even even more
problematically and this is the place
where fails and most often is trying to
do a game a thing in a game be way so
you know I'm gonna I'm gonna run a
lumber company but I'm gonna try to make
it a game B Lumber Company and you know
how do I go about D now well I'm gonna
try to you know make sure that all the
people who work there are going to
personal development and I'm gonna have
a wisdom counsel and you know whatever
happens to be right sort of hang
artifacts that game B or artifacts it's
almost like a Christmas tree right he
wants to look over all that game be even
been to today it's it's still a game a
activity and this actually seems to fail
really badly almost all the time either
because the they hold the integrity of
the interior container so I'm not going
to bring anybody on board who isn't
already a full game B player which
generally means you just can't move it
forward because there's not that many
game B players since definitely that
mean he gave me players who are also
sort of skilled managers in lumber or
the opposite which is that you begin the
process of
was I making compromises compromising
the integrity of the interior which
eventually very quickly will pull you on
the other side of it you realize you're
actually just more or less pretending
like you're holding some small amount
now what's interesting is that there's a
way of actually doing that same thing
that is that it works a lot and it's
just having the notion of pardon me
the zone of proximal development or the
adjacent possible use Snowden's terms
okay so let's say Dave Stewart has a
very nice term which is less like this
and more like this so it was that Dave
yeah Dave snoot
he's a complexity theorist right so he
talks about how do you evolve system and
the pot and the notion is when you have
something let's say like a Lumber
Company there is always a vector whether
you can take it on that is away from and
towards and so if you can identify what
is the direction of a problem so less
like clear cutting virgin forests and
more like producing resilience to
climate change by thinning out for us
that otherwise which you think we would
for example right and so that's a vector
that said there's a space there's
somewhere on that diamonds you can move
to that is real you can actually get
it's actually vital it'll be productive
it'll be competitive in game a and it is
and it doesn't necessarily require that
you try to hang all these accoutrements
I'll call it you know the game be
costume on it you can still be very
straightforward game a lumber lumber
experts who are doing this in a slightly
more gamey way and of course the point
is then you're on a movement then you're
on a path and then as that path matures
you can do the same thing in your and
your human resources right there's no
reason why the human resources have to
be in humans right okay well how do we
think where these people are where we
all are in this place and and lose some
step some small step may be a big step
is I'm small step at the least in this
positive direction don't try to move any
faster than you can so that's one one
category and its really interesting like
if you're familiar at all this is too
weird thing but I'm gonna deep does
arleady familiarity with the history of
the talking a district right okay
you know you all not really but so it's
a nice illustration because they
actually they've actually enumerated
these things they called cost of waves
there's a first wave copy secondly a
copy and third wave copy we're currently
the third wave coffee they're a copy
wave yeah and there's actually a really
easy way but the the first way of coffee
is kind of like like 50 0 like big thick
ceramic mugs 5 cent coffee at the diner
the percolator with the with the the big
filter and like Folgers instant like
that's the first wave copy and first
wave coffee was characterized by
homogenous ation but there's no
differentiation that's big coffee
companies like 10 big coffee companies
who buy basically the least common
denominator beans mostly from Colombia
well modernized and burnt and roast them
all in the same very dark roast and
shipped them up and it's basically a
caffeine delivery vehicle that has some
flavor to it and you can put a lot of
stringent agreement it now is palatable
yeah so then you move to the second way
and this is Starbucks Starbucks it's
really just second way which actually
started before Starbucks
well the side ways with Starbucks which
was this is the local coffee shop the
there's a TV show called Twin Peaks that
talked about it like oh that's a good
cup of joe these are like large bold
ceramic mugs the introduction to the
Western the Anglo American experience of
Italian style coffee so so many people
having cappuccinos lattes and this is
the doll of this is that all this
rigmarole just used this one point and
the introduction of the concept of fair
trade so suddenly there was like in the
zeitgeist of second wave
there was an adjacent possible there was
an availability and a possibility and
the part of the people who were actually
building the industry and and the the
actual price structure the consumers
were willing to support in that model to
do fair trade meaning that there is a a
conscious effort to create direct
relationships with the people who are
growing the beans to a lit and able the
guys who in the first rave really did
get completely over to have a
bigger
of the supply chain and Starbucks really
really pioneered this in a big way much
their credit but there's lots of
basically everybody played that so fair
trade became a woven into the fabric of
the fo aesthetic even technological
characteristics it was that was coming
90s right because I feel like I remember
that happening but I'm yeah I feel like
yes fingering the dream the dream of the
nine users alive in second wave coffee
yeah had a lot of that scene yeah by a
lot of that same sensibility to uh and
by the way is you know it's important to
recognize that the price of the copy
went way up my Starbucks cup of coffee
got a whole lot more yeah then a cup of
coffee at Dunkin Donuts with the local
diner so that margin structure allowed
that to happen and it was nice like the
consumers were willing to pay it and
while Starbucks made a ton of money
it actually did shifting meaning through
larger fraction flow of money down to
the guys in Ecuador who are picking copy
right so then you move to a third wave
and the point here is like this is a
less like this more like this arced it's
been going on now for almost a century
so in third wave coffee you have this
movement towards local it's like a real
conscious notion of these things it
can't be a giant internet or net
multinational corporation
it can't be Starbucks has to be local
like the each individual coffee shop is
kind of its own thing and so and that
local needs really local so the food
will tend to be brought from some local
vendors so I'm gonna bring in all the
fugitives we know the people who are
making the food and from Fairtrade to
direct trade meaning I had the coffee
shop owner will have a direct human
direct one-on-one relationship with the
person who's at the place is growing the
coffee and in fact part of the ethos is
I'll actually go there I'll physically
go there and I will actually participate
at least a little bit in the in the
harvesting and the roasting of the
coffee and this like a feeling and you
know these bags you'll see that has like
the name like
correlation estate in Kenya 5000 to like
a lot of detail good notion they're
trying to be a local
to make it feel like it's that your
neighbor and it can feel like you're
interacting with somebody who who in
some sense you interact within a
community and either to feel they have
come you nataas meaning that the
physical place tries to actually be a
neighborhood hub that notion of locally
we're not we're not trying to be
homogeneous Starbucks we're everywhere
in the world you go is the same place
we're actually trying to be a place
which is connected to the life of the
local environment and I would say that
almost all of those aesthetics almost
all those values are in a weirdly
unified way are seeing more in the
direction of gaming there's something
about each of those steps there's an
unlocking an evolutionary dynamic that
enables that's happen I know it's
interesting is one of the things that I
noticed is that for some reason so in in
third wave coffee there's a another part
of the story is a much deeper refinement
in the way that the top is actually made
this initiative is called a pour-over so
the barrese is actually the bar for
quality debris she goes way up so in
starbucks case they hire a random high
school kid maybe put them through a week
of training and boom their barista and
third wave at least the ones that the
ones that are really simplifying the
dies of that system and they'll have
like international competitions of
baristas to see who can actually produce
beautifully delicious nuanced coffee
like the in bars like the notion of a
mixologist so that the the notion of
quality and standards has gone up
enormous but as far as I know it'll have
cost the baristas do not share in the
profits of the of the coffee shops at
least not as a piece of the architecture
right and this seems like obvious like
it should be the case yeah go ahead
yeah no so there's just a bunch of stuff
is coming up around coffee and it
pointing the direction of game like I'm
think I mean you mentioned that there
was a stage zeroth and I'm thinking
coffee shops certainly in the UK and I'd
need to do a bit more digging just to
clarify this but there's there are few
people who have spoken about how a lot
of the kind of political changes that
took place like leading in the direction
of Liberty
kind of in general certainly certainly
here yep and in coffee shops they have
gone over and they were there was seem
to be a bit of a threat by the
establishment um and so I mean that
feels a bit game B to you know like this
is a place where we're gonna meet
together discuss Yap discuss things get
a little bit buzzed on the coffee here
however have a mind of experience right
that is novel this was new this was when
coffee was first introduced to the west
right right
and by the way mix have young
aristocrats with the merchant class with
academics and scientists we're all kind
of who normally would not mix a mix in
this place yeah sure sure yeah so it's a
yes a little talking us and the other
thing as well is um I I mean at the risk
of going like to deepen in a completely
different direction and I don't I don't
know much about the details around
coffee and how it was a like revered as
a like an actual religious let's a call
it a sacrament for the yeah for like the
indigenous people who you know we kind
of Westerners are certainly from the UK
we went we went to the Americas and we
took that you know like I know the point
of fact it wasn't you learn another
story go ahead yes coffee is indigenous
to Ethiopia but the Ethiopians actually
didn't provide much coffee yes yeah yeah
yeah yeah it wasn't really produced in a
way that was meaningful
until the Ottoman Empire like so the the
notion of the Turkish coffee was really
it's bizarre like it's not the kind of
it's not a modern thing I know not an
ancient thing yeah and then what
happened was the Ottoman Empire held
them monopoly they did not allow able to
know where coffee came from until at a
certain point there was a gift given by
the Sultan to the King of France and the
King of France had some coffee plants in
a botanical garden and this young
adventurer like this total like rogue
story-tell character stole the coffee
plants from the king of France's
Botanical Garden smuggled them onto a
ship sailed them to South Amer
and then planted them in South America
and began the process of actually
bringing coffee to the masses okay yeah
okay well that's a shame because I was
gonna we're gonna go deep in mystical
chocolate but chocolate is well yeah
it's fine it's fine it's still
nonetheless I mean just if I can maybe
have a little go at ruler mega ring that
yeah and but perhaps and with it
slightly slightly different slightly
different twist so I think things will
becoming less mechanistic and more more
human as the different stages have got
have gone ahead especially this last
stage like with the introduction of it's
almost it's become an art form art is a
very nice yes and increasing in
increasing art bullet yeah and um it's
it's less functional and it's and it's
more yes there's more creativity there
it's less robotic so as a humanization
of it and with each kind of stage and
that seems to be yeah and the other
thing about human eyes obviously using
is including the the growers of the
coffee in in in the profits and
humanizing those people rather than and
there's at the end there's a synergy
there and this is and this is perfect as
this will bridge to the next topic which
is finally do the AI topic yeah so the
synergy there is that the when the the
ends I or the thing that people are
consuming the things that people are
choosing to participate in and give
their money to is is really oriented
towards this artfulness towards quality
towards values and values in the
multiplicity with many many many banner
there a large field of values that kind
of thing is actually best cultivated by
virtue of game be mindset by Gilbert of
game be milieu game be is more capable
of producing quality more capable
producing artfulness than game a is
and so if you're trying to do a
mass-produced homogeneous project
product game a will actually out-compete
game B mmm because it's like the
difference between complicated and
complex right exactly yeah yes this is a
bridge into the AI so that's at that
notion of saying okay what's the where
where does the natural zone where the
game B capabilities and capacities
intrinsically must out-compete game
because of the difference between
complicated and complex and to what
degree can we have evolved the thing
that people are choosing to participate
in in that direction of complexity and
that direction of quality in the
direction of values so in the zone of in
the zone of Nai we find something that
is similar but and also in many ways
oddly not very different and this is
it's very it's difficult to get a hold
of some assistance so another place that
the game be seems to intrinsically I'll
compete game a is in creative
collaboration the context the context of
that gives rise to creative
collaboration is supported by sovereign
individuals freely choosing to enter
into collaboration and by freely I mean
there's a lot of spaciousness there's a
lot of space and how they enter there's
not an existing context that is
constraining the choices by which they
are entering into that collaboration
they're very much free agents inside and
they've done the work on themselves to
have sovereignty and to tree into
conversations Rula Magna right that
milieu of of a space where we little
mate can truly be alive and active as it
turns out all right this is just a
awesome reality is much much better at
creative collaboration at the
degenerative exploration of novel
possibility then the way that game a
goes about creating teams and motivating
people to do things and this is by the
way very well studied in business
schools for the past two decades have
been studying how do you support
creative collaboration and they talk
about things like every individual needs
to have a feeling of meaning the
meaningfulness of what they are doing
needs to feel meaningful not just what
their job is and then you have a feeling
of agency and autonomy real choice and
exactly how they're gonna go about doing
these are all values that if it turns
out if these ingredients are included
then the quality of creative
collaboration goes up okay cool
so that's again it's just an intrinsic
game B does that it can't help to do
that it does that naturally want
students to get more game be deeply
wants each individual to be finding
their highest purpose in themselves the
thing that makes them sing all the way
down to the connection between their
soul in their body in the Ark of life
that you could call their destiny and if
you wants every individual who's in
participating in something to be so
fully into it they're committing it I
used to call it uh following each other
hey saying that's just yes but yay
almost like yes this is a sacred duty
I'm not just agreeing but I'm in fact
like see I feel that this is right with
a capital R as Lucifer game B wants to
bring things and of course the point is
that that tends to be precisely the way
to maximally create possibilities for
creative collaboration okay well then it
turns out there's a wide variety of
different endeavors let's say that are
we're maximizing for the possibility
creative collaboration is how you make
the best thing the scientific research
is an example the size I think method is
based upon the proposition of creating a
more game be like community back of the
subject hunters at these coffee shops
that's the overlap all right how do we
create a space where more people are
more able to tell the truth for example
and just the simplicity yeah I will try
to tell the truth is earnestly I can
into the comments as opposed to try to
steer the story in some preferred way or
withhold evidence is part of the ethos
of the scientific method and and I will
share I will share that my information
and my techniques and my knowledge
broadly with the sense of a common
purpose so these were these were ethos
and ethos that was discovered in the
period in 1600 and 1700s that eventually
gave rise to the Scientific Revolution
because that mattes maximally or
massively increases the possibility to
capacity for creative collaboration and
now of course game a weaponize that game
a tried to figure out how to turn that
into a predictable tool for the
military-industrial complex for
industrial and military production and
therefore competitive against in between
different subgroups and that can that
can always be done which is always a
counter-current or way of capturing what
game B you may able pulling him back in
the game and move and then a game a
counter move that tries to capture it
encapsulated the game boobity game a
cannibal so in the present environment
we're finding ourselves in a
circumstance where because accelerating
chains because the the rate of change is
going up the count in the game a counter
move becomes less and less valid because
the thing that you're capturing
literally the act of capturing it makes
it less competitive in the million in
the environment because tomorrow new
innovations of how to collaborate and
small advantages and creative
collaboration can lead to a 10x increase
in innovation and so I know if I have my
standard game a move which is okay you
guys have done some really brilliant
work here in nanotechnology now let me
figure out how to weaponize it the thing
that I've captured is more obsolete
almost instantaneously because the rate
of changes are high if every two years
everything you familiar with it the rate
of new information is being discovered
in the world well I don't know the exact
numbers but I get the trajectory studied
thoroughly but it's been said that more
or less starting about a decade ago
every year every eighteen months twice
as the amount of total information the
world doubles which means that in 2020
there's everything literally everything
that exists in the world in 2019 is half
of what this produced in 2020 so as much
as produced in just the year 2020 as the
grand total of all human of all world
has
and what's the definition of that's
massive and what's the definition of
information is that like recorded held
on a hard drive written in a tablet in
my rent it in a bookstore is it
structured structured accessible data
right yes oh we're definitely not
talking about the the trajectory of
neutrinos in the five seconds after the
Big Bang yeah but we are talking about
the degree to which we have awareness of
that so because this is a human story
right yeah yeah it's a human story yeah
so so what happens then it's just like
oh okay well what then are the places
the locations and what I call innovation
space which is to say the possibility
space of where we might be able to bring
something truly novel into the world and
it could be in any domain but right now
I'm just kind of focusing in the
scientific tentacle it could be an art
right it could be in music it could be
in literature but right now I'm just
focused in the scientific technical and
this domain of intelligence this domain
of creating using human ingenuity to
further cybernetic capacity to further
human ingenuity that loop is maybe
exactly at the it stretching something
to an infinite test in the sharp point
yeah yeah so focus on that you know if I
focus a little bit
go for it yeah all right
right so if the problem is or the domain
is innovation the domain is is how do we
go about finding and and realizing
something that is truly new one of the
primary components is intelligence and
by intelligence I really in some sense
just mean the ability to search the
space of possibility to discern possible
or probable locations and then to
efficiently like quickly play through
those probabilities until those bitter
actualize about so it's almost like
search it's not quite like sir it's
almost like I'm reminded to have Vevey
keys is it what he calls it the
possibility space or something like
where he's talking about the way that
humans somehow able to just pull reality
out of everything is that yeah the kind
of ballpark it's exactly the same yeah
exactly
follow okay you've got this this vast
possibility space and the question is
how are you able to actually kind of
like wander into mystery and an extract
from mystery something that is both real
in the sense that it's reproducible and
meaningful in the sense that it actually
creates change in some significant way
and that relevance realization is the
base for make easily enrolments
realization realization is the sort of
holistic systemic omni modal way that
you would go about doing that and of
which intelligence is a very close piece
of that it's not a full but piece of
course piece of it and and so augmenting
our intelligence will for sure
augmenting path C to to explore
possibilities but the students platoon
it
innovation but if you focus on
augmenting our intelligence and the
possibilities because of augmenting our
intelligence then you've moved from
velocity to acceleration then you're
you're saying ah well what is the way
that I can go about increasing my
capacity of increasing my capacity and
this is like this doesn't stop it was
like a recursion on that oh well how can
I find the thing on that so I go from
velocity to acceleration to something
called jerk to not know that sounds
interesting
jakers jerker is basically just the
derivative of acceleration so okay
velocity is changing in location over
time acceleration is changing velocity
over time jerk has changed in
acceleration over time and then imagine
if I have a small amount of jerk over
over what your jerk is so my rate of
acceleration is higher than your rate of
acceleration obviously my velocity is
gonna be a lot higher than your velocity
quickly my location is gonna blow you
away and so is this this sort of a
recursive infinitesimal in the
directionality of optimization on how
optimization optimization and as it
turns out there's two things about that
that make it extraordinarily available
to the game be approached by the way I'm
beginning to think that maybe there
should be broadcast more publicly pretty
pretty important okay so one piece is
capacity for creative collaboration like
truly divergent thinking and learning
how in your body to actually build an
increasing capacity for things like
practical intuition and like really
sussing out the thing that gives rise to
genius level insight that's all the kind
of stuff that is smack dab in the center
of the game be focused like that's what
game B is all about developing in
individuals and then in groups that
coherence is a word that can be used to
describe a group that has a capacity for
genius as a group not a capacity for
just being smart as a group but a
capacity for genius as a group and as
you're going down this this recursive
spiral from position to velocity or
acceleration to jerk from innovation to
innovation on innovation
innovation on innovation on innovation
this capacity for collective genius is
the thing like that's the thing that
enables you to begin to make continue to
make progress on that curve so it's the
maximum leverage in anything that works
backwards up the stack and by the way it
doesn't have to be entirely theoretical
or esoteric you can actually find
locations that are on the bleeding edge
so just like AI used for automated
trading of financial securities has this
extremely intense competitive edge even
though they're you know infinitesimal
advanced option formats if my AI is like
a thousand percent faster and better
than your AI I basically have won the
whole thing
like it's not it's a winner-take-all
infinitesimal 'ti okay cool that's the
place where if you can throw if the game
B modality of bringing sovereignty and
coherence into play in this space gives
a one thousandth of a percent edge you
run the whole thing and by the way that
whole thing is trillions of trillions of
dollars which is kind of a neat
possibility for doing what you're
talking about
right yeah so that's one side of the
coin here's actually a piece of that one
side of that coin is everybody who
anybody who signs up for that kind of a
project anybody says I'm interested in
creating a game Bay a game be AI based
hyperspeed trading a platform must also
sign up for moving almost all of the
resources generated by that fund back
into the commons to support the larger
game be movement which has a recursive
effect because again you're being
infinitely smart about it like you
actually are supporting other people
working on other locations in these two
in these zones like okay how do I
empower people to be looking at
nanotechnology or other users of AI that
aren't exactly this use of AI and
finding game B players and to do that
I'm actually going to have to upgrade
the capacity for supporting personal
development because just because
somebody happens to be a genius at AI
doesn't mean they have sovereignty in
fact quite often it means exactly the
opposite so upgrading
the educational and human development
architecture other lyrics includes
nutrition includes housing and includes
relationality with other people
relationality with potential mates
raising your kids it's like each one of
these characteristics are in fact
critical paths and as I begin to get
increasingly noticing what it takes to
up level up gradient and individuals
capacity entrance coherence
a geniuses capacity in charge of
coherence the more I actually have to be
able to bring the whole of their being
into game be style relationships into
game be style milieu which means that I
now have an intrinsic necessity of
changing the whole of the world that
they live in if I if I'm again an AI
genius I actually need to live in a
world where everybody who I interact
with is also fulfilled for me to be able
to actually be able to give them the
best the fullest most complete genius of
myself to become capable literally just
in my body I'm giving that into this
effort it's not instantaneous like you
can use these things move step by step
but the the natural dynamic goes that
way so that's one that that's that whole
side of you know that's the whole side
of that point right the flip side of
that coin is this this is this frontier
of these kinds of intelligence on
intelligence themself and intelligence
is extraordinarily dangerous like
incomprehensibly dangerous the most
dangerous possible thing actually lives
on this frontier we're in the deep code
world we actually make a very specific
distinction between catastrophic risk
and existential risk catastrophic risk
is like nuclear war maybe 93% of the
human population dies in a nuclear war
and in the cascade effects that's really
bad that's a catastrophe
yatin existential risk is all life on
Earth is gone or something like that
like it's a category this is an
existence in fact you can actually
affect essential risk that goes to the
point of all complex molecular chemistry
is galling this gets really nasty
in a certain point but certainly they
are complete and utter elimination of
humanity is essential doumitt so the
space of recursive intelligence on
intelligence and
fortunately moves from catastrophic to
existential and therefore needs the
strongest container of applied wisdom to
make choices on how to actually use this
technology again back to game be like in
game a you can't even begin to do that
in game a there's a Nash equilibrium or
a multipolar trap of increasingly
reckless competition in China and Google
on AI research if Google doesn't push
the push the envelope and with maximum
recklessness then they all they they
just know they're gonna fall behind
China and trying to notice the same
thing and so now they're just stuck and
if you go to China and say geez don't go
stress is dangerous like yeah it's
really dangerous but if we slow down
Google Google will do it now google's
like well if we slow down china will do
it wow so you realize is that you guys
are both driving everybody off the cliff
and you also realize that you can't
possibly stop that's a game a trap that
happens all the time the point of the
game be trap is actually finding a way
because of this thing that's describing
earlier about the necessity of actually
feeding the consequences back into an
increasing rereading of the wholeness of
each individual and all collective lives
of actually creating a degree of enough
wisdom to take that problem so very
seriously that we you're beginning to
realize that the thing that's at the
very tip of that point of intelligence
on intelligence and intelligence can be
nothing but solving that problem alright
I can't say that the most important
thing I'm working on an AI right now is
self-driving cars or even like
nanotechnology or solar the thing that
has to be in front of everything is how
do I make sure that we don't action the
tip over the the precipice of
existential risk as the fundamental
center of all AI activity for example
and to be able to have each individual
who's participating and that holds full
responsibility for the well-being of the
totality of humanity as part of their
mandate and ability to participate in
this in this environment so that's what
I was going after so it's a very weird
thing I mean I'm literally saying that
if you're looking at
let me give you this the moon make it
very concrete there are people right now
who are who have the capacity they know
things they knew they have scientific
and to some extent engineering knowledge
that is close not quite we're like in
the zone between R&D and engineering but
they're in the zone between R&D and
engineering of being able to use
nanotechnology to produce much more
efficient solar cells like an order of
like four times more efficient like 400
per set which doesn't mean by the way
from 40 watts to 160 watts it means from
30% efficient to 60 percent efficient
something like that like the order of
magnitude
that's huge like on the one hand it it
radically and completely irrevocably
no-holds-barred outcompetes the existing
solar industry in every country like
it's one of those technological game
changers so if you've done that then in
many ways the world is your oyster
that's a trillion dollar business and
also because it actually creates an
amount and energy return EROI
of solar power that is actually a
game-changer right now solar power
doesn't have an e ROI that would make it
able on its own basis to support our
global energy needs right now it still
has to be subsidized by fossil fuels but
if you could use if you get that level
of upgrade in performance it is so BAM
being just transition to that and you
start getting this massive accelerating
curve on a new form of technology which
by the way if you use this nanotech the
way of making is also throws off of us
externalities well that gap at the level
of the degree of difficulty of getting
over that hump like we're close we're
not quite there but the degree of
difficulty is actually quite high
because the specifics company specific
complexity is quite high so they'll be a
perfect game B project and I don't feel
comfortable giving that level of power
to anyone who isn't able to be bound to
the well-being of the whole of world and
in a deep way I could finance the
finance thing or the solar common
the technology the nanotechnology right
yeah I mean it's there's another one
that's going on right now there's a guy
named George church who's the leader of
one of the major labs researching CRISPR
technology and one of the projects that
they're working on is designing a what's
called a gene Drive that could
effectively eliminate the entire species
of malaria carrying mosquitoes which I
don't know if you know the history of
the Green Revolution but um it's one of
these things where in a complicated
framework when you look at it's like wow
that's gonna be really good that will
save a lot of lives or watch people die
from malaria and you could just
eliminate the species of mosquitoes that
provides that you will effectively save
all of them so tens the millions and
hundreds of millions over decades okay
yeah and a thing that can be used to
create a gene drug that can eliminate a
species of mosquitoes probably really
increases the possibility of sort of
let's say targeting any species at all
or perhaps even subspecies perhaps he
didn't say like lineage human lineages
and also by the way the absolute a
removal of an entire species from an
ecosystem may have complex unintended
consequences that we don't understand
and so we're in this very again this is
sort of a Nash equilibrium in some sense
if if the Stanford guys don't do it
maybe the Chinese will and if we don't
have that capacity that we're gonna fall
behind them both in terms of economic
competitiveness there's all kinds of
cool tools that are unleashed by that
and maybe also military competitiveness
we don't want the Chinese have any
create a gene Drive that could sort of
eliminate all white people for examples
which is bizarre because like the answer
what we want to be able to have a
capacity its intruder okay great that's
that's like now we're kind of at the
efficient engine if you want to be able
to really get ahead of everybody else in
that kind of a landscape a game B
approach should be better okay actually
should generate more collaborative
creative collaborative capacity
to do innovation in that domain and yeah
and here's the trick kids know how to do
this in front and get a sustainable
competitive advantage but then use that
sustainable competitive advantage to
actually slow the whole thing down so
that we don't find ourselves killing
ourselves because we increasingly make
more powerful with an intervening in the
world that we can handle like that kind
of a trick
it's me mint it's that's gonna be yeah
that's a very different that's a very
difficult problem though isn't it
cuz as far as I can tell it's like how
to solve it at all right because that
pivot from well we're winning in a kind
of game a competitive way but with game
be principled angry principles but then
we're going to need to pivot that in
such a way that we can control other
actors that perhaps aren't game B yet
and it's trying to get yeah example so
here's an example that might that might
work so consider this I'm gonna drop two
things into the into the environment and
see how that changes the game theory the
way it plays out one thing is I'm going
to drop in a an open patent left concept
you through--the copy maps like in open
source vaguely but go ahead and lucky
again it's easy to give you so if that's
okay the the way that copy Maps works is
it says okay here's the the terms of
agreement for you to use this software
or this intellectual property are that
you must make your software an
intellectual property available under
this license it's kind of a viral
infection so you can use Apache but only
if by virtue of using Apache you also
make whatever you're making available
under the same license so it has a
opening characteristic it has to open
more things if anybody wants to use it
and so to the degree to which the tools
that are in this patent left category
are valuable and useful people like them
they have a competitive advantage
they're better tools then you'll begin
to find more and more people choose to
sign up for the patent left a set of
agreements less and less people will
sign up for proprietary would have
called closed approaches um so you know
you young entrepreneur wanted to move
forward in the sages gene Drive space
will participate in the patent left
universe because participate
participating in the other universe
before closes you from so much of the
core intellectual property in your
universe you really just can't do
anything effective there's a critical
point at which if I can't have access to
these key pieces of technology I just
kind of can't do anything alright great
so then enables us to do is it enables
us to then wire in more ethical
constraints on people who choose to
engage in in in patent left in this open
for example genetics pen environment so
we go in with you know Tesla made all of
their patents available for free no yeah
so Tesla had expense in electric cars
and like last year or two years ago how
long must go down stem all available for
free was just giving him away now if
instead of just giving them away he had
actually given them away under a patent
left structure meaning anybody can use
these but anybody who uses these must
also give their patents away under this
exact same license and let's just say
for example everybody has everybody
whose son said to this license also must
give twenty percent of their net profits
to a game B fund or a nanotechnology
research for recycling solar power
panels but that's something like that
like a finding a way to actually think
about how the total ecosystem of
electric cars could be furthered by
generating the right kind of ethical
components yeah so that's that's one
piece so one piece is okay can you
create an ecosystem dynamic where
participation in the ecosystem means
that people's choices are now instead of
going in a direction of a competitive
race toward to the end they're naturally
now engaging in a collaborative thing
that is interested intrinsically
endurable I'm participating in this
ecosystem it's going to work and if you
don't participate in the ecosystem
you're really not competitive in the
environment at all
so that's one piece the other side is a
guilt a guilt but it's like a union
which is to say to participate in the
ecosystem as an individual I must also
be a member of the guild as a member of
the guild I agree to kind of two things
one is I agree to further my progress in
my game be evolution to become
increasing the sovereign to learn how to
show up responsibly and to build my own
personal wisdom as well as my skill set
second I agree not to give any of my
gifts and if my intelligence my
knowledge my wisdoms any effort that is
not connected to the guilt right so
let's say bad guy biotech company wants
to do something quite reckless in the
direction of research in gene drives and
so therefore they refuse to sign up for
the the ecosystem agreements construct
they're like we're going our own well
one of the things that happens is they
can't access any of the guild members
knowledge and capacity no guild number
will collaborate with them and that'll
make it very hard for them to be
competitive now there's a point at which
but there's a point at which it doesn't
really matter there's a point at which
there's just enough talent in the
marketplace that will work for wages
right it will basically subordinate
their sovereignty and their choice
making to somebody else in exchange for
dollars but there's a point where a
tipping point where there's enough
knowledge and capacity people who
refused to do so who will only give
their gifts into something that is
ethical and an ecosystem that will
actually continue to work and during Lee
under the context of accelerating change
and for
everyone that begins to evaporate the
game a choice making and it's actually
not that big a tipping point because
more and more people would prefer to
work in something which is gives them
access to autonomy on their own creative
fall in their own creative directions
supports them increasing their
sovereignty and their capacity for real
and meaningful relationships with other
people um and also is fully committed as
a collaborative to making sure that the
choices were making collectively are
differently it's not existential but
it's a good it's just good right so more
and more people want to be participating
in something that is good that is good
for them and it's good for the world and
if it were possible you could actually
make that available as choice they would
choose to do so which means that they
would not choose to participate in
things that are bad and things that are
bad would have Lex access to resources
or begin to just simply go away right so
there's a structural or an architectural
way of weaving up something in this game
be dynamic that could solve that problem
something along those lines so that's
that yeah it's very interesting and now
that there was some some pushback coming
but then this is what I did I'm I'm a
bit of a licker I instantly like what
appears to me often is is well how might
that be where might the problems lie in
yeah so can I can I do it throw so much
is that is that okay yeah absolutely
only for not not to guy Bosch anything
but - you know - hopefully we can be
generated generative with it
so um so the first thing is like it
needs to be I think enough under the
radar in in the first instance to not
just get blown out of the water by a n a
n of the mega-corporation like in
whichever whichever space that it's
operating in um it needs to there needs
to be
because back to this back to this money
thing oh and it isn't just a and other
corporations by the way that I'm also
thinking about governments too because
yeah they want to they want to generate
tax income and they want to probably do
that in whatever currency that they're
operating in and the more stuff that's
like free the less they're able to to do
that so there's some kind of lobbying
arm and then and so and again the only
solutions that are coming a kind of game
a ones you know um you know like if
you're learning competing is it you know
game be has its own lobby group and it's
you know lobbying government to kind of
maybe reduce patent patent legislation
or or even if even if not there's going
to be some pushback from game a for sure
so there's some problems and that are
gonna need need ironing out and and
there's this this the same same problem
and they said this is perhaps a personal
one to me but I'm sure I'm not the only
person that's um this living this kind
of living it and is that it's the
transition period that's a tricky bit so
say I wanted to sign up for one of these
guilds and I needed to agree not to work
on anything other than game B projects
or then right how can I still pay my
taxes and pay my mortgage and due to
being a being a game a person thing well
then there needs to be flexibility in
that that contract at least in the
initial phases you see so it's like a
won't need to I think to shuffle my way
in and as the guild gets stronger and
stronger and stronger and starts to be
able to provide more and more resources
that means I can I can live on those
resources and but it's right basic like
you know that there needs to be like
dipping the toes in the water space you
know yes so think about it like this you
you you would start out you would start
out with something like let's make it go
back to the concrete example of the game
a game be hedge fund can be a automated
trading fund right so you're a
researcher in that fund and you're paid
money pounds sterling I believe it's not
the currencies coming back in in fashion
and use it to pay your taxes and use it
to pay your rent yeah but you take a you
know a modest reasonable salary a very
large amount of the profits of the firm
instead of being churned into cocaine
hookers and private islands which is
typically how that works out yeah is
being is invested in say like
constructing I'm kind of jumping ahead
but we're just gonna put it in place
yeah constructing Seneca village like a
real wholesome village that you and your
mates and your and my mates I mean both
your friends and your you know longtime
domestic partners yeah live in like
wouldn't that be a lot nicer than living
in some posh flat at the 30 90th floor
of some skyscraper and every once in a
while private jetting down to Brazil to
do some you know disco to actually just
live a wholesome life with people who
cared about you and who you cared about
and we're really interested you are well
being as a being on the planet and that
turns out actually not to be that
expensive and it's turned out that you
can now radically reduce the amount of
money that you need because you know
rents covered we built the village it's
a lot cheaper a lot lot cheaper to build
a village than it is to pay rent in
London yeah and and and in this village
we're actually including in supporting
all the other kinds of people who do the
sorts of things that you typically need
saving you to the barista my fourth wave
baristas in that place yeah the farmers
and so the food and the food by the way
is grown by farm is their vocation like
they're really doing at a sense of
sacred duty it's the thing that is there
most of filling thing and so therefore
we
sure the food's pretty good yeah gonna
be healthy you trailers Whole Foods
times 10 yeah and so and your body will
therefore feel more alive because your
body is not fighting off all the wide
variety of toxins you cannot help but
absorb through your skin into your
digestive tract when you're trying to
just be in the big in a city that is a
game a city right so this this feedback
with a step by step thing where you're
actually your your weaning yourself off
but you're winning yourself off from
this path towards higher more
meaningless like an actual life that you
just actually enjoy better it's a better
life and better friends who treat you
better who are better at being in
relationship with you your work
experience like I talked about you know
this support Google engineers these days
who live in San Francisco who come up
out of their five thousand six thousand
dollar-a-month nine hundred square foot
apartment step over three homeless
people who've got heroin needles
sticking out of them yeah get on a
private Google bus where they zip past
increasing urban squalor go to this
shiny techno flirt do their work and
then go back where they put their kids
in some collapse in local school and
their wife is just absolutely harried
because her job as a nurse has nothing
to do it's their job as a technologist I
take the exact same person and have it
be where they're in a place where
everybody who their width is
simultaneously as an individual
committed to their own personal capacity
it's successfully moving there it's
committed to supporting everybody else
in that community in going there and the
entire community is completely committed
to making this available to the entire
world like maximum purpose maximum
meaningfulness and actually done in a
way that is strategic and viable it
could actually work we're piloting it in
the community we're learning okay here's
how governance can actually be done to
avoid the various pitfalls we all
understand habit in politics here's how
water can be handled so that we actually
are creating and moving and flowing
clean water that we're not despoiling
from the get-go
there's food production there's energy
like all the various problems that have
to dissolve for humans anywhere we're
actually learning how to deal with them
but again not jumping to utopia but step
by step increasing our skillfulness and
artfulness and learning how to do things
in a way that uses the efficient
frontier
effective capacity intelligence on
intelligence to make breakthroughs or
breakthroughs are needed and just make
simple choices where simple choices are
already available to do better stock
because most of it's actually quite
simple only most of what's going on
right now in the world as the humans
have been pushed very very far away from
what human beings naturally I wanted
like to do yeah and and therefore we
have to inject ourselves with a very
large number of artificial stimulants
can fill that gap of meaning for its
most of the problem I know yeah so
there's a few places where that kind of
thing a kind of thing not oh the exact
same thing by any stretch but happens
sort of already so there's the hippie
commune thing so there's a bunch of
lessons that would need learning there
and yep and then there's also like
religious you know I'm thinking about
like monks maybe living together in a
monastery or yeah like so there's that
religious yeah you nailed it I really
yeah so so can I give you this is this
is a more advanced language it may not
work okay if I can give it to you we can
actually make some real progress
okay these kinds of things if you have
the right kind of tools you can actually
solve really hard problems yeah so
there's there's a particular philosophy
the one of my collaborators just worked
out but is able to identify that there's
three fundamental modalities that make
up what we call the real reality and
it's important to recognize that each of
those data means modalities is distinct
they are like X Y Z you know no amount
of the X dimension is gonna get you any
amount of the Y dimension they're
distinct but if you have X Y and Z's got
a three-dimensional space so Lord Allah
days and he there was issue of his names
and they're they're reasonably well
chose so one modality is the
transcendent modality and that more or
less maps to your monastery
it's more or less than a person amongst
feels like the sacred the spacious the
eternal connections spirituality those
are kind of like transcendent modalities
by the way it's most specifically it
actually has to do the space between
domains but we can go there good like
then you have the eminent modality the
eminent mood
is the as presents the slow of life
moment to moment embodiment actually
being in life like sitting in the in my
backyard looking at that plan like Here
I am
right now that kind of goes and that
actually that's kind of true hippie
commune or to an indigenous tribe and
then he have the emission and the
emissions is many ways it's tied to
things like complicated this to
technology to knowledge to knowing to
being able to use information structures
to constrain and control what happens
causation to build to build things
engineering and this actually starts to
map to modern Western civilization in
general I was gonna say it feels a bit
gay may actually that last one that last
piece it's very game gaming is give me
is very much what happens when you buy
us heavily towards the omniscient right
and by the way that happens with
objectively bias towards ammunition
meaning that we tend to try to solve
problems using complicated solutions and
subjectively we try to think through
problems using complicated toolkits that
our heads and in art relationships and
where the in one of the insights where
the powers of game be is to say ah it's
it's not any one of these three it's
actually a three dimensional space that
brings them all into right relationship
so we actually need something like a
monastery we need something like a
hippie commune means something like a
googolplex and you know is just like
kind of like you know mix them all
together it's not a squish she's just
like squishing together it's more like
baking a cake and that's like I can a
smoothie what's your call that's like an
aggregate it's like mixing a bag of
gravel right and there's a way there's a
way of actually bringing the the deepest
called insider specificity of each of
these modalities into an integrated
whole we should then be called reality
so I'm just what I'm getting here now
I've no idea if it's of any use but it
came and sorry to interrupt but I just
felt like I'd say it like oh I'm getting
kind of a like a visual of the 3d space
so I'm gonna make a sculpture of the
right shape
of across those three different if we
could find the perfect sculpture so like
the right amount of omniscience and the
right amount of yeah like something I
don't know sorry Tru truly grasping all
of that is a lot of work yeah right is
that it's not it's it's very much
non-trivial but you know so was
arithmetic back in the Greek Age right
yeah yeah sure once once you kind of got
good at it good at teaching it you can
start getting you know third graders to
do it but right now it's not their grade
level it's a lot of work yeah
but the point being is that your insight
is right like okay yes it's all three
it's those three different elements in
this elements brought into right
relationship both statically and
dynamically so there's a right
relationship in in in a moment there's
also revelation ship and how the process
of dynamic evolution and homeostatic
continuation how that plays out yeah
so that's what you're thinking about
that's what this kind of a village would
be looking like is they would yes it
would actually have a feeling of the of
the monastery it have a feeling of the
hippie community and have a feeling of
the Googleplex exactly where each of
those aspects as good as most needed
yeah and that would be as you can see
the monastery lacks Googleplex yes
yeah right it lacks women typically you
don't have women in children you don't
really have an enduring culture you've
got something which is a you know a very
specific subdomain like a parent site at
the end of the day is powerful and
important by the way monasteries have
been in maintaining a lot of the core
essence of game be it's over long
periods of time and in significant
through bad periods and of course we
know the hippie commune with a lack is
they lack simultaneously a true friend
Cendant connection to something that is
beyond themselves they tend to become
too hedonistic reality-based
choice-making on a frontier of up
gradient capacity so they tend to be
sort of uh
what's that called return to nature
identic is i can any Zdenek utopianism
which doesn't work because what the very
least he doesn't work because a million
people can't live a need in a key to
open ism we did that and that had about
a billion people in it yeah i mean
that's that's that you had another
another piece of pushback that i wanted
to respond to because i thought was very
good i've lost it so there was the the
initial contract being flexible but I
suppose you've kind of answered that in
one sense by making the the value
proposition which is you know yeah
amount that people will gain should
hopefully be enough to attract them but
I'm still wondering because people cuz
game a is a trap right yeah and like
some wave I suppose suppose that could
be you could manage that by inviting
people to come and visit it you could
you could be doing and sorry I'm
thinking out loud of it here you could
be go ahead yep so just in terms of that
value proposition and making it flexible
as well it's just making sure that it's
this stuff going on that's public not to
public that it's gonna be bringing too
much attention
ah that's oh you're bringing out you're
bringing out the risk the risk of either
attacker co-optation right yeah yeah so
broadly speaking I agree we've
discovered that we actually have a
really interesting advantage and it's
almost like what's this called like
passive
camouflage in the animal world mm-hm
gamy really doesn't understand what the
hell I'm talking about yeah it's almost
like I could I could stand in front of
somebody who okay I could just go into a
boardroom and then it's act have and
begin the process of having this
conversation and some combination of
either I'm
I'm completely naive I'm lying
I'm a commie whatever it is right it
will tend to not reject it in the
direction of oh that's really actually
dangerous and therefore I need to
cooperate destroy it right now but more
than the direction of not to be paid
attention to which is a really odd thing
like it's more it's almost like it's
invisible it's almost like game B is
intrinsically invisible to game a thus
far and that said there is a point at
which I imagine that would change so
maybe needs to be on a steep exponent so
that by the time it shows up to the
brainstem no no but they think of game a
gaming is that dinosaur that famous
dinosaur where you know I can hit it in
the tail and the brain wouldn't know it
for like ten minutes yeah so by the time
the dinosaur is feeling the teeth in its
rump well that actually is aware of it
in its brain it's to eight exponential
that needs to be a steep exponential and
this is why by the way in my in my own
work I tend to focus on the components
and getting the raw components together
right like it's effective coherent
creative collaboration there's new form
of collective intelligence and being
able to scale it past certain critical
thresholds like if you if you get that
right because that core code right then
implement it you begin to actually do it
you begin to use it and to scale it
that's the kind of thing that can they
can move very quickly and if it's scales
whether that means is that it's stable
as more energy is put into it it does
not break with a million people for
example you use oh we schedule
million people now it doesn't work at
all if that's what you want to avoid
because it's the kind of thing that once
you get past some minimum threshold game
on like it has to go all the way to the
end without breaking so it's very
important to actually get the design
work right I know a lot of folks with
variety of different biases tend to
critique the game be effort for being
too conceptual but it's actually more
about design than it is concept it's
it's more of a design approach like how
do we actually make sure that we're
thinking very clearly about all the
various steps that need to be in place
for to actually work and and then we've
actually designed with real precision
the elements that must be in place
to be able to to blow all the way
through the objections let's think about
the objections well in advance and not
necessarily discover them in the middle
yes we've made a terrible design in his
 because it's a it's a very
specific lien it's like you know landing
somebody on the moon you design that
that ship with a lot of precision
because once it's in space
you better got it right yeah
it's got a lot like that yeah I think
rightfully so though for exactly all the
reasons you've just said you know yeah
and just it just to say then my own
lived experience is that we still have
way too much game a habit so we tend to
cut corners take shortcuts or project
gaming models to solve problems and my
lived experience is that every time I've
done that it is in fact kicked me in the
ass so I'm like okay I get it I get it
that's not gonna work this there's good
reasons where I can't I'm not just like
get punched in the face and then okay I
don't get punched in the face I get
punched face like okay why don't you
skip punched in the face what just
happened there oh okay here's the
underlying basis for why this picture
coverage doesn't work okay now I just
got kicked in the balls the hell just
happened there oh here's a different
underlying basis but if I think about it
they're actually both tied it's the same
thing which is more or less stop using
gay made tools with all these problems
mm-hmm yeah so the next big thing that's
coming up for me and I'm aware of time
so maybe we're getting close we're
getting close to the end yeah we can
park we can park this but how that's the
next thing that's the next thing
how proof well I assure you that if I
knew the answer that I'd have been done
long ago Yeah right and it's weird
because I actually am able to now
explain why I don't know the answer any
kind of gesture in the direction of how
but it's a good thing okay because it
has to do with the same exact thing that
we've been talking about of innovations
in innovation is a mystery the answer is
that this is a mysteries that have done
a puzzle it's a mystery so the how is
actually building our skillfulness our
embodied skills our actual practical
wisdom in navigating mystery
is a really weird thing because it's
recursive because a lot of the
underlying essence of what it means to
game be again d player is actually
increasing skillfulness in navigating
mystery so it's weird like to catalyser
to move game b forward as the mystery so
to begin to do that one of the things we
have to do is we have to increase our
individual collective capacity at
navigating mystery like how to increase
our intuitive sense how do we increase
our ability to perceive that which is
just right around the corner that we
can't quite grasp with the mind that we
have but it's real enough that we can
begin the process of understanding how
to build the kind of mental constructs
the could grasp it without making it up
them wouldn't know what it is this is
real stuff like it's not it's not made
out like we've done this as humans many
different times or this kind of thing
many different times and it's it's uh
it's out of that order and what's weird
though this is why I kind of always get
confused so almost like topsy-turvy
which is in some sense getting past a
certain critical mass getting past a
certain level of individual and
collective skillfulness and being able
to navigate the mystery is is all there
is because once you've done that you're
now in it you know the thing that you're
racing into it's it's already landed on
the moon it's very weird that there will
obviously be actual real material things
that will actually build in our
technology would build actual ships to
space will build villages but will now
be doing it in a context where the
capacity to do it right and well has
already been embodied has already been
done and I think that embodiment feels
feels right and if I'm getting that the
your train of thought here which is
actually we're working on ourselves
right now it's it's like yeah each other
and each other of course yes is right so
there's this yeah that's what it links
with your religion not religion stuff
with with with Johnny V or everybody
said I was good
which is that kind of what other
practices that are going to get as their
what do we need to do like if we're
going to meditate how do we meditate if
we're going to meditate we're gonna do
it alongside a bunch of other things you
know what are those things um I suppose
that's the that's the focus isn't it
right it's yeah how do we make how do we
make how do we do this bizarre thing of
making effective choices without a
rulebook telling us where Twitter is to
make which is called wisdom mm-hmm that
would become wise that's another way of
saying it yeah yeah and yeah and then
we're back into the sovereignty thing
aren't we and they have the capacity to
use all of our senses
organs whatever they may be to find out
what the next best step is and then take
it yeah okay
humility is another good pill to take
every day yeah right right because I
mean what came up for me is we were
having this conversation was all right
so now I need to come buy a piece of
land I need to settle this thing but
what you're saying is I said whoa whoa
whoa whoa like just chill a bit you know
that's the impression I'm game which is
like do the work first like on you
before you run away and start throwing
money is that what you're saying or well
more or less I mean yes right if I had
to have it
that would be the simplest version but
this isn't really to say don't have
agency it's just to say to just remember
that most of what you'll be doing in the
object which we will be doing in the
kind of in the do it really needs to be
seen as experiment it really needs to be
seen as prototyping and testing and
feeling like we we don't know how to
build those villains who just don't know
we have any idea yeah but some people
are going to have to start running
experiments trying to do different kinds
of things some people don't have to
start you know building the you know the
new R&D kind of organization and we will
learn what works and where doesn't work
Larr as much
I doing it and failing feeling well like
failing in an interesting way feeling in
a direction this forward yeah
as we will by getting clear precision
and more better principles of design
that help us prune experiments that just
won't work at all and that's kind of
that's the combination so yeah work on
yourself make yourself a vessel and and
vehicle that is more and more capable of
entering into coherence with other
people then seek out those particular
experiments that seem most likely most
like the one that you are here to do
like what there's lost and there's no
obvious strategy there's no obvious ones
that are more important than others so
whatever you're in most call all do and
whatever your coherence like if there's
other people around you throw very
connecting with and that connected group
has a feeling of a particular experiment
that goes like there's a dude do
that but recognize you're doing an
experiment so loop go in come back out
look around talk to people or make apart
your groups see you know cross fertilize
come back in run another loop like that
kind of thing like a living process of
learning doing growing that kind of
thing is that's the nature of the
experiment Vaska witty make this thing
move forward building wisdom that's how
you build wisdom great yep all right
thank you so much pushback I love that
that's all right that's okay any time if
you think if you want someone I'm here I
do that all right cool
thank you so much say oh just before you
just before you go you said in the
middle that you might you might want to
join me to send you a copy of the
recording or to review it if you feel
called to share this with more people
feel free to okay I would say all right
fab thanks I'm in great see you later