[Music]
Rule Omega is actually a really simple
practical thing that I towards coherence
that I would like everybody here to get
is if if Jordan mare talking or Pugh and
I are talking like we we have this and I
think we naturally have it's worth
making explicit is if you say something
that sounds ridiculous to me or batshit
crazy or wrong I actually give the
benefit of the doubt that you might have
a reason that I didn't understand first
so rather than just default into you're
probably wrong
I'll ask more questions and and that
giving the benefit of the doubt that you
actually might have something useful to
say increases my making sure that I
understand you before I'm responding and
that actually and the disagreeing was
something that you weren't even saying
because I didn't seek to understand well
enough creates very turbulent flow
rather than laminar flow breaks down
coherence right if people could just do
that towards coherence if they could
just give the benefit of the doubt that
each other that everyone has some signal
even if it's on a very different part of
reality than the part they're focused on
and even if there's noise involved and
they're listening for the signal first
that would change everything
that's a starting place so Daniel
expresses something and let's see he's
trying to express intense hard which by
the way the rule make is designed for
that kind of a thing like I'm not
interested in having conversations that
aren't actually trying to break new
ground so okay do with you so you
expressing something hard and in the
expression ninety-eight percent is noise
and two percent is signal like the
chance riff but what happens is that my
job is to actually do two things one
hold all of it not just say it that
was that wasn't a hundred percent right
so I'm just gonna nuke it hold all of it
then in my self discernment to what
degree can i express something back that
gets rid of the fifty fifty percent that
is noise
so now I've got 6% signal express it
back and of course if he can then do
that and now you three is even better a
more profound instrument because you're
gonna be bringing a different
perspective perhaps you can take it and
actually zoom in on it down to the poem
you're actually 50% signal that's the
idea I and so one it's an invitation and
say hey we're trying to do something's
hard let's all try to do something
that's hard to be willing to take the
risk of not speaking elegantly and on
the premise that everyone else is doing
their absolute level best to hear
that which is trying to speak itself
through you and listening them is in
themselves like oh there it is
tone got it there's something beautiful
and clear there here's what I heard and
that's for the Omega and there's a
psychological safety that's created to
be able to try out new stuff knowing
that we know we're trying out new stuff
we're giving the benefit of the doubt so
it actually does become more explorative
and that's where you get more novelty
and then I imagine I don't know if this
is true for Daniel I imagine it's true
for you but certainly if it's true for
me
is that I'm also noticing myself like
this constant you know when you're
meditating you feel this this constant
chatter and flow of like all the things
that are going on internally that are
either like certain ideas are popping up
or emotional responses some of them are
like social emotional responses some of
them are like just like I got a P and
like being able to actually notice all
that chatter internally and do the
disturbing interior and say okay of all
that chatter which have a heart that's
actually signal oh
but listen to all of it you have to have
you we're gonna make it goes in and out
right I'm listening to myself fully and
I'm listening to the to the others fully
and trying to use discernment to
continuously allow that process to turn
that into gold now there's a really
important distinction that we're saying
something that is different than the way
that some people think about multi
perspectivism which is we're not saying
I'm not saying all perspectives are
equally valid and I'm also not saying
that there is no way to integrate them
into higher
understanding I'm saying all
perspectives have some signal generally
have some noise and that perspective is
itself a reduction of information on the
reality being perceived don't know it's
on the quantum foam of it all
[Music]
you
[Music]