welcome to Saturday morning roundtable
where we shared what we've been up to on
our projects the last week I didn't
wants to join in they can follow the
stream yard like in the comments on
Facebook does any want to start with
what the project is and what they've
been up to and what they could use help
on I gotta start us off so I guess since
we're kind of doing introductions of
what the project is as well Bentley
Davis project is reason scored say it's
a process to increase mass agreement
through evidence-based debate I have not
done anything this week because it was
mostly taking vacation coming up I hope
to finish an example debate on nutrition
science and and reach out to some other
people in that area cuz that seems like
a good place to practice using the tool
as far as ways people could help if
anyone has a smallish argument not like
climate change then you know maybe we
could you know if someone wants to
debate tabs versus spaces in the
programming world or something like that
then we could use that as an example so
I meant the point we're trying to create
examples and test it out and improve the
process through actual use and so that's
this coming week and then I'm working on
a lot of other projects we're doing work
on no code development in the Dallas
area I'm creating content for that and
I'm helping my brother with his business
that's making physical products so
that's what I'm up to
because I can go next I'm Adriel Briscoe
my project is wiki election it is a tool
to fight misinformation I have recently
been working with Bentley and someone
else that shows up here a lot mmm a
douche to create the early framework for
it got that online it's actually a app
duck we wiki election calm I still
consider it kind of an early Oh like a
pre-alpha version because it doesn't
have a lot of the stuff that the
election will need to actually be usable
for its intended purpose it's all do
working with them over the next coming
weeks to continue adding to it to
hopefully get it to a point where it can
serve its intended purpose I can't think
of anything else that I need except for
that although I guess I'm looking for
more easily downloadable data for
politicians voting history I checked BC
it is available but not very easily
understood and imported so if there's if
there's something out there that someone
knows is actually just in like a
downloadable table to say here's how
each person put it on you know different
pieces of legislation that will be
easier for the next step this week I've
mostly been being an octopus it cuz I
realized the stuff would've jarred zeros
got many tentacles so one of the
tentacles then the there I was running
droppings a local church because they
given us a free room so I had a meeting
with them and the agreeance away to the
fourth phase of the lockdown exit and
before we start getting them up and
running again it's well hoping to
install Drupal this week have been
collaborating with Matus on his mapping
projects and spoke to canyon from the
project group he was in India at the
moment and it turns out she lives in
Glasgow which is about 60 miles away
from me so I wait to see her when she
gets back and they have lots of chats
explaining the faith of project to her
and I sort of
document the Chad for the insight
framework
she didn't manage to win at the awesome
 club but Chicago is going to open
loads of other base and that so I'll be
looking forward to suddenly chatting to
or more or finding out more about that
and what are the tentacles ever got
wrapped around people's necks not yet oh
every watch a sad thought to Jerry's
weird tomorrow which I'm looking forward
to hopefully get a chat with Kylie
sometime over the weekend and onwards
and upwards and and more chats with
people and that's away so yeah I suppose
that's all we updated tentacles for now
I am Jubilee Briscoe weird we have the
same last name Adria
my projects are solution raising process
raised and quite frankly just me on my
own project in the last week last
Saturday I wasn't at this because I held
the first fall in love with a fellow
human being otherwise called oxytocin 36
and only one person showed up for it but
it was amazing that that one person
showed up and I got to know him better
and it's on the back burner of something
that is in the toolbox or something that
can be used to to bond people but I
don't quite know how to get people to it
and I'm not really willing to put in the
effort to figure that out at the moment
because my focus is on solution raising
where we had ours this last week on the
slavery
vini a Gupta showed up it was a very
caring was very powerful conversation
and just continuing with that and
figuring out how can I get more people
to host solution raisings and now that I
have a zoom account how can I hosting
them on there and getting people to show
up consistently so we can break out into
groups and at least have parallel ones
processor 18 is continuing on we're
still meeting going through the
foundational documents we've moved on
from vision admission to the currencies
and that is an interesting process I am
enjoying otherwise just try not to start
any new fires the ones that I currently
have and I'm thinking what I need in the
next couple weeks is to do a project
raising on solution raising to figure
out how do I get those extra people I'm
still in the process of getting my
document to the stage that I want to
send it to carry which might just be
sending it to carry as is because I
can't necessarily it's like here's my
brain dump and then trying to organize
it into a way that makes sense so that
it flows is not my strong point so that
is what I'm up to or have been up to
so I guess that means we kind of see if
anyone wants to be in the hot seat
Adriel on yours I know there's a lot of
data like that in the US I'm not aware
of any for downloadable but it should be
there yeah that's what I'll end up I'm
probably just going to go from sort of
you know where's the east checking each
province in Canada and then if I don't
see anything there I'll check you know
state-by-state starting with the larger
states it's sort of the more because
yeah they're like the more digitally
savvy ones because some of them aren't
very savvy and some of them are
extremely so it's I'm actually yeah kind
of more used to that data anyway but and
you might include in your searches like
open data that's a term that's being
used for people that especially want it
to be able to be dealt downloadable and
a lot more politically that's a good
point yeah there's probably some some
services outside that have already done
that and no because if you look like I
looked at BC and Alberta so far and they
do seem to follow a format it's just not
easy for me to use but it's you know I'm
gonna be fairly easy for somebody to
write a program that could go through
and parse it and then add it to some
data so if someone's done that then that
might make it easier yeah and if you
need help parsing the data I've done a
lot of that in the past thank you
yeah and that's kind of the current plan
if for whatever reason I can't
and then the fallback was to instead of
doing the politicians and their voting
history because the framework as it is
just tracks people organizations and
then the people's positions in the
organization's the other option is to
start tracking sort of events in the
news and tying it back to organizations
and people mostly around sort of how
individual companies are handling all
kovat thing like the companies that are
actually doing cool stuff the companies
they're very much not doing cool stuff
the companies that are just going to
staying on the sidelines and you know
trying to make it as much money as
possible no matter what
just to have that record but there's a
lot more involved there it seems like
it'll be easier just to add things for
the legislation and voting history and
then there's a way to you know actually
have that not easier to understand data
format and I'm off with the races no I
remember when we cuz when we first like
years ago talk about crazy and items DVD
for politicians there was something that
was looking up what your politician like
what your MP voted for how they voted on
different issues historically but that
was uh nearly a decade this is the
default format of how the bc system
works if you go there it's just a giant
list of like a it list per person and
then it lists like all the things that
did they voted on and how they voted but
the end goal like i mean theoretically
that could work if i just wanted to pull
out like five people and five pieces of
legislation but if i can swing it the
end goal is to actually be able to have
like you know here's a hundred
politicians in DC here's 20 pieces of
legislation here's the full voting
history is after that the immediate next
step is to start to categorize the
legislation and then use that to sort of
create a summary of like hey on these 20
pieces of environmental legislation you
know did this person either you know
voted like 95% of the time for it or you
know eighty-three percent of time
against it so you can start to test you
there but yeah that's a good point both
sort of your and Bentleys is look for
other services that may have already
done this work and that may have parsed
the different provinces and states into
something a bit more understandable
Thank You sounds like it's something
that is going to be even less you can
create a bot that does it a lot of data
entry right a lot of like this just
personally voted on all these things
which is enough for just bc let alone
all of the provinces and canada and then
of course in the states to do all of
that that is the point where you like
want volunteers you want people that can
but not in it has to be at that stage my
guess is you can find them fairly easily
just on facebook of like hey who wants
to change your political stance you know
who wants to donate an hour's worth of
data entry i would donate i said that
let me try to look at the individual oh
I don't know - you know if estimate very
easy never mind I've just stuff a
Lincoln that I'm thinking I don't know
whether that might be any use I'll start
having a look about see if there's any
in the UK and you kind of because I've
seen it says what is your MP said so I
don't know whether that might be a very
useful yeah thank you see postal code
against my old one I'll give you mine no
that doesn't well all you that's for
your British MP so you don't have a
postal code oh is that British oh yeah
okay you know I'm secretly British no no
I did not
Oh Jerry gave you one oh I should just
saw a list of MPs so I can just check
one of them
[Music]
Oh interesting they kind of do a similar
thing although very like there's only
five topics but they kind of do roughly
the same thing that I find for a
collection where it shows like how this
person voted on gear right so it shows
two votes against two votes four and
five absences and they voted for smoking
bans and so on so cool Thank You Kari
also be interested to know what how not
trustworthy it is but how like the
public trusts it I mean my guess is
probably fairly good okay legal document
they voted for against it no they don't
they don't trust cuz that there's a
third party doing it and so on what
would what do they not trust just the
politicians or they don't trust the
right leg UK right nobody trusts
politicians as far as he can throw them
even the ones who like them I don't
think they can trust as far as he can
throw them for so and whatever
informations on there does probably
soars like you know tempered to a
certain light well you know you may have
said something else somewhere with us
they're not going to tell you that you
know I mean so there'll be probably
loads of emissions and stuff I just saw
I just fell across it now I'm just as a
huge disparity cuz I do they'll think
that you know everyone so they thought
of the politicians and that and betweens
yeah they Scotland is gonna go try and
go for them independence again and even
even the difference between England and
Wales Northern Ireland huge disparities
here are arranged so I don't know cuz I
think everybody's a leak Nicola Sturgeon
of the SNP who's thrown in Scotland's at
the moment she I think she's got more
respect but she doesn't put up with any
nonsense and there's a Scottish comedian
who basically does voice-overs over and
the really funny so I'll have to send
you some of them today more like the
site itself is a government document put
out by the government but it is just
documenting what
voted for not voted for them as an MP
like our governments used to be the
number one person you could go to for
information on science and politics and
things that they collected information
on but with the internet around as long
as it has been we've seen like in Canada
where they were like let's muzzle the
scientists let's do there's like that
that even that Trust is eroded to me
it's better to have a third party doing
it but does the population feel
confident in this is like that this is
accurate information even if it isn't
total information it sounds like if this
is maybe the first that she's sort of it
it might not be that that commonality it
might not be out there that much which
is half the problem really is it does
seem to be like there's things on here
where that's sort of how I want to show
it where it's not about something that
somebody would even argue against like
this person it's showing it like
generally voted against lost from Oh
equality and human rights okay that one
they might fight back yes showing two
votes for eight votes against four
absences but something like you know
voted for a mixture of for and against
allowing marriage pitching to people of
the same sex
two for two against three absences even
if they were like staunchly against a
probably still agree yep that's how I
voted I'm gonna be people who are angry
about that and that's sort of how the
easiest way to start are the things that
both sides will water sort of agree with
what actually happened because that
supports their that their worldview and
sort of how they position themselves
oh you've also got a sight of somebody
their attendance records and then as I
said more on the rowing records as well
so I don't know whether that you know
you can take that for granted cuz I for
them asleep when the when they've
attended you see them snooze you know
which that's something we're sort of in
the end I don't care they're absent
or they're sleeping I would want to
track the percentage of votes that they
were absent for because if you're voting
for someone and they were absent you
know 87 percent of the time and everyone
else is you know absences are like you
know less than 50% you're like oh this
person is lazy they don't want to show
up and do the job that they're getting
paid handsomely to do maybe we don't put
them in office again oh and this like
that
I only just the the probably seems in
Canada see a switch open Canada see is
nice Oh federal Canadian Open Data well
I haven't looked to too much for this is
up until last night I was planning on
doing the the organizational one then I
was like it's gonna be better just to do
the politics first it'll be yeah I'm
more open and yeah I mean somewhere in
here I'm having trouble finding it cuz
there's so much data it's actually
surprising because they do have kind of
all the spending data for the Canadian
federal government and then there's a
link on I think the front page of that
that that has like the open government
websites for the for the smaller
jurisdictions or at least the ones that
exist so I guess it would just be a
matter of fishing through all this
funding right yeah this the ballotpedia
one you sent over which I should have
actually started there but Bella PD is a
pretty good resource yeah
did they have are they just us-based or
the I believe so yeah
hey that up Matus do you want to give
your update what you're working on I
could use up with I yesterday realized
what I was missing
though I wasn't aware of it so I'm busy
I didn't protect and once this audit I
will find another thing that was missing
and others as well
so yeah
no public at least yet
I think we're all searching okay that's
probably enough for that I can dig
through the multitude of resources that
we talked about so far and that was more
just cuz people weren't you know no
nobody was jumping into the hot seat so
I figured that it was something that I
was going to be doing research on so why
not start with a brainstorm yeah that's
good I'm actually gonna do a quick
search for open data in the background
just so that it's America I mean I guess
anyone who has a democratic democracy
that's a democratic government is more
like they kind of have to be transparent
with who voted for what it's on camera
it's on it's just how usable is the
information exactly yeah with all this
like all like the thing that that
Bentley sent over I knew about about PD
and there's great information here but
it's not really like easily parsed into
that like I can probably dig deeper and
see if there's an underlying information
source I mean it's very cool because it
shows like you know where they get their
money from how they voted on the the
previous page you had that I was on you
could actually sort it by their
percentage of absences and and like it
seemed like the average was like 1% and
there's people who have like 20% absence
you're like oh that's interesting
yeah and for for the u.s. every vote
should be recorded but of course now
that would be by Bill ID and stuff like
that so the the stuff that ballotpedia
is done taking a step further and say oh
this is for this or against this that
would be in the data in the source data
and also that can be tricky because you
know sometimes as you know sometimes
there's a bill for like a road but
there's a writer on there that would do
something else and they voted against it
for that I mean it'd be nice if in the
future and I think we discussed this if
the politicians could say why they chose
to vote the way they did yes I thought
choirs their participation
yeah and they're like that part I don't
necessarily need in the data because
that's something unique that collection
will take in its own direction and that
stuff is how Belle pedia works is sort
of they have their own data but it might
be okay for just like the prototype to
show like here's an example of how it
might look the part of it is to just go
like the puppet is great but candidly I
don't think most people are willing to
look at that level of information like
it should be kind of a snapshot of
here's you know a 60 second read on what
this person did and how they performed
and if you want to drill in you can yeah
you know as you cheaply said this
information is actually very available
in most areas that are democratic I
think there's some that still sort of
hide it there's some that they do like a
voice vote where you can't really it's
not the the same or I think at that
point all that you can really say is
like person was present and here's how
the vault went right like they say that
the yeas want it but even that is in
exact because there have been you know a
few the videos came complaining about
the voice vote system or it shows a
recording and you hear that one side
clearly has it just from the volume but
they give it to the other side part of
those places that does that we don't do
that anybody we don't think so the one
that comes to mind was the Democratic
convention in 2016 where yeah there was
close to some riots if you watch the
videos people were not happy just a
record of the votes and yes we do but
yeah we don't have it and one day of
11th September last year
they had I mean Department at 88 votes
and the first one was about when to
announce a break yeah so I'm thinking
now if they voted so many times every
day the amount of data they evolved its
own and they see the lease is so
detailed and so I mean they voted on
such irrelevant pieces so I'm interested
to see how that works cuz I mean you
think like sometimes days in government
can get very long so if that was an
11-hour day at 8 miles an hour
like that's a vote every what 7 minutes
I would like to see like half an hour
video of that day just to see how oh I
guess I couldn't understand it but just
to see how quickly that went that's okay
474 actually yeah it's probably some I
mean this is the issue in any time you
have meetings where you need to vote on
stuff it's like let's vote on when
there's a break can we not have the same
thing every day
point of privilege point of privilege
I'm gonna bring up all of my issues it
just like lasts a very long time oh
they'll be talking about it and then
we've seen like hours something like
that they just voted on every single
thing and there's so much to optimize
yeah clearly they don't have any data
scientist or any mighty person no it's
very normal for the government site
itself is almost never that readable it
usually takes a different group but I
think the last link that Bentley sent
may have just oh it's Crito license but
um yeah the Guv tracked us I went to
like the HR to invest in America and
it's actually got pretty good
information this guy got it break down
by party and then you
download a CSV of how people voted for
just that piece of legislation which
means that I can just go download that
for 20 pieces of legislation and that
should give me what I need
yeah yeah and it looks like they get
their data from there using some sort of
software to read the data from the
congressional votes in the u.s. directly
from the Senate and the Congress nice
sites that are XML in case anyone wants
the raw data but yeah I'll pass on that
that's probably uh I guess it would end
up being that might end up being the raw
data that's actually even better but I
think for my purposes look I know in the
States that people normally do vote on
party lines right you're gonna know
whether the Republicans or Democrats
vote but they don't it's not as strict
as in Canada I would be very interested
as to when any MP voted against their
party because it's so rare that it's
like wait are you representing me are
you representing the Liberals which one
are you representing because you should
vote differently and so when an MP does
vote differently that is actually much
more interesting than it would be you
know in the states where it's not it is
absolutely yeah I think there's very
different things that you'd want on
surface but a big part of this is just
to get the data and once you have it you
can do so much with it like in the US
especially I would want to tie how
somebody voted to where there the money
from their campaign came from and then
to see like hey how did other people in
their party vote or or that you know the
people who didn't get get money and
versus how did somebody on the opposite
party vote who did get money from the
same group too tight there because of
the whole citizens united you know just
openly being bribed it would be
interesting to see how that affects it
and in Canada yeah I have the exact same
thing of like is it's very much you you
you can get in a lot of trouble for
voting against your party once yeah in
some case you can get kicked out and so
yeah I'm very interested to see like
health and that happens and who's doing
it and then also becomes not just
tracking how
the individual votes but how the party
votes because in Canada if you're voting
for a person you're generally actually
voting for the party and that all party
platforms even if you liked your local
person but don't like the person in
charge of their party probably shouldn't
vote for that person then is you're
technically you know voting for whoever
is leading that party cool yeah I think
I should be able to take this like that
and they sent over and get some data
ready to populate so it's a people and I
have to decide how this will fit in the
whole person organizations dataset but I
think that is uh that's good I wasn't
planning on jumping right to the US
Congress and Senate but but if the data
is that available and easy to understand
then all right yeah I'm just excited for
anyone to get the data in order so we
can actually use it in which case then
if there's a lot that can't be done when
he when humanity has access to data that
they can understand and use it's like
90% how we great game B Oh
information we trust and can use what do
you know that once it's all the data
about government politicians and money
and how many moves across businesses and
families of politicians while that's
transparent
it means they Mary is going to be very
very shaken maybe not for the part
straight away but still so many things
that's important came up about the
pandemics and so who bought what
equipment and why and which family of
which politician that's like tons of
money that was very interesting question
is given how much we know what happened
and who earned
lots of money the question is how much
we don't know you know yeah and I my
only goal for all this is to take thee
because it'll change per country sort of
what you're really wanting to look at
like in Canada it's very party base I
think in a lot of you know places that
run on these in system it'll be the same
in the u.s. because you can vote outside
party lines without a lot of
repercussions most the time but I don't
know of any other country that has
something is you know blatantly open
bribery as citizens united that that
becomes a very different like still very
you know interesting information to know
and that's one of the things like where
what Kerry said with the like well
people they might not trust the site
that she said because it's even though
it's not done by the government because
it's sort of specific to the UK and it's
a charity well we saw in the last
Canadian government that charities can
be swayed by the government by being
like oh if you don't you know do this
we're gonna take away your charity
status but if you're an international
thing like if we're not in the US and
I'm reporting on us stuff they haven't
have zero sway and it's doing all the
countries with the same system that sort
of you know as we were talking enough I
lost a bit more of what I said yeah and
there's an article about it not being
that infallible you know but there was
also an something like a fella crossed
years ago and it was a way the political
parties get the funding from and I think
got that in most countries as well but
also what I'd like to see is all the
lobby groups so you've got all these
lobby groups that nobody knows about the
sort of like in their making all the
decisions for each and every government
so it'd be interesting to find out who
blew these lobby groups are as well and
and what they're doing and what they're
up to I think that would be also
interesting as well because as I said
they're they're probably twisting the
arms you know I mean depending on how
much depth you've got on them all get
off so him yeah so that'd be quite
interested yeah especially in the
because when I talk about Citizens
United that's sort of one of the things
that that came out of that is just the
blatant like them giving money to
politicians and then you can see will
born there in power like oh they're
obviously not voting for the people's
interest who are they voting for oh the
people who put them in power even though
you'd think that was the voting public
but they actually give credit to the
people that gave them money for their
campaigns as to who put them in power
and that ends up being I mean and that's
true in Canada as well although it's not
quite at the same level as in the u.s.
from what I can tell but yeah that's a
super important part though uh that is a
more complex layer so that's on still
probably the fairly short term roadmap
because that's super interesting to know
but it does get a bit harder to sort of
parse that information and put it in a
irritable way but yeah that's what one
of the things I want to know is not just
who gave them money but then you track
it back to the industry and the
individual companies and then compare
that to their voting history and stuff
that they did while in office to see if
you can tie those two together like if
somebody is thoroughly funded by the NRA
then check to see how you know how do
they vote on gun legislation probably
fairly one-sided if they're you know
heavily right and then if somebody was
you know heavily sponsored by tech how
do they vote on tech stuff I think
that's revealed yeah I like to think of
it as big data on Big Brother right like
they have a bunch of information on us
and we technically have access to
information on them but like it's so
unusable for the average person like you
would need to do hours of research to
figure out what your politician is doing
and people just don't do that people
don't a lot of people don't do five
minutes of research a lot of it because
they don't know how to get it and a lot
of us probably because they don't think
that they can really make a difference
but if it's something that was actually
you know open and public people people
knew about it but then it was also
blatantly obvious why this wasn't under
the thumb of politics like you know we
don't
any government hunting it's all funded
by members we don't have charity status
for the government to take away like
every possible thing that the public
says could be a concern for maybe why
not to trust it you you you you tackle
that and it becomes an important part of
that brand to say here's all the things
that we've done to make sure that you
can trust us I think one of the key ones
is the crowdfunding is not taking money
from anybody that's not just a voting
citizen and then to actually set a cap
on that because you know you can still
say well Bill Gates is of voting's hits
in here's a billion dollars
well yeah but now you're in his pocket
so Bill Gates is you know you can
contribute if he wants to but at the
same limits as everyone else which will
probably be you know maybe $100 talking
about them like yeah you know cuz people
were wondering why he was showing up all
the time on the BBC well he acts Liam is
one of the the BBC will social
initiatives he films them so thought
that was why you know I mean so among
many other things about say about that
yeah I guess you which I did this
Matthew what you're talking about you
can see that sort of playing out even
though it's not politics with Bill
Gates's involvement in the vaccine thing
we're now a bunch of people don't trust
the whole vaccine conversation because
there's a bunch of politicians and
billionaires trying to drive the
conversation when those are two groups
that are in pretty low trust right now
do you wonder if we the system was
changed and you could as a
philanthropist could give money to
something but you can't have any kind of
like you can kind of only give it
anonymously you can you know you could
be Bill Gates and be like hey I want a
fun vaccine research so here is what I'm
doing a free fun vaccine research that
takes a step back it has nothing to do
with it
yeah yeah our entire system that he gets
more of a say because he has billions of
dollars he has billions of dollars cuz
he's acted in a very capitalist way
where you know like Windows is the only
thing that's allowed to be
the pc computers yeah that what would
what would actually change in the world
yeah very interesting
they still want money if they don't have
the power I don't know yes money's nice
anyway you know what what we need to
find we need to find some legal legal
brains because like as I said you
talking about philanthropy I was just
listening to a podcast me to talk about
philanthropy and na and how it was set
off for now they set up these charitable
trusts everything come under what set in
the constitution of these charitable
trusts enough but it's to stay that way
infatuate you know i mean so people
who'd set set up trusts and things
foundations were seen as big
philanthropists overall for us records
but nobody could touch it because of the
way the legal legal system is set off
for him so i think i think we need to
find so like legal brains and maybe want
them to play out with us and that and
then obviously there's loads of
loopholes everywhere you know I mean so
if you can find you know um with the
place where to where the the chamber of
the bullet to George so wants to get
back to where he'll be getting them
other questions by that we hope to see
if we can fight somebody in Scotland
that I can maybe play out with so in you
might be interested and well maybe hunch
is enough so maybe so I mean he's a good
laugh as well so yeah I really like them
really be worth starting those
conversations now because you know if
it's evolving the law is probably gonna
take a while
Scottish Lord is different from English
law for some Scottish Lauren is it's
from France and other bits and pieces
like I've already kind of looked at
briefly at the disco search business law
but haven't looked at it for years so
there what's going on
and because I did the stints in the
Faculty of advocates which is this this
huge build in and like there's we
covered as morphine open this exit area
which is quite funny and but anyway so
answer says there was work when Jim
posted about the pair's need you above
doing whatever legally wise oh yeah I'll
be having conversations when I go back
to work with them to see if there's
anybody
he knows within in that section of the
Lord who maybe want to come and maybe
volunteer some hours or time or maybe
just looking for something interesting
to do to create you know all the other
stuff that's going on because I'm sure
they they probably get the laws and they
just go and roll their eyes of it you
know I mean and that's what you've got
to do what is going to stick to as well
so so hopefully I can get some movement
on that in the future good for that
people agree you know I mean so so if
you could find somebody in each country
knows the law and just maybe sorta like
set up a crew of legal eagles do we've
got you know I mean so I'll be on a
mission to collect the legal eagles you
know are we so that'd be really cool
yeah yeah it's unlike the the long-term
roadmap for wiki election just start
building up a Council like one for
lawyers and one for like people and you
know in journalism in the media and for
people in cybersecurity to start sort of
having groups that you can say like
especially for something like the law
where you would want to know overall
because it needs to be sort of country
agnostic and then for something like a
charity part of the goal is to say
what's the amount that they're actually
spending on their cause because that's a
big part of charities is like in the
u.s. there's cancer charities that give
like two percent of the money raised to
the cause and 98 percent of it goes
towards administrative costs and I think
if people knew that the charity was
doing it they probably wouldn't give to
that charity I just realized that I've
got loads of contact so value it in the
security and cyber kind of security in
that and also and so they'll know other
people so I just need to reactivate
people contact so like you know I mean
so they'll probably be able to help me
at some point so and but yes what's but
I see you can starts well as them the
collection phase has started that I'll
be reaching around for people and that
you know so and that's earlier the table
but that was more just because I didn't
think I was going to run into somebody
that had those contacts so if we could
start it now hell yeah
I find this is not specifically for the
collection or politics but one of which
is kovat 19 that is emerging as like
scientists are not in agreement because
it is emerging
but looking at and I don't know whether
a drill a to shore Bentley your projects
whose would be better for it
but to be able to look at the different
countries their existing healthcare that
was in place long before what the
politicians did and what their
demographics was before because that's a
pretty big important part did they like
in Italy they have a lot of elderly
people and then looking at what actually
was the what was the impact could it
have been seen in advance right because
a lot of it is just luck well we we
didn't do enough but we do how can you
not get attacked yet right or we happen
to not get enough people and the other
one that's very tied to that but not
necessarily about the science is the
funding of research like the Cancer
Foundation and such and actually giving
like the money going to the collection
of people who are directly impacted by
it to decide is this something we want
to research right like even something
like breast cancer you might choose to
put the money into treatments because
you have it but you also might pass it
on to your kid and so you might be
wanting to put it into prevention it
seems that the actual Cancer Foundation
puts it into what's going to be the most
profitable right as opposed to what's
gonna actually get less breast cancer
out there including the breast cancer
industry itself like I think
subconsciously they're like oh but what
if we actually solve breast cancer there
goes all of our jobs there goes all of
our like to actually have the money that
everyone raises and then hands over to I
don't some not-for-profit that's
actually for-profit and very much not
for purpose and have it actually be
crowdfunding campaign under the umbrella
like instead of hey someone ought to
research my thing actually finding all
the people who have it any money that we
donate any money that we fundraise goes
into a pool and then who what kind of
research do we want is anyone willing to
do this study in this study in this
study right well let you have funds or
people who are like hey we'd like to do
this study and
for the money but very much based on the
people who are directly impacted by that
yeah that's definitely on the long term
roadmap for wiki election and I think
that's where reason score and we could
actually kind of intersect is that is
the realm of like trying to understand
evidence and where it's at
and like you know once you have a good
collection of evidence you can start to
spot the blind spots you can say oh well
people say they want this kind of
evidence we only know of one study Oh
interesting and then I think you engage
both sides of the conversation and say
what would a study look like that if it
were done this way you know a decent
number of both sides would be happy with
like yeah that study was well-designed
you know it wasn't skewed one way or the
other and if it was actually you know
even if it came up against my side I'd
still be inclined to believe it like if
it was you know free of the money coming
in from the source that won't wants it
to swing one way and anything else that
it would be involved a idea via having a
crowdfunding campaign that you first
gather the people in the same like one
year we're the direct stewards of this
like the people have had breast cancer
or like the direct stewards of the
research for weirdest breast cancer
money go
whether or not it's based on how much
money they physically bring in right
even Bill Gates on vaccines would be
like okay well if you prey on him in a I
don't agree with it being tied to the
dollar amount that you gave but even if
it was if it's still open for everyone
else cuz vaccines is a good who's who's
the stewards of vaccines well literally
everyone right if you want people to be
doing it but like what what evidence
would be there any vaccines are a really
good indication like the the controversy
right now around aluminum adjuncts and
they're not super safe but they're
because we've been using them for 50
years there are actually things that are
safer to use but we haven't been
studying them for 50 years so it's like
we can't necessarily put new ones in
because that would be experimenting on
humans which isn't okay but it was kind
of okay 50 years ago so now we have
something that is 50 year old technology
that we have like I said we have a
better option
but we're not going to do them because
this one has yeah I think it's also a
part and we also see this with the
current conversation around cook Ovid
it's like a general misunderstanding of
science but the general public like to
say if science says oh wait a minute
actually this thing instead they're like
also you were wrong in lying to us well
no this is how science works we here's
what we knew at the time we've since
changed we learn new things like and
when you're seeing how fast it's going
with Kohlberg we're like actually it's
this no it's that no it's this no wear
masks no don't no do this no do that
that's actually how science goes and
that's not a flaw in that that's just us
doing it sort of publicly and more
visibly than we would otherwise and yeah
so I think it's a admitting that and
then be having something in place where
you can spot the gaps and say okay well
there is still going to be doing their
research and and no one's going to stop
them so if Bill Gates wants to sponsor
some studies on vaccines sure good go
for it it will show who who who paid for
it in case the people who are looking at
it want to know that and then you can
start to say here's all the studies that
we we know about here's where the the
funding from the different studies came
from oh maybe the general public says oh
I'd like you know a more impartial study
on the aluminum adjuvant great and we
can you know design that but here's what
we know right now here's here's how
these studies lean and then if there's
anything that the public wants added
cool well we can you know do a
fundraising for that where it's outside
of the influence that maybe the public
that might be the problem that they have
with it yeah there's five studies
showing that but they're all paid for by
pharmaceutical companies we've learned
recently maybe we can't trust those
let's fund one ourselves
oh that's talking about the same way oh
all right I think this is fine and
adjuncts I mean our good example I cook
like well then just take the aluminum Oh
like just don't have it in there and
you're like right but then the vaccines
not effective because your immune system
doesn't recognize it as a foreign body
and attack it it needs to heavy metal in
there to be able to do that then the
heavy metal comes at a cost and so it's
like is there a better thing that our
body will react to as an adjunct but not
the heavy metal part of it my guess is
yes but then it's not ethical to test on
humans you can't have a double-blind
study on vaccines at all let alone okay
this one has this actor bunk to this one
it doesn't have this adjunct but even
the public knowing that could be like
you know what my kids not gonna get the
aluminum one but I would sign up for one
that isn't a heavy metal toxin if I felt
that it was a safer option and yeah
looking at those long turns heavy or
that becomes a more useful conversation
once you have a roadmap of the whole
conversation because I know one of the
things that the probe acts people sort
of say against the anti fact is that
they keep moving the goalposts so if you
say here's the full but here's the full
pealed here's all these different
ingredients and if there's one or two
they're like ooh that one's a little bit
sketchy and maybe doesn't have all the
proper research cool then we'll do it
there is there anything else so we can
do all the studies you know at the same
time oh this one over here isn't perfect
all right
well within well do these two studies at
the same time on these two things and
other than that all the ingredients you
know are actually you know as safe as we
can reasonably expect cool and then
people who don't have a problem with you
know the pharmaceutical companies doing
DD funding that the field might look
great for them and they might have no
problems in there already could going to
vaccinate their kids mm-hmm this has
been a really light session talking
about politics and vaccines and yeah
homie only with our group actually the
most the best argument for the vaccines
would be to be transparent about who of
the let's say big pharma people and
doctors and politicians actually did
vaccine their own kids because otherwise
I had quite a few conference
conversations about vaccines and science
and how it works and my conclusion is
it's very rare to find people who
believe that vaccines are actually
harmful and they know what even a study
science
yes so most of the conversation I had
was about
yeah it causes autism so we don't and
there's just no arguments to convince
them otherwise or to even start to mmm
make them consider their options and if
the question was okay what kind of study
would you like to see in order for you
to accept the thought that exists not
completely harmful and the answer was no
I know they are also just all studies
are paid for by the big pharma and
that's it yeah and I think any tool that
you're making to help solve this it's
not gonna be a hundred percent some
people have this already made up their
minds and they're never going to do it
but there are people that are sort of on
the fence and in the middle and they're
like well you know of the ten vaccines
those two seem okay because of the
ingredients of it those two but not
these three those people are they're a
lot more likely to sort of be willing to
change their minds and as you've got a
platform that sort of you know says it's
completely agnostic to everything and
then shows it like in politics in this
and that in vaccines and in climate
change if you're willing to sort of show
unpopular opinions in some cases if you
show something else that maybe somebody
disagrees with like yeah but they agree
with me on on those two and those - I
did not expect them to agree with me on
maybe they're right
and for those people it's doing that
right yeah and I think once the people
who are staunchly you know if they're
staunchly Andy vaccine and I knew a
couple people that was sort of in the
middle and started off and he vaccine
and started to get exposed to the to the
science that's the person who the
staunchly anti acting person that's
probably the only person they listen to
if you're like look I agreed it was
because of you know it was all only
funded by the pharmaceutical companies
but since then we've all funded these
five new studies that actually show this
interesting right and then it might be
okay well they don't get those two
vaccines because they have these
ingredients that you don't like but
these three new ones don't don't have
that and they also
don't have these other two ingredients
all the ingredients in those like
they've actually been listening to us
and they have new vaccines Oh
interesting
in the study nobody has ever taken me up
on it but the pro backside I'm always
like think of ten questions right no
Google it brainstorm ten questions you
think should have been answered the
vaccines are safe and effective now look
for studies is it has it been done and
no one's taking you up on it they've all
just googled twelve facts that are pro
mic Pro vaccine it's like that's not the
same thing think of like you have a new
kid you go to your doctor with these
questions have they been answered that
was literally my experience was like
well I just need these ten questions
answered we'll be good to see my
scientific curiosity maintained and
there's no answer there's no answer to
the safe level of any of the ingredients
let alone all of the ingredients there's
no long term studies about the health
our long term effects of them and so
dealing in that realm of science of like
wait you just want me to shut up and
accept that studies that it's safe and
effective when you have zero evidence to
show that it's safe and effective
long-term yeah as somebody that's like
fairly in the middle I see that from
both sides I see it that 98% of the
people participating in both sides of
conversation don't understand science
and they're just initial reason they got
them on one side or the other and then
confirmation bias kicks in and then they
only will listen to studies from the one
side like I still consider myself mostly
Pro vaccine but the conversations that I
see pro-vaccine people having I'm like
that's not helpful to the conversation
like if they're 100% safe and effective
water isn't effective how can you say
anything is well you look like wearing
masks right and there are people who are
dying from wearing masks I think however
if you consider what would have happened
one way versus the other right there are
some people who have breathing issues
they probably shouldn't have been
wearing them but they didn't know that
right there's people like young guys
who've been working out with them and
died would they have died without one
maybe there's young people who die all
the time from her
tax because how we eat and how our
bodies aren't aren't so great it's
different people who die right same with
like the automated car versus humans
driving it there's gonna be very
different deaths but some of them are
gonna die it's the overall cost of it
and that is is not like how we're
dealing with masks I mean honestly it's
not that hard to wear a mask and yes
some people are dying but like one in
millions versus if we don't wear them
everyone gets coated eventually and our
huge percentage of our population dies
theoretically I haven't looked it's like
all the science but that's like my
understanding of it that if this is how
we deal with masks I can only imagine
once there's a vaccine and it's not
going to be a one-time vaccine it's
gonna be something like the flu where
it's it's yearly and so the only way
will be for them to implement it from
the top down and like oh yeah well that
works with masks when it's literally
asking something to put something over
their face which is hard I've had panic
attacks or something anyway that its
we're seeing how people's distrust of
both governments and science and the
medical system is valid and that it cost
you - all of us at the same time it's
like right that we can't trust those
people means how do we trust one versus
the other you just pick a side and then
find your confirmation bias because I
cannot so you guys could step up with
your reason things that we have we have
third party tools that conceal the
reason score wheel spinning in Bentley's
head throughout this whole conversation
yeah I was just I was just thinking do
you believe that we're where are you on
vaccines right now I have a
seven-year-old who was always going to
get vaccinated in the future and I've
never met a doctor who can actually help
me feel safe about it so I my kid has
not backs in fact the one vaccine I was
gonna get her which was the measles when
it was relevant because measles was in
Vancouver and I called up and they're
like oh no we're not vaccinating
kindergarteners till X I'm like my kid
hasn't been vaccinated they were like oh
Percy says I was right whatever you had
a window a one-week window when I was I
was feeling safe there was a greater
anyway my kid is an accident and I get
you so yeah I think that would be a good
topic for a reason score because you're
coming at it from an evidence-based
mindset which I guess most the
anti-vaxxers kind of do that but yeah so
if you have some time I know you're
doing lots of videos that might be one
that'd be interesting to found out how
to phrase the question and if you have
10 questions and we could put those
right on reasons core and shine
questions once I ask the doctor you mean
right yeah yeah and so you just want
like one of those questions so you can
go reason score on it yeah well just
cover the whole thing we want to work
together on how to phrase the main
question like it you know as opposed to
our vaccine safe because like you like
Adriel said nothing safe but you know is
it is it is it a wise something up to be
effective is it wise to vaccinate my
show
considering be yeah I'd be totally open
to having that that conversation I do
come at it from both a very logical
science basis but also a I've been
affected by negative things injected
into my body and the science isn't there
right so part of it is like my own
personal bias my own personal trauma
around the medical stuff and the science
and the science isn't there to make me
feel safe it's for my drama and so yeah
I mean I'm very open yeah I've had
decades of health issues because just
the general information given out by our
government and our doctors is inaccurate
it's an onion but yeah so yeah so that
so yeah if you have some time that would
that be something I could use to help on
our project so I can I do like how at
the beginning of this but he's like I
don't want anything too controversial
like climate change it then we'll just
do vaccine backing vaccines are it would
be big
but it's something I'm personally
interested in records well and you're
starting relatively small like starting
with sir a specific questions and not
the overall I just like the hall keep it
non-controversial
let's do vaccines understand why though
yeah I mean because there is like I have
a kid that I'm responsible for so that
is my number one concern it's not doing
something that physically harms her it's
my decision and a big piece of it is
like the entire like just the bare bare
basics what's in the vaccines and what
is the safe level of them those two
questions alone it's like half the
doctors like how do I figure out what's
even in this well I'm not too worried if
you haven't looked into that but it's in
the but it's like the insert that they
take out of everyone and they just chuck
in the garbage is both the only evidence
we have and we can't trust it
simultaneously anything anyone had
during the study is put in there so if
someone had a heart attack looks like
that causes heart attack that's a really
bad science and the only thing they have
to point to the whole thing once you
started going down the rabbit hole it's
a rabbit hole and that's why it's very
controversial is because there isn't the
science that makes people feel safe
hasn't been done when I looked into it 7
years ago I mean maybe it's been done in
between time but I haven't seen it
because all they ever say is like those
anti backs there's an autism none of
that was autism yeah yeah the dismissal
is causing in this a big problem as
opposed to just addressing even the
crazier concerns I mean I have seen it
address but when people just do a
blanket dismissal it does cause it also
gets tough when you've got people that
like their meaning well on both sides
but they don't actually understand it
and so they chime in with something like
it's 100% safe and effective like well
that's not true so now that gives me
doubt for anybody on that side talking
about it and you've got like a whole
I've seen quite a bit of evidence from
you know each side and each side can't
even agree on sort of how to argue did
their points which isn't great for
anybody who is unsure looking at both
sides you're like they're both so far in
their camps that neither side is
actually
we're going to look at evidence and
information that might contradict what
they currently believe which really is
it very useful for any sort of discourse
when my kid was under two I was like I
want to find a group of parents I wanted
brainstorm what is everything we would
want to know about it what do we know
about it and do we feel safe enough to
do it and none of that's available it's
basically just like shut up and listen
to doctors all I can tell you how well
that's worked in my life not at all
ever and they don't have the answers to
the questions and they all disagree with
each other except on this one thing that
none of them have studied like literally
none of them except one that I talked to
you is actually looked into it their
whole looking into it is just saying
it's safe and effective because we
taught that in medical school yeah
although it's really shallow yeah both
the doctors are practitioners and they
don't understand the signs of anything
they do and that's also why they've been
giving me bad advice for several years I
mean they're they're kind of like
they're more like the bricklayers than
the architects your primary care
physician
unfortunately they should have the
knowledge I think and they'll work out
well if they honored that right if they
were like I'm just a bricklayer and not
the architect but they come into every
conversation like I am the architect the
biggest architect and oh no no no like
treat me as a god even though I discount
all the other gods yeah that's a huge
problem we we had a doctor just a little
while ago and she was treating us so
like idiots and like children and it's
like I think I've read more papers on
this than you have anyway yes I'm really
done any time you want to chat I put in
a lot of thought if scientific research
because the stuff that I want to
research isn't there and now my brain
even if it was there wouldn't be able to
read it so yeah all right we're at the
hour mark does anyone have any rough you
know thoughts before we say good I know
all right
goodbye YouTube and Facebook see you on
Friday