[Music]
Jeffrey I was really taken with an
article that you wrote for Colette
called the neurodiversity case of free
speech loved it if you could just kind
of outline the case that you made in
that piece and I'd love to talk to you
about I mean the piece was inspired
honestly by the James d'amour Fiasco
with Google right where this lovely ass
P programmer d'amour is trying to
approach Google his company saying I
think you guys are doing certain things
wrong and getting certain certain policy
issues wrong about sex differences and
why there's certain inequalities of
outcome and he got hammered absolutely
hammered even though he tried to express
his concerns systematically and
logically as possible right
and Google basically said you can be
systematic and logical but we are
offended this is outrageous
you're bad we're gonna fire you and then
I looked at my own University's speech
codes our own policies about what you're
allowed to say and they basically were
full of language that said don't be
offensive
don't be outrageous try to anticipate
how people will react and as someone
with Asperger's myself who has trouble
with that right where I don't always
understand other people's beliefs and
desires as easily as as normies do I
thought how the hell am I supposed to
know what is going to cause a fence or
what will cause outrage that's a totally
subjective judgment so if you're putting
the onus on someone with Asperger's or
any other kind of neurodiversity to kind
of interpret a speech code and to be so
you're basically asking everyone to
acquire a telepathy superpower to know
automatically before I say something
what will cause offense and not to say
that
and I thought particularly at a
university that is a ludicrous and
oppressive attitude to take because
there are a lot of ass piece at
university right they're
over-represented in science technology
engineering math and in psychology so
you're basically asking academics don't
have the kind of personality that leads
you to become an academic and instead
download this telepathy superpower will
allow you to navigate this PC minefield
this also applies to some of the kind of
aftermath of the me to because now in
many areas what's being said is that we
can't have any unwanted sexual attention
but you're asking someone to then know
exactly what unwanted sexual attention
is yeah so to the extent that men tend
to initiate sexual attention and women
sort of react to it you're basically
putting the onus on young men to somehow
understand which woman will be receptive
to you know courtship under what
circumstances and that's a that's one of
the very hardest problems for young men
to figure out with with the male brain
it's even you know it's doubly triply
hard if that young man has Asperger's or
any of a number of other mental
disorders or personality variants and I
I don't think it's it's sort of fair in
a moral or legal sense to say you have
to be a mind reader
you have to acquire this telepathy
superpower and if you don't you should
not participate in the mating market at
all and that's the message a lot of
young men on college campuses are
getting this is what I hear again and
again in office hours and classes as
young men saying I am terrified to even
try to date any woman on campus because
I don't know what the rules are and if I
make a single misstep I can be thrown
out expelled you know lose
lose my fellowship my grant lose my
college degree basically for an innocent
error of misunderstanding what I find
really interesting about this argument
is that it it it is actually very
inclusive it's actually kind of often
what comes in with this sort of sensoria
sness of the kind of the more extreme
social justice left is this sort of
sense of thou shalt not but what you're
saying is that that sensoria sness
itself is discriminatory against people
who don't see the world in the same way
as the people making the rules yeah the
irony is the social justice left say
everyone must be treated equally you
know regardless of race ethnicity
religion sex oh except if you have any
form of neurodiversity the means you're
a little bit socially awkward or overly
assertive or overly argumentative
then you should be expelled you should
be ostracized stigmatized your life
should be ruined there is no place for
you in our culture and that's an
incredibly unwelcoming you know divisive
unincluded attitude to have to act like
everybody is expected to know these sort
of sensitivity rules at all times and
have you seen that happen in your campus
specifically I've seen it happen a lot
and and yet it doesn't happen quite as
much as you think why because young men
and particularly learned to self-censor
like they learn really quickly oh my god
if I'm taking human sexuality class
there's a lot of questions I should not
ask because 70% of the students are
female and a lot of them will give me
pretty nasty looks if I raise certain
issues so what you end up actually
seeing in in like my classes is the only
guys who are willing to speak up are
basically the mature students like the
granddad
is coming back to college age 65 and is
just curious to learn stuff or the vets
right they've served two tours in
Afghanistan
they've compact they don't give a shit
they'll say whatever they want but the
young men who are 19 who don't have
those life experiences and you have a
lot more to lose are incredibly
self-censoring and you can hear it in
their voices that the fear with which
they approach a lot of these topics and
this is this reminds me a bit of Eric
Weinstein in an interview that we put
out a documentary put out called glitch
in the matrix to the origin of the
intellectual dark web was that this
these sort of tales of the distribution
that kind of the really obnoxious or the
really difficult people are often where
the genius comes from yeah I mean where
would civilization be without guys who
have Asperger's you would lose literally
about 90% of all the major technical and
social innovations that have happened in
the last several thousand years so if
you shut down the aspies right what you
would have shut down would have been
like the entire Apollo program the
entire tech industry the entire
industrial revolution the entirety of
science most of medicine all lost
if you censor people who show all kinds
of freaking neurodiversity and it's not
just Asperger's there's also people with
kind of light forms of schizophrenia
called schizotypy who sort of have like
weird beliefs and are eccentric and have
have strange views of the world even
people who are a little bit sociopathic
or psychopathic can contribute amazingly
to society if they learn to harness
their particular strengths and
weaknesses in kind of pro-social ways so
if you only want the kind of normies to
contribute to society like you could do
that
but good luck sustaining and advancing
and civilization on that basis and as
you said in the piece there's a kind of
paradox of wanting to respect diversity
but actually what you insist on is a
kind of a modern homogeneity of
different personality types yeah your
homogenizing personality traits and you
know when I I've written a bit on on
mental illnesses but almost everybody
who who is serious in psychology knows
there's kind of a continuum between
quote normal and personality variants
and personality disorders and light
mental illnesses and then like low
functioning serious mental illnesses and
you know Asperger's is kind of on a
continuum with autism maybe it's kind of
on under debate schizotypy is kind of on
a continuum with schizophrenia
sociopathy is kind of on a continuum
with psychopathy but it's a big mass and
nobody really understands the variation
the point is there is variation it does
matter it particularly matters in social
interaction and communication and trying
to take other people's perspectives so
if you have a social justice left that's
saying everybody must be exactly equally
sensitive and built and able to
anticipate any possible discomfort or a
fence or outrage they're basically
silencing the majority of people in
society II think that's more applicable
to universities and elsewhere and
especially at universities right the
universities are kind of a continuation
of medieval monasteries where all the
freaks and weirdos and nerds and
eccentrics hung out you know that's why
they became monks and like let's all get
together and do like calligraphy and
worship God and whatever universities
used to be a sanctuary for the unusual
and the eccentric and I think they still
should be
but if you let them get taken over by
the the censorious social justice left
then universities lose their whole
reason for being and and like then where
did the eccentrics go well they're going
to go onto YouTube and be a lot less
quiet about their weird beliefs and what
about I know you wrote quite a bit about
the James d'amore case what was it in
particular they exercised you about that
because here was a well-intentioned
break did you identify with him I
identified quite a bit with him I
thought like if I was younger and I'd
gone into the tech industry I and I had
kind of his similar libertarian politics
I could totally imagine that kind of
thing happening to me where I go well
google you're not being very logical
about this sex differences issue here's
how I think you could do better
constructively right and he took such
pains to express himself in constructive
ways and a footnote and like link to the
scientific literature and nobody cared
they were just like we don't like your
message you're a bad person you deserve
to be burned at the stake or the modern
equivalent which in some ways is
actually worse so ya identified pretty
strongly with him and you know reached
out tried to be supportive and my worry
is there are literally hundreds of
thousands of other young people of both
sexes like him working in tech and other
industries who are now operating in a
state of complete terror and aren't sure
what they can say under what
circumstances and where the companies
they work for doing a continual
bait-and-switch where it's like we
welcome your in but please be radically
honest please let us know how we can
improve our goods and services and
improve our internal HR procedures and
then these people's like take the bait
and speak up and
be hammered it's kind of like one now in
the 60s early sixties said let a
thousand flowers bloom we're going to
have an intellectual Renaissance
everybody say what you really think
but all they were really doing is
gathering information about who to crush
in the Cultural Revolution and I mean
the other part of the James d'amour the
situation was the fact that the the
media was very I think there was there
was an article by kana Freitas Frias
door from the Atlantic where he said
something like he's never seen a
document that was so publicly available
to so many journalists mischaracterized
so much and I think yeah he basically
said that was a there was a unique
situation and it was a collective
failure on behalf of of the media to
construe it as an anti diversity screed
when James do more specifically framed
as these are ways that we could increase
a gender diversity in the workplace yeah
I mean for me personally it was also a
turning point and realizing that
journalists do not generally have the
professional ethos to do journalism at
least not in America not anymore
before that I kinda sorta trusted
journalists to get it right
mostly because I'd interacted with
science journalists and science
journalists generally are good smart and
honorable people and try to get the
science reporting right but oh my god
once you go outside that that bubble and
you get into kind of general journalism
clickbait journalism voxcom all that
stuff then you know I don't think it was
a failure of journalism to read the
d'amore piece I think they intentionally
either read it and mischaracterized it
or knew that well if we read it it might
soften the reporting so we're not even
going to engage with what he said this
is crucifixion time right this is the
time to do our virtue signaling and tell
the world not just this is
Badman but to set the social norm that
says and furthermore all of you other
motherfuckers out there with this
condition don't you dare say anything
even close to this because we will ruin
your life also and what do you think it
says about the the current kind of
culture of the media that it was mere
mischaracterized that that way I think
it shows that most journalists now
aren't journalists or activists and they
don't really care about the truth they
care about and spending their particular
narrative and they will sacrifice the
truth very eagerly to promote that
narrative so if they have a certain you
know role of the evilness that they want
to fit you into they will fit you in
there regardless of whether you really
belong there or not and I think we saw
this over and over and over after
d'amore with you know Trump and was the
reaction to everybody who even sounded
like they might vaguely support Trump or
with brexit and everybody who sounded
like they might even vaguely be
sympathetic to brexit and so I realized
we're not really living in a in a free
speech society we're living in hegemony
where journalists are doing this this
ideological instruction and ideological
capture and the only zones for freedom
are the kind of IDW stuff or what you
guys are doing YouTube I hope I hope
YouTube stays relatively free and I mean
what a again sort of coming back to the
neurodiversity argument what I really
love about that is that it reframes
there's an ideological capture of the
media as well did you get much pickup
from it have you seen that argument
getting much traction because it does
seem that it's a very effective argument
against the exclusion of certain voices
in the media landscape yeah I think my
neurodiversity he's got almost no
traction precisely because it was a real
good argument I think it would have been
extremely awkward for journalists who
read it and I know some read it to go oh
my god the guys write existing speech
codes are discriminatory I even did a
follow-up piece called the cultural
diversity case for free speech that was
about how do you create let's say campus
policies that are genuinely welcoming to
grad students or faculty from other
cultures Brazil China Iraq Japan
whatever how do they come to America and
actually learn what they're allowed to
say can we perhaps provide a list to do
topics that they can avoid can we give
them good training for how to engage
with American political arguments what's
like okay here the the views in American
society generally holds but here are the
views on campus that you're only allowed
to hold and that also I thought was a
powerful argument it was also inclusive
it was pro diversity it's like we should
have grad students from other cultures
we just shouldn't have a bait-and-switch
where we go we're a free society oh wait
but not about this issue because this is
the paradox of the social justice left
as well is that they love marginalized
people poor people in the abstract but
they actually hate their views yeah and
it gets them into such an awkward
corners it's almost hilarious like if
you're teaching a human sexuality class
and talking about meat choice and then
maybe you have a young Indian woman in
the audience say I'm married actually
it was an arranged marriage my parents
found my husband for him I didn't meet
him until the day of the wedding and you
know what we're really happy the
American women had can't even process
that like you're patriarch Ilia pressed
because it was arranged but you're happy
so it's okay so like it's a suitor -
it's a pseudo diversity they want they
don't actually
want people from different cultures and
lifestyles and mating conditions to
actually speak up about their experience
they want to just impose their a little
worldview on everything that happens and
to the extent that you know a student
from India kind of buys into what they
want then like your honorary American
leftist and that's okay
but if someone actually challenges what
they're saying a their first instinct is
ostracism and silencing and be they have
no logical argument against a different
culture you see there's quite a lot with
the reaction to Coleman Hughes who's
written quite a few pieces for Collette
there's sort of this unspoken deal in
these kind of social justice subcultures
which is as a person of color you play a
certain role and we will give you a
hierarchical position but that role is
to make us feel guilty about our white
privilege it is to kind of to fit into a
certain narrative and and there's a kind
of devil's bargain there with with the
people going into it but if that person
refuses to play that game like Coleman
Hughes for example with his pieces about
Colette saying there are cultural
reasons for black failure that are not
entirely due to racism for example he
they don't know what to do with it that
someone as soon as someone comes up
slips out of the script it's a very
different conversation and no one really
knows how to react
yeah and that again you know illustrates
that social justice left pays a lot of
lip service to diversity but they they
aren't actually capable of processing
anybody with a kind of complicated
patchwork of views you know maybe we we
should step back from it and say maybe
we don't want the social norms of
communication to be set by a bunch of
absurdly immature eighteen year olds
like maybe they should actually respect
people who have a little more life
except
instead of thinking well if it feels
wrong to me I should protest it and shut
them down
[Music]
you
[Music]