[Music]
akira fully yeah return of the Mack yeah
welcome to LA thank you man so it's what
two months yeah couple months different
world man different world different
world amazing but it's a great day to be
alive
it's a beautiful days of really so I've
sort of been tracking a little bit of
what's been going on on Twitter we've
been in touch a little bit yes and it
seems that the meaning wave thing is
getting a bit more pickup yes yeah it's
useful it's proving useful in people's
lives and I have committed to doing it a
lot so we'd have interview mostly about
Jordan Pederson yes JB p-wave now you've
expanded into IDW eight well as we were
talking about last time you were let go
will there be more things I was like yes
there are already at lots of other
things me like oh really I was like yes
look this and there was maybe eight or
ten it was the beginnings of the meaning
wave universe I did a poll to check what
it was called it's good to involve other
people some people were calling it the
Donna verse and some people are calling
it the akhirah verse but consensus is
meaning wave universe so it's the
meaning wave universe and there are many
many members of the meaning way of the
universe
obviously peterson started it so
Petersons like iron man you maybe think
of it like the Marvel Cinematic Universe
which is how I do think about it or
conceptualize it he was kind of like
Iron Man sort of the grounded tied into
the actuality of the world as it was at
that point and now it's sort of got to
look Maurice oh it's Harry because we've
gone on what why do this why why do this
yeah that's a good question it seems
like a stupid things to do like
ridiculous way to spend your time
because it's necessary and because his
yeah because it's necessary you know
music is an incredibly powerful thing
and music works on the frequencies of
galaxies and the universe and music can
really really change things music is a
thing that you hear a bit of music it
can take you it's like a time machine
it's like an emotional time machine it
can transport you decades it can music
an incredibly incredibly powerful and
the things that people talk about with
in popular music for the mostly for the
past 40 years have been an arrow a
pretty narrow range of sort of thoughts
and emotions which have usually been
tied to the experience of the teenager
pretty much and there's this thing in
music when people and rap and so like
all aspects of music people constantly
feel there needs to be pretending to be
a certain age like that's the experience
of the 16 to 24 year old and anything
outside of that is its deemed culturally
bad or something and this is silly and
this has led some really silly stuff and
it has led to people pretending to be
what they're not and it's led to a
massive part of the human experience not
being put within music which kind of
damned part of why I did it was because
uh I was waiting to be wise enough to
make my third album and I wasn't wise
enough yet like I hadn't lived enough of
life I was able to make my first album
and it'd be perfect and because that was
about being a kid and I was able to make
my second album and that was perfect
that was about a person realizing
they're no longer a kid but to make the
album that's basically about being a man
of a real and connected like
fully actualized man I wasn't quite
there yet cuz I hadn't reached a level
of experience and wisdom I needed to so
I started making instrumental music and
sampling people who was smarter and
wiser than me because they've been there
and they built a you know Peterson has
spent four years thinking about certain
things and therefore he has a good
understanding of those things there are
people out there who know a of a
lot of of a lot of stuff but those
experiences hadn't necessarily been
putting music before so I put them in
music and now people have that and it's
proving very very useful in people's
lives and I get hundreds of messages
every day at this point from people who
like this has completely changed my life
right business of this in the gym or I
listen to this on the way of work I
posed to my father so now he understands
things or I play this to my children so
they understand things
whatever the hell it is it's like a
thing that was missing in the culture
because there's also something about the
way the music relaxes the system and
allows the words to come in yes is that
something that's deliberate or about
something
yes very deliberate and it's a constant
refinement process of getting better I
think I'm a lot better at it now then I
was when I started and again that all
the whole just insists I released three
things a week so it's sticking to that
schedule is very difficult and and it
involves a lot of working out systems
and we're finding ways of becoming
faster and more efficient but also just
getting better and it is really
important that this that it works
rhythmically and that it works
unconsciously and there isn't anything
in there this that kind of sticks out
and ruins the overall flow effect you
should be able to listen to it without
focusing on the words and you should be
able to listen to it while focusing on
the words mmm and there should be enough
of it that's hooky and catchy like a
regular pop song that you know you could
maybe hum along as well or have a little
bit that remember but also it needs to
have the depth that the subject is
coming across properly hmm and you can
take it in at a decent speed what's the
biggest challenge with making something
like is it finding the the words as it
finding that the original content I
think it's doing justice to the truth of
it and the spirit of it is the tricky
thing well though the hardest thing and
they also he seems to get harder as it
goes along while I'm doing well in some
ways it gets easier in there like I'm
paying attention to synchronicity and
I'm sort of flowing and I'm moving very
fast but it's also like just harder and
harder and harder because have a more
aware of the gravity of it and the that
it's important to people so I can't
up and it has to be and I know you know
these are if you're taking the words for
someone who spent 34 years thinking
about a thing then you better do justice
to how those words are presented hmm and
you'd better not misrepresent those
words while at the same time making it
foggy
[Music]
people are just not pushing the right
transmit counter album just drop it just
was like that's a strange entering
suddenly you've got all these
psychedelic possibilities and as we were
talking about last time I've been
predicting this swing back into sort of
psychedelia and people have been
interested in more out their concepts
whether it be sort of a psychedelic II a
CD type stuff or chaos magic or and lo
and behold all this stuff seems to be
kicking off already
and so what enough happened was there
was a break in the place there's a
glitch in the matrix brink of the frames
there's a glitch of the major of Lincoln
that like we got in touch at first
because you remix the glitch in the
matrix film Bank classic classic classic
I'd not really thought about it at the
time but the making of glitch in the
matrix was my kind of leap out of one
world into another one I'd find it quite
awkward I think to go into a newsroom
with someone who and an organization I'm
pretty much criticized and presumably
you would find it very limiting giving
like now your scope is kind of you know
you can sit down and have conversations
about whatever you want for as long as
you want
yeah the only limit is your imagination
yeah presumably there's not even you
know Lentz or whatever there is no
bandwidth limitations so you see me
going back into that system you would
feel somewhat confined yeah true and it
it also it's like what's the right lens
to look at what's going on at the moment
and I think we're in the kind of times
where the right lens is not the
political it's not the it's not the kind
of cert all the surface level kind of
analysis is just becoming less and less
apparent because what we're dealing with
is I think we're dealing with a kind of
phase shift a potential phase shift in
and this is the time where all of these
really deep questions of what are your
axioms what are your assumptions about
the world what are becoming increasingly
relevant and we've taught in the rebel
wisdom kind of podcast we've talked
about the end of the age of materialism
I think that's what we're seeing we're
seeing return of kind of the archetypal
we're seeing a return of the kind of
acuity we're seeing a return of
as Pedersen is kind of a Herald of this
kind of the reintegration for sacred as
well yeah all these things okay these
vast crossing these worlds yeah between
the sort of like a typical in the sort
of grounded on full-blown material yes
yes yes he's a scientist yeah yeah but
also it's sort of like an interest in
the divine and he doesn't squat yeah
a lack of scorn for certain concepts and
again this is like we were talking about
before this sort of swing from them it's
a hard material back into the sort of
psychedelic hmm and we've kind of gone
through this intense dark political
period of everyone screaming at each
other and wishing death upon each other
and flinging around horrible words and
splitting up with their families and
divorcing their wives and all these
things over ridiculous ridiculous stuff
but with swinging back and as we swing
back we swing up and we can look down
upon this stuff rather than being sort
of down because you think we're going
into a new sort of psychedelia time yeah
we're definitely doing that and that's
broken you can see that everywhere are
people it's the concepts people are
getting interested in talking about the
drugs that people are starting to
mention the colors in clothes you saw
this with Kanye West who's always on the
cutting edge of this stuff
and aside from sort of shifting the
culture with music he's been doing it
with clothes for many years now as well
his previous collection was all this
dark stuff the joke was like you
couldn't tell if it was a homeless
person or someone wearing $2,000 Yeezy
jacket but it was just this dark sort of
like military ish and his new collection
is all sort of rainbow stuff it's all
wood stopping sort of like bright colors
joyfulness sunshine smiles or this type
of thing hmm and you see that kind of
thing everywhere as you were saying
seven years is that does that yeah yeah
is it getting fun I wonder whether it
might be getting faster no it stays the
same but it's like each time it bangs in
one direction it kind of gets sort of
heavier hmm so you have like the mini
ones which is seven years then you have
like much larger ones which are more
like sixty years but haven't worked out
exactly what that is but we're going
back into psychedelia right as of now
like as it past few months but it's
going to be way bigger this time because
of the way things are online and because
of
all being interconnected and the lessons
we've learned in the past few it's going
to be a much huger psychedelic explosion
and because we're also connected it's
going to have permanent effects on the
sort of culture at large and the brain
at what you cook this sort of the bay
thing is when you think about the
company other consciousness is an
overused word but just look at videos of
people in the 70s versus people now it's
a completely different species and the
species that's emerging right now is a
completely different one to that which
we use doing you see most of the people
you see on televisions are at different
species to the species that's emerging
now and the species that's watching
these things online and it's gonna be
really instrumental in where the
cultures going did you see we did an
interview with Michael Pollan the guy
food writers just released a book about
psychedelics called how to change your
mind and this is one last week it was
about a couple of weeks ago but one of
the questions I asked him because he
he's New York Times best-selling writer
one of the top hundred writers they like
the Malcolm Gladwell of food almost
right and he's written of he studied it
for few years did his own psychedelic
trips and has now released a book about
it and my question to him was is this
the most significant moment in the
psychedelic Renaissance and the answer
is yes am i I can't I can't say who but
but someone very close to me watched it
and immediately said I wanted to try
this and he said in the interview he has
a way of writing about things that makes
people want to do them yes and this is
by far the most significant kind of
public validation of psychedelics so it
makes perfect sense of it yeah assume
it's literally having everywhere every
drogon conversations suddenly after six
years of it being quite like hardcore
life stuff material stuff is suddenly
back in that world again it's it's uh
people coming on talking about like
treating depression with
ketamine and psychedelics and stomach is
suddenly this big thing just over the
past few weeks I was talking about
terence mckenna's brother was hosting a
psychedelic science conference in Los
Angeles last Sunday hmm just suddenly
popped up mainstream the whole thing
with the psychedelics thing is one of
those things that and people always said
this you know once you do it it changes
you fundamentally and you suddenly the
world aspects of the world were closed
previously open up yeah and anyone who's
done it will tell you that and anyone
who seems to have any kind of major
influence on things on a scientific
level or the cultural level is usually
had some experience like them so once it
cracks open on the mainstream and
everyone does it that means everyone all
the stuff all the little corridors and
ideas that the Internet's opening up in
people's minds and once that's coupled
with the real life thing as we've spoke
about previously it's a very important
for us to move these online discussions
into the real world and these online
experiences into the real world and the
psychedelic thing I believe is going to
be a massive part of that hmm and once
those doors are opened they cannot be
closed once these Pandora's what was in
Pandora's box
genius once these genies are out these
lamps and once these Pandora's boxes are
open they cannot be undone and the cut
that's that says forever shifted on to
the next phase because psychedelics can
also I think about this the other day
it's like you also it also makes people
very susceptible conspiracy theories it
makes people very susceptible to like
you may stop believing in the kind of
traditional story of society but you
become very susceptible to believing all
kinds of other yes and this happens
in the previous psychedelic cycle hmm
and then we went out of that and then
the conspiracy people whose weirdo the
conspiracy thing flipped and CNN San Lee
became Infowars and vice versa and a
weird source and there's some very
strange sort of fashion but you have to
kind of have that because people have to
be able to tokens who had no idea some
part of being open to new ideas is also
you know being open to bad ideas or
silly ideas
have you but we're in this new period of
being open to new ideas but we have
toolkit now toolkit seems to be in both
as a word lady anyway we have a better
toolkit for dealing with these things
and because we're all connected together
in this in these larger networks and
because we've been listening to these
three our conversations with smart
people hmm
a lot of the things that we were drawn
to in the first phase of the internet
conspiratorial wise it's been done so
you can't do it again hmm
so once you've gone into that particular
little pocket and you've looked at all
those ones and you've come out and
you've worked out what was real and what
wasn't it's not that you just gonna
repeat that it means this time we're
gonna look at sort of bigger ideas and
deeper ideas and we're gonna go further
and deeper and there will be some
nonsense in there but there will be some
some deep deep amazing truths which will
help is reach deeper than our pasts and
go forth to Mars hmm McKenna was talking
where you'll DJ what's that where I will
be DJ McKenna was talking about this at
the end of society a society collapses
or a part of it dies whenever that
happens
the smart people of the time will look
into the deep past for uh for something
valuable to move it forward I think was
eaten archaic what's that the okay with
revival yeah he calls it yes and he was
talking about this in 91 but I think is
very relevant or hampered Sheldrake who
we interviewed as well that's why we you
know you're deep in the heart of a
little thing yeah that's where we're at
right now and we have our Council of
wise men of which the ID W yeah are a
part they're one of these councils of
wise men hmm and yeah yeah that's my my
sense with the IDW is that it's an early
almost like a placeholder for the growth
of this conversation it's like a kind of
line in the sand of these are people who
prepare to speak their truth these are
people who are not prepared to be kind
of shamed by the mainstream media and to
not talking about certain subjects but I
think it's almost like a beachhead that
they're a minute hill
yeah it's like a beachhead that then
allows a bigger conversation to take
place
yeah because as we was saying earlier
a couple of years ago people were
terrified to talk about certain things
in public in a way that that they're not
as terrified now and I feel that that
has shifted massively just over the past
few months
hmm I'm saying this in real life I'm
seeing this in clubs I'm seeing this on
the street I'm seeing people who
previously were keeping their mouths
shut because they were just a bit scared
and we're in Los Angeles here and by the
way which is you know very so consensus
people everyone's terrified of saying
the wrong thing because then they'll
lose their representation I won't get
hired to be in movies and things of that
nature which happens it happens in a big
way in comics it's happening in a big
way it's happening in everything but
people are a lot less scared right now
in the summer of 2018 than they were in
a spring 2018 and people are having
these conversations and people are
openly kind of like mocking people who
try and throw some Nancy and things at
them Medicus for discussing stuff that's
now you you mentioned this earlier this
it's on British channel 3 and channel 4
or something right there a sketch comedy
previously mocking this this stuff so
that that's great mm-hmm and but you
know that is you said this is just the
beginning is the beginning of these
conversations and the bigger ones that
we had as we move into this new glorious
Eon hmm you seem a lot more optimistic
than the last time I suppose you I'm
optimistic and also this is the paradox
it's like and I think both of these
things are true at the same time you can
look at things like Steven Pinker and
say look at all of these indices we are
more wealthy we have more and the
freedom all this stuff than it is the
greatest day to be alive in your history
and that is absolutely true you're
serious look at it it's amazing but it's
also true that we are so interdependent
our technologies in a certain we are
also in a very fragile situation yeah
one particularly like excitable sunspot
activity would wipe out every hard drive
in it just like that yeah boom but I
guess what we would deal with it
instantly because that's what we always
do we're very very good at that we're
done very very very quickly I'm I am
more I am more pessimistic
well I'm also optimistic at the same
time that some a lot of the thinkers
that I'm following sort of most closely
like Jordan green hall for example Brett
Weinstein
well I think Eric as well as much more
much more pessimistic than say Jordan
Peters all of those I was thinking
because they're talking about it's like
okay we we are in a better situation in
many ways but we are incredibly fragile
and we're so interdependent the the
pressures on the system are getting more
and more and I think all of those are
true at the same time and I think
actually we are going to be tested more
than any but I think we're going into a
period of like real conflict and real
chaos but I think we'll come out ready
in it yeah we're all I think it's gonna
I think it's going to increase yeah
exponentially yeah well but we're more
likely to deal with it than ever we were
before
yeah and the main thing is you know
children the children who did who you
know we're at the last generation who
remember no internet and it's and after
that it's just been Internet and one
when you're just Internet when you're
just a creature of Internet is a
completely different mindset and it
completely different way of viewing
everything and those do
not have the hang-ups that everyone
before them had hmm and they're much
better equipped to deal in the sort of
speed that's required and in the kind of
flow that's required a sort of flow
statements that have been thinking about
this whole thing a lot but part of the
way I've been working in this hyper
hyper productive ridiculousness has
taught me super powers in a way that
previously I just sort of like suspected
but putting it into practice like
forcing yourself to work every day with
this incredible tunnel vision and
forcing yourself to rely on instincts
and forcing yourself to notice every
synchronicity and to act upon that as if
there's a guidepost
puts you in an incredible flow state
where everything suddenly becomes
magical and things just seem to happen
of their own accord and you just keep
going and do not stop and do not deviate
then it's it's just wonderful and insane
and magical and you get an awful lot
done and it's really good and
increasingly so being in that kind of
state internet children a way more
equipped and ready to exist as that and
to accept that as a possible reality
and to do that way more than people
before them so as we move into this
stuff and all these programs arise and
stuff which is way way better equipped
to deal with them in this in this
generous generations that are rising up
we'll be able to deal with these things
one of them I think it was probably when
I first met you because we connected on
online on Twitter and you just so
happened to be coming over to the UK
afterwards and you've remix glitch and
the matrix was the first time I realized
having put put my stuff out there that
the internet is a machine for generating
synchronicities yes that's what it's for
yeah because because it's the action
yeah
it becomes don't even keep doing it you
keep moving you have to move with the
speed of the Internet the speed of the
incident is different to the speed of
so-called real life it's a lot faster a
week in the Internet is like six months
in so-called real life so you have to
move with the speed of the incident you
have to be like a shark mmm you have to
keep moving you have to observe
synchronicities and realize that there
are signposts for the direction of an
eating snake you have to eat steak each
state honest yeah that's a big part of
my success but it's yeah I'm fueled by
stake in meaning stake in meaning that
was the other bit that's missing is you
have to have meaning behind what you're
doing and then if meaning is the
motivation and
synchronicity of the signposts and you
just move like a shark you know
water a river is beautiful and clean and
amazing as a wonderful thing but when it
sort of gets stopped it becomes what
does it come a pond or something like
stagnates and horrible things groaning
it's very problematic it must be like a
river and you know there's that's that's
the natural state of internet generation
hmm I believe so I don't think I think
that that will counteract a lot of the
problems and I think the steam culture
idea that Alan Moore used to talk about
that we're now in we're in we move from
the culture of say the amount of time it
took to go from the invention of the
stone axe to the Roman Baths then the
amount of time it takes to create the
same amount of stuff is half that and it
keeps dividing kind of Moore's law yes
indeed
like that so you go from a fluid culture
to a culture where suddenly so much
stuff is happening all at once it's like
steam and we're in that right now like
you know thing could be invented in
three minutes that fixes the issue of
plastic in C or something least nu I'm
reading about all this stuff every days
I go someone just worked out to fix that
and someone just worked out to fix that
these problems that seemed just
completely unsurmountable for many many
years lots of these things are being
fixed and will be fixed like very
quickly you know and then there'll be
new problems but I think we're really
really well equipped to to sort out all
of our issues as Peterson said recently
one of the things the whole Joe Rogan
podcast everything phenomenon shows is
that we're actually way smarter then
everyone gave us credit for which you if
you talk to people if you actually talk
to people and listen to them you'll know
this anyway mmm you know I go to pubs
and bars where the people apparently
supposedly like ignorant idiot
working-clothes racists who sneered upon
by the London anti brexit people and the
the American anti Trump people you go
talk to these people they're not dumb
and if you listen to them for more than
three minutes you'll find they're not
done the channels through which things
are observed and have been like
propagating stuff or done hmm the old
media was done and the way put things
across was done and now we're in a brave
new world where there is space and room
for intelligence and for people to
educate themselves at the right place
exactly hmm exactly that that's a whole
other big conversation the whole
education thing yeah that's the thing
about this this new generation of
Internet is they're able to educate
themselves anything that interests them
- as far as as far as they're willing to
go down that subject and they are doing
them hmm
and I made them all the time and they
write to me all the time I have a
discord now where all these all my new
sort of meaning wave era fans hang out
and the most active chat room is the
philosophy chat room which is just
buzzing all the sites and notifications
offices just ping ping ping ping ping
there's in there having played really
big deep conversations about stuff and
saying oh go look at this and go look at
this
look at that and deliver that hmm the
second biggest room is the means room of
course and then you know what would
usually a bit of sort of general chat or
music or whatever is quick to lower down
on the list of interests and these are
all or generated what's it called alone
millennial anyway whatever is yeah those
ones away smarter than we were and
they're way more they're way more
developed than we were mmm you know you
can know if you can operate an iPad
which is essentially a supercomputer you
can operate that age three what the hell
are you gonna do when you're 23
whatever my my only concern about that
generation is it is that they're growing
up within sort of like a public shaming
kind of space
yeah well the cyber yeah the cyber
bullying and stuff like I'm like I think
about what I post on Facebook and there
are certain things I wouldn't post on
there there are certain things like I
get pushed back for posting and I'm
pretty disagreeable like I'm prepared to
sort of speak my mind and I can express
myself fairly well and I think about the
generation below and yet even so you get
kind of publicly shamed or attacked for
sharing certain things and I think the
generation below ours like it must be
really hard to develop your own voice
because if you say something out of line
that someone can say oh that's racist or
sexist this is typically this is a tiny
blip it's something we have to get
through to get to the other side on the
other side because when everyone
realizes oh everyone's done
something bad everyone's got something
dark about them everyone's got something
about them that I don't agree with
everything that will be the major
realization you might take 10 years to
get there or something but when we get
there everyone knows that everyone else
has something about them that's bad
something in their past there's bad it
something about them that you disagree
with and once everyone gets to that
point okay we're all the same and
there's gonna be a lot of casualties
along the way but we're like I was
saying I'm already seeing that whole
little thing of people worrying about
what people of having the wrong opinion
and being publicly shamed that's
lessening and people are getting braver
yeah people are getting a lot braver and
they're realizing they're not alone
various states sort of shame or the
promise or anguish or what have you so
this is a thing that will be dealt with
from the other side of it is a much
freer space something that none of us
ever had before
yeah in public to be sort of connected
to the whole world and be able to be
yourself completely hmm in all of its
horrible and wandering glory and as we
were talking about earlier if one sort
of mass squeegees everybody then
suddenly everyone is aware of all these
other aspects that are out there of
reality at all times and prospects that
are in here as well which is pretty
terrifying
yes well again then that takes us back
to the whole shadow thing and all that
and that's a big part of it yeah the
integration of the shadow is an integral
part of the moving forward and it's but
it's that's a bit like what I was saying
about the whole getting over the shaming
thing it's like once everyone integrate
realizes that everyone has a shadow
first you have to realize you do mmm
then everyone else does and then
everyone works out how best to utilize
that stuff and you know use those forces
mmm then you have that sort of thing
fixed that's great then you all do the
sort of psychedelic experience on mass
and then you go oh look at all
these aspects of reality and stuff there
are isn't this beautiful and wonderful
and we're all connected in this thing
and then you actually are all connected
because the whole digital thing has
happened
mmm yeah yeah no it's a good point it's
like before you do like in the 60s
people would do psychedelics and go buy
it we're all one it's like well actually
now because of the technology we are all
you are pretty close to it actually that
being true yeah it is yeah so when she
bad
the psychedelic thing to that mmm so
previously those realizations would
happen in the corner of a room with a
few people look girl one but it's only
us who are all wanted you can't explain
it to anyone else and I think you're mad
this time very different this
time it's the generation of people who
already know that world one there or do
you know that we're all connected
already know any kind of illusion sort
of cultural barriers are silly in there
they grew up this thing's a sort of
Japanese reggae and Dutch techno and
and la trappe at the same time they
don't have any of those sort of cultural
barriers that previous generations did
and they truly are all connected by
technology in a mental psychedelic
 cyberpunk Blade Runner fashion
terrible cultural appropriation you know
that although that's great because that
whole intersectionality thing's
brilliance it just destroys itself so
they oldest all those people can go
destroy themselves all those people with
their sort of very surface very narrow
very material way of sort of like being
angry and upset about the world that's a
thing of the past and that will eat
itself and destroy itself
meanwhile over here we can have like big
big conversations and go to Mars and we
don't yeah let's squeegee the third eye
squeeze you the third eye on yeah our IP
Bill Hicks oh we've been really nice to
Bill Hicks trips in all this stuff
mm-hmm he was he was a cynical person
but he had this he'd had these
psychedelic experiences which gave me a
little glimmer of hope hmm it's a wonder
for the glory of humanity hmm and all of
its splendor
history is just a twenty five thousand
year - from the trees to the star show
[Music]
there has been well-received like I've
seen Eric Weinstein tweeting something
for house and Jordan Peterson tweeting
it out and how does that feel
yeah it's beautiful thing what all one
wants in life is to self actualize and
have the respect of one's peers and you
know it to be yeah to be able to
self-analyze to do what you're good at
and makes you you sing makes your soul
sing what make sure it makes your soul
shine whatever it is and and then to get
the respect of one's peers as an inker
is a truly wonderful thing and it was
something I wrote that I wanted to some
years ago I was like that's basically
what I want but at that point I thought
of my peers being other people who made
music whereas now it's actually it's
sort of it's way bigger than that and
now my peers are by all the biologists
and musicians and professors and
psychologists psychologists and all
sorts of people which is wonderful
because that's another thing I wanted to
do as well which was kind of move music
or create music that could exist
usefully across all these spheres and
musicals all these people are keeping
you keep as you get older in life you
see people around you to sort of
switching off from music and thinking oh
well that's for kids or that's me
younger people and then you start
hearing these are well music was way
better when I was young musics all crap
now because they kind of stopped and
everyone associates good music with the
first time they've got their dick sucked
which is why the top comment on every
YouTube video is that music was so much
better in my day
whatever that day was but it's because
of like I was saying although most pop
music it's kind of not made for people
over 24 you know so if so creating a
music that could be listened you know
again I'm not saying that like pop music
is useless when you're over 24 because I
listen to a hell of a lot of pop me is
it can I listen to a lot of so-called
ignorant rap music and I love little
pompe all that type of stuff but you
know there's there's a whole aspect of
it that will
it wasn't being served as well as it
should and it could then bring all these
people together perhaps yeah once
what was that Eric Weinstein said you
haven't made it until the cure the
donors turned you into a song
yes she's which is true well you haven't
yeah you haven't but you have yeah you
actually very early yeah you were very
early on that as a as a recipient the
other icing of the dawn thank you yeah
it worked means a lot you deserve it you
and it you're out there making your
ancestors proud which is what you know
we should all be doing yeah we should
all be thinking of our ancestors and
thinking of everything that they went
through so we could get to this point of
hitherto unimaginable luxury and
potential here in this incredible summer
of love 2018 thank you are you over
[Music]
you