hello this is Eric I wanted to give a
small note to say how today's episode
fits into the general arc of the portal
as many of you know I'm a critic about
what is going on in academics and in
science and in the economy with respect
to innovation I feel that we're
experiencing some kind of a very broad
malaise and slowdown on the other hand
whenever you allege that something is
going generally environmentally wrong it
is incumbent upon you to check that you
aren't in fact in the middle of a
depressive or negative episode one of
the things that I like to do is to check
and see where are the bright spots what
are the things that inspire me where do
I see people actually pushing the
envelope making breakthroughs if I can
spot those then I can realize that it's
not me who's dead but in fact a memory
of what is possible that is actually
causing the frustration and in these
circumstances I sometimes look very far
afield to see where people are actually
innovating and one of the places that I
see a tremendous amount of innovation
right now is surfing at some point out
of the corner of my eye
one particular surfer caught my
attention his name was Kyle ne and it
wasn't as clear as it is now that he was
on to something really special as his
skill has increased he's been taking on
larger and larger waves and I don't know
how to say this exactly but playing with
them so before you watch today's episode
put in the name Kyle ne ka i le and and
why and maybe words like jaws or Nazare
and watch what he's doing because it's
unlike anything I've ever seen every
time I look at it it looks more like art
than surfing he's effectively playing
with some of the most frightening and
dangerous waves in the world and in some
sense it seems like a metaphor for where
we are that with many forces that are
potentially incredibly threatening a
small number of us have the courage and
strength and discipline to instead of
fretting and becoming innervated we
start playing with what the
possibilities might be kai is
experimenting in every technological
dimension every athletic dimension and I
dare say every artistic dimension that
you can imagine his famous phrase is I
feel like we're just getting started
it's hard for me to believe that there's
that much Headroom given how close to
the edge it seems that he's always
playing but even though I know that he's
taking his life
making these videos for us and
experiencing these waves in the kind of
perfect solitude that must accompany
being inside a gigantic barrel or
falling down the face of what can only
be called a liquid cliff I know that guy
is actually serving something greater in
the human spirit and even though we
can't necessarily be in the wave with
him through the magic of helicopters or
GoPro videos or any of the incredible
technologies that we're now able to use
to bring the experience closer to home
kai is reacquainting ourselves with the
sense of the possible what might lie
within us both as individuals and as a
society so I hope you'll see this in
this light I hope you'll take an
interest in surfing whether you live in
a landlocked country or whether you're
old and maybe even disabled what he's
doing is in fact to me hugely inspiring
and one of the places that I turned to
when I start to feel extremely
frustrated so I feel hugely honored to
be able to bring you Kai Lenny please
take a look at his videos beforehand and
then once you've understood what it is
that we are all capable of through his
efforts and antics I think you'll find
that this interview is much more
enjoyable I hope you enjoy it as much as
I did thanks hello
you found the portal I'm your host Eric
Weinstein and I am thrilled today
because my guest is now the other than
Kai Lenny who I've been stalking on the
Internet and recently in Maui actually
Kai welcome to the portal thanks for
having me on the portal okay
well look the the aim of this program is
to talk about breaking through two
worlds that people can't even imagine
exists yeah and there is no one who
better exemplifies this at the moment
than you because what I see you is doing
before even people a lot of people
aren't even gonna know who you are is
that you work right now in the process
of expanding the vocabulary in a very
unusual area so that I'm seeing things
that I've never seen before even though
I'm not expert in your area we talk
about big wave surfing and what you're
doing to it oh my favorite thing in the
world to talk about big wave surfing
because it's like the passion I mean
just a quick background for everyone you
came and visited on Maui and you saw my
board room and you saw all this equip
and stuff where I grew up it's just down
the road from we what would I would call
the Mount Everest of big waves jaws
peahi in Hawaiian pay ah he means the
beacon or to be called which is a
perfect name because when it starts to
break it almost sends this signal out to
the rest of the world and people come
from all corners of life to either surf
or watch or film photography a photos of
these giant waves and so when you're
born and raised with Mount Everest in
your backyard it's inevitable you're
gonna have to go try to climb it right
and big wave surfing you you're in it's
inevitable you want to go surf it as a
little kid because before you know comic
books in comic book movies right mainly
comic book movies were really big in the
mainstream media they're my superheroes
were these guys that were riding these
monster waves you know there was wasn't
there a comic book hero called the
Silver Surfer the Silver Surfer yeah
sure I guess but it was like I guess
like in Hawaii we do live in a bubble
yeah not arguing against that at all cuz
we're we're not a part of the
continental United States were middle of
the ocean 2,000 miles away the most
isolated landmass on the planet and you
everything that's going on around you in
Hawaii is what's going around you you
know it's there's not a lot of there's
influence from other places thanks to
the internet and stuff but it's such a
scene over there and Hawaii is a
powerful place as well like an energy
you can really feel that and it's almost
unexplainable there's a frequency that
if you can match it it will give you
some of the most incredible moments your
life and I'll get into that more when
when when I start talking about like the
art of actually riding big waves yeah
and being in tune with the ocean and the
frequency and I mean why not just stop
start talking about it now is that the
no offense I'm going to start off by
just contradicting you you say that if
you are out there of course you have to
ride it
you're too modest because I talked to
people who are living out there who are
surfers who love it and when I tie a
go and reserve this particular wave the
usual answer is how did I'm not crazy I
mean this wave went when it when it
breaks is really it's a beast it's a
beast but okay so you throw it back to
when I was gosh my I think one of my
earliest memories is a child you know
all of a sudden it's like you don't
remember anything and then maybe when
you're four years old or even younger
like three years old all sudden there's
like a distinct memory one of the most
distinct memories I have as a kid is
standing on the cliff watching jaws
break so there was already a seed plants
from an early age highly you know
curious kid super my superheroes the
guy's the equivalent of the Justice
League and the Avengers were called the
strapped crew and they were the ones
that pioneered pay off EI ka jaws and
jaws doing a name check them huh
yeah yeah no absolutely so who who made
up this strapped crew were guys that
invented tow-in surfing which was the
first the first or still probably the
best way to ride big waves on a
high-performance level
Laird Hamilton people have probably
heard of him
Dave Kalama was another rush Randall
Derek Dorner Piku Brina Robby Nash Mike
Waltz Brett lickle those guys kind of
comprise this strap crew and there are
all different characters a lot of them
windsurfing champions a lot of them from
different parts of the island islands
you know from Oahu as well as now of
course but they kind of were on Maui
Gerry Lopez who's like I would say the
equivalent of Yoda in surfing you know
like he's the all-wise basically
all-knowing like master the the the guru
he showed Laird this wave back in the
day like this is in the he'd been
watching it since the early 80s and very
early 90s they Jerry's like okay like he
noticed Laird was really taking interest
and
big wave surfing on Oahu which at the
time was considered the best big waves
on the planet he's like I got something
you might want to see and they walk
through the pineapple fields they get to
the edge of the cliff and all of a
sudden Laird is shown the the Golden
Goose the the the best big wave on the
planet it's so perfect that if he's not
someone on it for scale it looks like a
small wave it's rare to find big waves
that look six feet but are really 60
feet and so Jerry told me when I was a
kid and I always try to get him to
repeat it is a story of like in the 80s
when a giant swell came and they were
surfing this other break which is also
known as one of the best waves in the
planet not best big wave but best wave
and it's very similar to how jaws breaks
just on a smaller scale
it's called Honolua Bay beautiful epic
sunsets there and he said one day after
surfing they went up to jaws to go check
it and it was so big that where we surf
for now would have been whitewater and
where the boats are would have been
where the barrel was so where the wave
was breaking and creating a giant tube
he he would he would approximately the
waves were probably in the 100 foot
range and there was other nicknames or
other names they called it before it was
coined Jaws jaws sort of came when Laird
landed on the cover of National
Geographic with a giant wave and he was
just in board shorts and it was like
unbelievable shot which I think he's
still the only surfer to ever be on the
cover of National Geographic well
there's so many ways that I want to get
in underneath the story before I even
get to like you and what what a jerk so
but I don't even know where to begin so
first of all one the only thing that
connects us really is that we're both
fascinated by waves I'm fascinated in
physics you're fascinated by ocean waves
yeah and one of the things that I find
fascinating is that these these waves
have are sort of like intercontinental
intercontinental exploration that has
only happened recently like we mapped
all the landmasses but somehow they're
still relatively recently only
relatively recently have there been
certain discoveries of these really
important surfable waves like Mavericks
in Half Moon Bay has not been explored
for that long and then yeah and then you
know you're saying with with jaws jaws
and P ie the thing that I find
fascinating about this is that there was
also this taboo around tow-in surfing
that because of the the purity of
surfing culture and the ethos of it like
you're talking about it both as a sport
and the beauty of the wave and the
sunsets like it is the sort of kind of
complete picture in world and there was
something transgressive about towing and
is that right I think before anybody
started kind of pinning toe and surfing
as being unnatural or not so full or
whatever other kind of term they use
people were just blown away by the fact
that you could ride away that big and so
it didn't even matter at that point now
fast forward to present day people are
paddling in and tow and surfing is
widely regarded within course surfers as
cheating but I think they forget that
it's the it would be the equivalent of
going and climbing the mountain and
skiing down versus taking the helicopter
up and doing it 50 times but isn't there
an issue about how fast the wave is
moving if it's moving too quickly it's
almost impossible to pedal it or is that
changed I think it's changed a lot I
mean I think what people thought was
impossible to paddle into is possible
it's just the best way I can describe it
is when you're trying to paddle into a
really big wave just imagine there's a
platform or like a launching pad right
that you can go from but the bigger the
wave gets the smaller that launching pad
gets where you can take off and make it
yeah because it's all about positioning
it's triangulating yourself with the
land around you so looking at shore and
finding two trees or two points that you
line up with okay this is where I am on
part of the reef and then looking to
your left and finding another point and
lining up at the point and so you kind
of triangulate yourself in and that's
where you buy by checking where the
waves are breaking that's how you figure
out that you're gonna be in the right
spot to get on that launching pad
because if you're too much on the
shoulder which is kind of away from the
part of the way you're not gonna catch
it if you're too deep you're gonna
become part of the waving go over the
falls so it's that's pattern given that
this is a non surfing program can we say
that over the falls means getting swept
up over the crest and being just yeah I
guess over the falls would be the
equivalent of jumping into the water and
going over Niagara right like that's the
same thing like oh so you become the lip
the wave picks you up in what we call it
as the ride after the ride okay so what
I don't really want to object in any way
to toen I don't have these issues so the
the main issue for me is innovation
right like the reason that I find this
so fascinating is that I wasn't around
unconscious like in 68 I was three years
old when dick Fosbury came up with the
Fosbury flop and changed high jumping
and if you think back to like table
tennis this guy from Japan I think his
name is like Hiroshi Ishii such put
rubber on a hard bat paddle and changed
the game of table tennis forever what I
see you is doing and I could be wrong
about this I've been looking at you for
several years not knowing because I'm
not a surfing guy why am i carrying
about this one guy and it wasn't quite
so evident or earlier than it as it is
now that suddenly I'm seeing things that
I just came and believe I'm watching and
essentially what I think I'm seeing is
that you're taking some of the world's
largest waves and instead of just like
showing that they can be ridden like
actually just playing and doing tricks
and pushing every available corner of
performance to eek out things that
nobody knew was were possible so you're
really inventing your own vocabulary of
surfing to me and then the the thing
that you said that just you know tore at
my soul I was watching you on some kind
of unbelievable wave doing some trick
and you said you know the thing that
blows my mind is I feel like we're just
getting started and I thought I thought
we were already at the limits
of what is doable and your point of view
was I can see how much Headroom I have
and its enormous its yeah I mean it's
crazy the there's I think there's more
room for growth than high performance
big wave riding than there is in any
part of surfing maybe even any part of
action sports because you know I'm just
starting now to do 360s on big waves and
do it confidently but there's really no
reason why I shouldn't be doing a triple
cork something that Shaun White can do
you know in a halfpipe you know
something like that so your feet are
tethered to your board are they on toe
and surfing it is on totally it's really
the only way to do it in big waves tone
surfing because of the speeds you're
reaching the amount of winds even on a
glassy day when there's no winds on the
face of the wave waves are moving fast
enough they're producing their own local
winds at the top so you know probably
20-knot winds 25 mile an hour winds on
the top of these breaking waves and so
you and the boards are heavy to go
through all that chalk because I'm
probably hitting 55 miles an hour at
times and even faster potentially in
certain waves riding my toe and
surfboard got it so what I want to sort
of just induce people to do is to Google
and search for some of the epic rides
that you've taken that also alerted the
world to the fact that something crazy
was going on so you know with Laird
Hamilton a very famous alert that went
after the plan it was this photograph of
him in Tahiti which must have been Lenny
emwave did you want to talk about how
that affected you I mean Laird was my it
was a superhero to me even up to that
point and this is 2000 and Laird was
known is known as writing and kind of
like pushing the limits a big wave
riding where people didn't think it
could go part I think that's why I'm
kind of inspired to follow in those
footsteps like and it might be a little
different approach but for Laird when he
rode that wave in 2000 he just kind of
like blew the door open on what was
possible so
what wave was it talked is this is
Tahiti yeah so this is in Tahiti
French Polynesia most beautiful day ever
there's this way of called Taihu po
people call it Teahupoo people call it
chops and it's this wave that breaks in
six feet of water on a shallow reef
comes from the depths of the ocean it's
really deep on the other side and what
makes this wave so unique is it can
displace the entire ocean instead of
being instead of standing up vertically
it just folds over so it's almost like
it's the closest thing to a rideable
tsunami there is because there's no back
to the wave it's just the whole ocean
view it is the most beautifully perfect
wave I've ever seen and and I'm there
are two waves that have captivated me
just visually and they're the exact
opposite of each other so this in that
how should I say should I ask a Teahupoo
well you could say it however you want
what does it mean can you translate it's
got a good name oh yeah this is this is
great so Tia hoop oh yeah Teahupoo is
translates to broken skulls yeah and
it's not because of the wave but that
area is like culturally significant they
call it the end of the road just where
the road ends and that's where that wave
is right at the end but back in the day
there used to be really big battles in
Tahiti listen and people's skulls were
put on stakes and they would be stuck in
the sand there and it just kind of fit
perfect that one of the gnarliest waves
I could stick you on a stake is just
maybe 200 300 yards offshore a fairly
shallow reef so shallow so sharp razors
just imagine razor blades on the bottom
you touch it fairly it's just you're you
get ripped apart and a classic Tahitian
tradition is you lime them after to kill
any bacteria because the reefs are so
alive there that it's really easy to get
staph infection yes and so instead of
using anything that's like by modern
medicine standards or less painful they
lime you and it is or it's like putting
acid in your wounds it hurts so bad
because you know the acidic the nature
of limes are pretty acidic and so it
just feels it's kill
everything in there but it's also
stinging horribly bad and there's
nothing worse when you get cut you try
to hide it from like all your friends
and the local Tahitians because they
seem like lime and people it's it's
hilarious find so much pleasure in
seeing you just like squirm as they like
lime you're back and it's good because
it kills ya any staff that could
possibly take you but at the very same
time it's miserable you already go
through a horrible experience I think
you have to do it again this this wave
is not the tallest but it's one of the
heaviest waves in the world interested
in terms of the mass of water yeah I
mean it kind of defies like belief when
people first see it especially in person
it's not that the wave it actually it's
not like the wave gets displaced as it
comes in and hits the reef and typically
what happens is water is shot vertically
in rows what creates a tall wave there's
a back to the wave it's usually half the
size of the front of the wave but
because there's all that mass pushing
behind it but at Teahupoo the way it
hits the reef it just shoots the lip
forward and the whole oceans behind it
and it draws all the water off the reef
back into the ocean and so you're
surfing at below sea level if you're
riding a 30-foot wave there you're
thirty feet below sea level you're in
like a pit and you can see the water
going back up the reef in front it it
almost doesn't make sense yeah I know
it's just it's a freak of nature and
certain waves do that but this one's the
king of it it's the best it's I like to
call it the most perfect close out on
the planet because and all the photos
you see of it it looks like this perfect
wave and it is for a little bit but as
you're riding there's a right-hander
that's coming actually so there's a wave
that's equal in size that's gonna close
out all that missed the right at the end
so that's called spit you know when you
see a breaking wave as it barrels it'll
shoot like a cannon and all the water
it's the compression of water these big
waves waves in general are like cannons
or like guns so when you're riding in
the tube you can feel air it's a vortex
right it's a vortex and so it's sucking
air in like a jet engine like and then
the wave there's so much water moving
the air can't escape so it goes the
least
resistance which is back out the tube
and it explodes and it shoots chunks of
water that can knock you off your board
probably hundreds of pounds of like
water that are like shooting you and it
hurts really bad like it feels certain
waves it feels so good like getting just
it's the only time it feels good to be
spat on man well you said this thing to
me about barrels that I never thought of
and maybe it's a common place and
surfing but I'd never heard it which is
that a barrel is a unique experience
because of you said something about the
only time that yeah well riding inside a
tube a barrel a wave basically the
hollow part of the wave as it pitches
over it's unique because it's the only
way we can breathe underwater without
any other breathing apparatus so that
was amazing and you feel like a fish for
a second you know and there's something
about waves that break and the negative
ions they produce that you know make you
feel so good so you can imagine being in
this kind of capsule or this vortex
you're so focused on making it it's all
that's on the front of your mind that
there's a moment when nothing else
exists and time slows down it's like you
really are almost I don't know if
accessing more parts of your brain or
what it is but what feels like tense
what is 4 seconds feels like a minute
that's amazing and you're just in there
and and I'm watching water droplets move
by me at like matrix speed everything
looks like the matrix and if you really
calm and and you're really comfortable
you can look you have time to like look
around and absorb all this information
and then all of a sudden as it spits and
you come out of the tube it's like life
just starts going back to normal speed
and you realize how life fast life moves
because in there it's like you have all
the time in the world it feels like and
it's it's what it's probably the
pinnacle of what you could do surfing
better than any maneuver any aerial
acrobatics trick so being in the tube
well so that tube I just I geek out on
it because it's such an incredibly
unbelievable I can't even imagine that
something that
beautiful and perfect exists the other
version of beauty that I'm drawn to is
this other totally different wave which
I think you said you may be headed
towards which is the shipsterns bluff in
Tasmania which is the gnarliest ugliest
it's waves within waves and you know
quantum field theory is this concept
beyond quantum mechanics it's waves upon
waves or and so there's waves within
waves concept even though it's all
obviously classical is really evocative
to me and there's this thing inside of
this crazy Tasmanian thing which people
which forms like a Ledge and I've
watched people fall off of it a bunch
yeah you want to use it as a jump oh
absolutely
well you know what's interesting there's
not that many crazy big waves in the
world they're big waves but then there's
waves that are in the league of their
own you could say chop who's in a league
of its own
jaws Nazare mavericks which is here in
california and chip Stearns is one of
them as well and they all have different
personalities and the art of riding
these big waves is finding their
personality and kind of matching your
the best of you with them but what makes
shipsterns exciting and the reason why
that college shipsterns is because the
way the cliff is situated it looks like
the front of a massive ship maybe that's
high tannic or something there no but I
know all about that way you know because
I've been studying it kind of getting
ready to go and I've had opportunities
ago and it hasn't worked out I mean big
wave surfing you could be halfway across
the world on your way and the forecast
can switch in a flash and you turn
around and go home because it's not
going even breaking or the winds are
gonna be bad and Tasmania is very
susceptible to bad weather just cuz it's
really as close to Antarctica as you've
yet and all those massive storms that
produces big waves oftentimes slam that
Island and but what makes that wave so
raw and so heavy is well it is really
cold water but it's the the bathymetry
the bottom the the what we would call
the reef which is really just rocks
there has a bunch of it's an uneven
surface and so a bit mapped
no but I just know from experience and I
mean if you you can look into videos
about they they basically talk a lot
about all these
because I got thinkin Teahupoo I've I've
saw underwater photography of the wave
breaking from below and it's one of the
most confusing and gorgeous things I've
ever seen it's pretty I mean there's
always like hidden features to reefs or
to the bottom contours that you don't
necessarily realize but for the most
part if you've been surfing a long time
and especially big waves certain things
equal other things so so you could infer
what the bottom must look like from the
gnarly aspect of that fish yeah just by
seeing those ledges you know in the
ledges within the face so this wave the
way it breaks is it's like a right hand
or Teahupoo but maybe not quite as
displacing of the ocean but it has all
these like steps they call them ya face
the wave so miniature waves within later
you could have like four miniature waves
in the face and that is like if you go
to a river and you look at a river in
and you see a little standing wave right
before you'll see some turbulence right
before that's because there's lightly
uneven rocks right before it and so
underwater there's these rocks that come
up that kind of ever so slightly
displaced the wave in such a way that it
makes these mini waves in between but
everyone the way people typically ride
it is they kind of those are speed bumps
and they try to get through that as
quick as they can to get into the barrel
and I'd say my vision for it and it's a
scary one anything you try and new in
big waves is horrifying because it's
like the consequences are severe
beatdowns and you know possibly drowning
but is hitting these small little waves
and doing aerial maneuvers off of them
and then dude as soon as you land have
the whole wave break over you and you're
in the tube and then come out it's
really like being a drug addict and you
just need a harder drug or something
because you can ride big waves all the
time you can surf in general all the
time but for me I feel like I need to
constantly be upping it because it's not
as satisfying as the last time I did it
and also I'm all about progression as
well like I love getting the the feeling
of getting better and maybe that go
coincides with it right never done drugs
in my life
but I can imagine what it might yes yes
you have yes yeah it is a drug but a
natural
right what is the this is the thing when
I look at I mean it and again I don't
view you within surfing I view you as
like rodney mullen or eddie van halen or
Alex Honnold like they're just these
people who are meant to change what we
know about each of these sports now
they're all within a context you have a
lot of colleagues or you're learning
from and you're teaching but I do see
you as what do you see is
differentiating your approach that you
know if everybody's got kind of a secret
signature and you were talking about
your own expression relative to the wave
what would you say is defining the
difference what am i picking up I don't
know anything about surfing at all well
I think from my own personal perspective
I'm just kind of and I think a lot of
other people that do really cool things
like I think I've heard Alex Honnold
talk about this as well it's like you
don't really know any better it's just
kind of who you are and it kind of sort
of happens and it's and in my
perspective it is sort of the
environment that you spent the most time
in or that experience that led to this
point and so when I go out on the water
it's not like I'm going out there with
the intention to change things or try to
recreate the landscape it's more like oh
son I got this idea and that sounds
really fun and I think I could do it you
know it's like it starts with a little
whisper in your head like maybe this is
possible then you do it and then all of
a sudden you look around and people
appreciate it and without people
appreciating it I don't think I would
know if it was significant you need the
feedback loop look I think Rodney Boland
was basically having a conversation with
himself
yeah like well I know what I want to do
but sometimes like when you're surfing a
big wave you don't know how big the wave
is behind you for example if I never saw
a photo or if no one told me if it was a
gnarly I might get so used to it yeah
comfortable I was talking to my brother
about this the other day about being
starting to get desensitized by certain
size waves now I mean I spent out of the
last two weeks all terrifying yeah it is
but you get comfortable you know you
spend so much time in it spent the last
eight days surfing big way
out of two weeks and I was in Nazeri and
I went to jaws and foon Ezra is this
Portuguese wave that comes out of an
underwater Canyon where all of like the
energy is being focused it may be the
tallest close to the tallest surfable
wave in the world yeah that is that's
probably the most consistent big wave
and I think we should that's an in-depth
conversation that place but real quick
I'm just to kind of finish off this
starting to read this no no but to
finish off sort of this kind of thought
on becoming desensitized a little bit
and talking about like yeah how you kind
of need feedback there was this one
particular wave I'm not meaning to toot
my horn at all but there was this one
particular wave where I got interesting
feedback from my brother afterwards
where the way I was approaching it and I
you might have seen it on my social
media on my Instagram it was that really
big barrel is wearing an orange vest and
I wrote it for a long time and I end up
getting spit out was probably one of my
best big-wave arrows ever but the
interesting about that is I was I was so
focused on reading the curve of the wave
and when you're taking off on a wave at
jaws the whole thing is a horseshoe it
bends around you and taking in certain
aspects of it I could read what its
gonna do it's like predicting the future
like if it hits the reef just in this
way the waves gonna bear really hard I'm
gonna be standing in a cave or standing
in like a huge tunnel and without
thinking twice or how big it was I just
bought um turned I did what we call a
check turn so it's a turn mid-face to
burn my speed off the tow board and then
I just stood there and I lived inside
this tube for a couple seconds but
afterwards I was talking to my brother
and he was like he's like how was that
barrel earlier you know he jumped off
the cliff and I picked him up on the jet
ski and I was getting him some waves and
he was like he's like how do you stall
for that and and and like do that and
I'm like honestly like no big like it
didn't feel that big he's like that was
the biggest wave of the day so far and
and I was like that's really kind of
weird I think I'm like getting a little
desensitized by what I'm seeing because
it's becoming such an often occurrence
that it's becoming my normal all of a
sudden and yeah it's still terrifying
surfing big waves at all is terrifying
just like a huge drop on
I think was on jaws that like the world
was buzzing about yeah yeah that was
like last year and can you talk about
that and is that an example of something
where you didn't realize just how gnarly
it was until you looked at the footage
yeah absolutely so I had been riding
there we had a big wave competition and
it got too big for paddling surfing so
the waves were in the 60 to 70 80 foot
range and I decided to go tone surfing
because what they called this off yes so
we were in the middle of this contest
and the waves just got too big and
probably getting too big was also the
wind factor it got really windy and the
wind was blowing up the face making it
really difficult to catch the wave
because it was just trying to blow you
out the back and if your surfboard turns
into an air force it becomes a wing yeah
and you start flying through the air and
to do that in competition I mean it's
just really dangerous
I mean that morning the heat before they
canceled it guys were passing out
underwater hitting the water so hard
having concussions they were blacking
out
people were coming up spitting blood out
of their lungs maybe one person in the
final heat made a wave and that's when
the decision came okay it's like too
gnarly like we're all for big waves
surfing and big wave competition but in
a contest is never worth losing
someone's life over anything you know
it's not like big wave surfers get paid
that much either to compete right um and
so they ended up canceling it it was a
group decision from most of the surfers
that they didn't want to continue
because for fear of someone not coming
home to their family and but on the
other hand a total moron might think
cool there's no one in the water I'm
gonna go for it I guess I'm that moron
that's what I'm talking about talk about
what happens next well so I mean I just
saw the stuff and I flipped out the
gauge is insane well so I couldn't
paddle anymore and with tow and surfing
which is when it explains people who
don't know a tonne surfing is it's a jet
ski with a wakeboard rope on the back of
it and you use it to get towed into
these massive waves so you eliminate
paddling altogether and it's just a
slingshot into these giant waves and
you're riding a board that's a much
smaller versus a 10 foot board right
you're on a six foot board and and so I
just ended up having the bet
session in my life at that point because
there was no one around everyone didn't
want to surf because they didn't want to
in jet injured because the contest was
gonna run the next day the ways would be
smaller but for me big wave surfing was
never about competing it was always a
spiritual aspect that's where I found my
it was almost became my religion because
when you look at a big wave it's like
looking in a mirror in that moment is
the most transcendent thing I think this
goes into the name you can find out on
Kai show right yeah yeah yeah so there's
they made videos and they called it the
Kai show because I was the only one out
I'm just saying that it's it you can you
can search on it from that yeah and what
I got out of it was was transcendence
like there's this one man in this very
vulnerable position you don't need to
know much about surfing you know what
kind of risks you're taking out there
yeah well so it stems from passion first
and then it stems from a lot of hard
work and focus and determination and
over not overcoming fear but being kind
of in line with it as soon as you
eliminate fear that's when you get
injured especially in big waves because
you make brass brash decision so you are
in essence to me a risk manager like you
you wouldn't be here to be having this
conversation
if you weren't playing the same role
that like if you were running a hedge
fund you have to figure out what can I
afford to take what can I afford to take
calculate the calculation and so that we
all look at this stuff I mean and it's
also there's like a very weird aspect of
the psychology I mean I don't know it in
surfing buddy know it in other places on
the one hand it's like a very alpha male
dominant sort of activity looking but on
the other side of that you have to
submit to the wave like it is they're
gonna win it isn't wave it's an act of
submission right in my SEP tense and
acceptance because once you've committed
to that thing
your choices disappear to an extent you
have a limited amount that you can't you
can't say too big for me once you've
already committed you're in oh yeah I
know like I mean what I love most about
big wave surfing in the draw is you look
at a big wave and it's a mirror and you
realize who you like there's no hiding
there's
lying to yourself who you are in that
moment in your life is right in front of
you and you know it clear as day and you
can either work on it or you can be
stoked that you know of who you are in
that moment because it's it's you're
you're facing death straight in the face
and fear has never been more relevant or
more powerful in that moment and there's
there's something so satisfying and
scary though of accepting acceptance of
fear it's like a release it's like
relief you kick out of a big wave and
you were just on that the edge of your
life and if you fell you were just
worried you may never come back up or
you might get absolutely destroyed and
the fear just washes off of you like you
know dirt in a shower and you just stand
there and and it's just you feel pure
you know it's like all your sins are
forgiven or something and and and that's
why that's what I love so much about big
wave surfing is it just makes me feel
most alive and the more I do it I think
it's given me it's making everyday
normal life harder like to to cope with
so we talked about this recently with a
pornographic actress that there's an
issue about what happens when you do
something that hyper stimulates you and
you have a trouble getting back to a
normal baseline because there is this
sort of hedonic shift in what your
normal is sure and in large measure what
I see is how do you have a normal day
after your day at the office being
playing on the sides of temporary cliffs
oh it's I I mean if I'm being at all
honest it's a normal average day is
tortured like sure it's it's like
because you don't have that same
stimulation you're not there's I guess
things start to lose purpose because
when you're riding a big wave there's a
purpose of living right you know and the
purpose of like living in as you're not
you're you don't want to die but you're
also you're also experiencing something
so pure and profound it feels bigger
than yourself you know like the act of
riding a big wave feels there's almost
like that the egotistical kind of feel
Godley for one moment you know like so
this is the thing flying too close to
the Sun like Icarus you know exactly
waiting for your wings to marys in front
of the gods you see that's the first
element of Greek tragedy and what I see
is that I'm used to watching big waves
where there's some different dot on
every wave and I watch the dot which is
this human being just just hang on for
the ride and if they can just do that
that was that was what I was used to and
then like I see the dot jump and do a
360 on the way like it's playing and it
does it feels like mythically wrong like
wait that wave is huge but I'm gonna
play with it rather than just just
submit and accept it well so kind of
like if you have you've watched
Christopher Nolan's inception right you
know how they go from a dream into
another yeah the way I look at it like
riding a big wave is you have the base
line which is just the act of riding it
going straight surviving it kicking out
you have that 30 second experience and
then you can and then there's and and
and there that takes a certain amount of
focus and for me doing maneuvers on big
waves all of a sudden it's it's it's
like putting that one scary experience
and putting it to the side and as I'm
rotating through a maneuver or a trick
like a 360 down the wave I have to I'm
looking at the water I'm focused on
what's going on with myself and then
it's like when I land I pop back into a
different part of reality and then when
I kick out I'm back to like normal
reality mice mice my baseline so you're
aware of several different colonies
living between the same set of ears the
trade-off on an individual wave hundred
percent yeah so and I could go like I
feel like the most I've been able to go
is maybe three levels deep or maybe four
for when you go four levels deep it's
when you're riding a wave and all of a
sudden you don't you're not you're on
such the edge you don't know that you
don't know what you're doing to make it
work and when you kick out you start
questioning what you did and then you
actually forget how you did it you're
like what just happened and it's kind of
like me sitting here in
heart of Los Angeles I almost feel like
that other Kyle Annie that does it I
sometimes question like gosh will like
I've done it I'm like let's say I did it
a hundred times but I question if I can
ever do it again like I don't know if I
have the confidence to say that I'm
vaiting in this car make a different
person in this conversation you're just
some cool dude that I met in Maui and
there's nothing that suggests that the
person that I've seen on these myriad
different videos is that guy in other
words you're talking about this but
there's no aspect of the the person who
does those incredible things you're just
now just saying well here's what I
remember about that yeah and so when you
meet somebody like you know if you if
you're talking to Albert Einstein and
you were going to McDonald's with him
and you were just ordering hamburger
there would be nothing Albert Einstein
ish about his act of ordering a
hamburger and so like it's a very weird
thing the way the mundane and the
transcendent collide and sometimes the
person who has this transcendent ability
when they're in their mundane head they
can't even imagine that that's who they
are
do you ever have that oh yeah no I
totally have that it's kind of like the
fear will I ever get to that level again
sort of thing but there's a there's a
moment where I I'm starting to identify
when the switch happens and it usually
happens because to get to big waves you
usually round a corner whether it's on a
boat or a car or whatever we're walking
down the beach you come around a corner
and all of a sudden the wave is revealed
it's like the reveal of a movie like
okay all of a sudden you see the monster
or you see the building or you see
whatever it is that you feel that with
you oh my god every time so you turn the
corner and you see plumes of spray going
hundreds of feet in the air and in in
the distance maybe a mile away you see
this monster breaking and and your heart
starts to skip a little bit and you're
like oh my gosh like here we go and I
could start feeling the switch kind of
starting to move and then all this and I
pull up and I see the the canvas that is
the wave breaking and the perfection and
any fear that I had the night before
because it's not like I don't live in
fear at all like the night before I'm
like scratch my
like I got myself into what am i doing
was it like Bruce woohoo coming Bruce
Banner is gonna have to fight and he's
not the Hulk yet and so he has to
approach the fight and before it becomes
the Hulk at some level it's terrifying
because you're signing up to do
something that you're not capable of
doing until you make the transformation
it's a great analogy definitely because
I'll pull up on the jet ski and I wanna
see a wave just submit and it's a
sixty-four wave and it's terrifying and
and and you know everything about it is
like you want to avoid being caught in
there you know like how can the human
body live through something like that
yeah but then all of a sudden I get all
this energy and I and I'm like let's go
let's go and I'm whoever I'm with I'm
trying to rush them off the jet ski or
I'm trying to grab my board to paddle
out or I'm getting them to drive me and
I'm like let's go and I'll find myself
sitting out on the water doing like I
have kind of this breathing exercise I
do or it's like breathe in for two
seconds out what you said it's just
really mellow and it's just really to
get a lot of oxygen in my lungs but it's
also to like have like sharpness of mind
and and then sometimes for waves in a
set will come in so it's not like just
one big wave comes in it breaks there
could be four stacked in the horizon we
call those a set and and and it's like
it's always a bit of chess to try to
figure out which one's gonna be the best
wave because I've had millions of waves
where I've kicked out no you're not
millions but lots of waves where I've
kicked out and you see the perfect big
wave behind it and you're like oh my god
why did I go on the first one and you're
kicking yourself but so so I'm usually
I'm usually really like I would say
reserved in the fact when like I hate
asking people for to go out of their way
for something like hey you know is it
okay like even if I'm staying at
someone's house like it's okay if I get
some water you know it's just who I am I
would say on like a base level but all
of a sudden I think my commander inside
me or kind of like the general sort of
comes out where it's like my driver I'm
telling me exactly when you see I'm like
number two which is the second way no no
no no faster faster let's go and I'll
send I'm yelling and I love this person
and later on I feel guilty night
sometimes apologize but they understand
that I'm out there with a purpose and
trying to catch a wave and it's like you
do have a right to command a situation
you do have some kind of a split
personality because like when we came
out and visited you you could not have
been more hospitable to some like I mean
the funny part is if I understand
correctly you first found out about me
because you were a Joe Rogan watcher
yeah exactly and I said hey are you
watching what's going on and surfing
that's where innovation is happening now
and I shouted out your name that I see
on Instagram
hey this dude shouted out my name or
something I'm thinking like okay how
does that guy even know that I exist
that you know what it's the same way how
does someone like you know I exist no no
it's like funny I just feel like you
know in my world I'm trying to break out
of my own personal bubble like and it's
not a bubble in terms of like get seen
by other people more but it's like I
think we all find ourselves in our own
world and in and I in fact if I've
learned anything from big wave riding is
this trying to be uncomfortable more
often like everyday if I can be a little
uncomfortable it's probably positive
because it means that I'm experiencing
something that I'm not used to it with
whatsoever you know let's talk about
some of the technology that's changing
what it is that you do if you're
thinking about like you're a painter
you're talking about canvas all right
well now you've got more brushes and
paints to paint with so what I see and
correct me if I'm not getting it from
outside so that this foil the hydrofoil
underneath the board's is making it
possible to be like effectively Aladdin
on a magic carpet where you're surfing
above the water then there's this kite
thing going on where you're really
accessing the wind to jump at levels
that just seem absolutely insane there's
safety equipment which is weirdly like
only recently available to decrease the
probability that you're gonna get held
down I think what all those things have
in common and this is what's really cool
about water sports and the the real
connection is things are invented out of
necessity
just like everything in life but really
it's it's in created in the name of fun
like how can I have more fun what can we
do to make it more fun oh this is the
solution and like big wave surfing it's
fun until you drown
so that inflation vest you're talking
about it's a similar concept is the one
that's under your seat when you fly on
an airplane co2 canister and air bag in
a wetsuit pull the cord the thing
inflates and if you become a buoy and
and it's in the name of fun because now
all of a sudden it's given people like
me the opportunity to ride these big
waves and focus less on trying to not
drown but more on what can we do on
these big waves like how what kind of
experiences can I have on them and
that's where I say that the limit is
still yet to be totally tapped into
especially with tow-in surfing paddle
surfing people are put constantly
pushing the edge because it's it's an
act of it's it's really like going
hunting with you know a knife you know
it's like going hunting with a knife
versus you know going out with all the
technology in the world and it's just
different it's a different approach and
some might say it's it's not pure
whatever wool those people don't
actually surf equates though who cares
but for me I love technology yeah and I
love when they merge with like what's
the craziest thing you're thinking about
with technology I'm constantly trying to
figure out how to do something better
you know I think what blows people's
minds away the most is the hydrofoil
yeah and what those capabilities are
it's like an underwater airplane
attached to a large fin attached to a
board and lets you glide like your
seagull and gives you an illusion of
flight and I think almost everybody has
a dream of wanting to just soar through
the air you know like be a bird and you
can't see what's lifting you up out of
the water when you're riding these
things all you can all you feel it see
is the board around you and the water
moving and when I first did it I started
when I was nine years old but when I
kind of told you I'm 27 but but there
was 2016 was kind of the year of
reinvention of it kind of the rebirth of
it originally it was adopted from the
air chair which was what you would ride
behind a water-ski boat and those guys
would sit down on they do incredible
maneuvers but they had the rope and you
know you had to be rode around a lake
and then Laird Hamilton Rush Randall
Dave Kalama Derek Dorner all these guys
strapped
crew took it put snowboard boots on it
and their goal was read the biggest way
he's ever ridden
another problem with riding big waves
and this is what led them to the
hydrofoil was the chops going up the
face Levite gets so big that on normal
board you can't go fast enough hydrofoil
is a giant fin it cuts right through it
like a hot knife through butter and so
they that was they were pushing it in
the big wave realm and then come 2016 I
had a vision of instead of trying to
ride the biggest waves in the world on
this why don't we try to ride the
smallest waves in the world on this and
that opened the door the floodgates for
making terrible surf anywhere in the
world feel like it's the best waves on
the planet and because you don't need a
perfect wave to feel like you're on one
because you you can glide on parts of
the wave that are far away from where a
traditional surfboard has its limit and
it also open the door for crossing large
bodies of water now for fun what we do
in Hawaii and we do races now is we
cross between each Island riding a board
that's mate at times no wider than four
feet and you're hovering and you feel
like a bird and you go from one Island
do you know for like Molokai to Oahu
yeah like Molokai - well every island
you can you can go between it's just how
long do you want to be out on the ocean
for what's your time in Molokai to Oahu
is for is a is a 32-mile channel
crossing and I could do it just above
two hours two hour mark is right there
which is exciting but the coolest thing
is is like if there's a when I first did
it
there was this there's this you for
doing by pumping well so pumping is kind
of like the flapping of a bird you know
like that's how they create more lift
when they need it but if you play your
cards right and you the best way to read
the open ocean swells is imagine you're
playing a game of chess or if you were
playing kind of like you know what's
that game like in an arcade where the
ball bounces around and it you get a
bunch of different points and you try to
get it into that one like a thousand
point hold - what is it called again the
pachinko that the Japanese want a
pinball pinball okay
you're trying to pin ball between swells
ting ting ting and if you you go from
one cell to the next to the next thing
once you're gaining the energy and the
lift underwater the vortex that's coming
up these little waves and creating lifts
you don't have to pump so in a perfect
and a perfect line you're you're just
turning and you're snowboarding it feels
like you're going downhill the whole
time if you and you might pump to get to
the next swell if you have to if it's
spread out far enough and it's so I
would say more even it's physically
taxing you use every fiber of your body
because you're using your arms to create
energy to help your legs pump this board
to go faster because it's always about
going quicker and then your mind has to
focus on reading the ocean and if you
miss time it or you miss read it you
stop you come to a dead stop and so if
you if you're really on it it's like
reading I feel like it's when I read a
really like dense book lots of heavy
words that I don't understand I'd have
to really think about it that is like
doing a channel crossing because every
single wave you see isn't the same it's
all slightly different and you're trying
to navigate it and it's playing chess
you know you if you make one mistake all
of a sudden you're you're you're down
that's interesting I mean I have to say
I've seen you do this and it doesn't
have the same visual appeal if you're
not part of this world I've also seen
the motorized version of this which
definitely looks like a magic carpet for
sure and it is it is bizarre just I mean
the physics almost don't feel like they
make sense to see the board that far out
of the water it's funny because it's all
physics yeah it's also everything that
I'm doing now I mean obviously is it's
all physics and I never was a kid I
never thought I'd be into physics but
the only way physics I understand
physics it's through kind of these
devices or kind of these approaches it's
almost my my version of math you know
it's like well if you take a board here
and you do this and with the wind and
you rotate that way you know it's like
but let's talk about this in a weird
context so there's that now there are
these engineered waves oh yeah and
people are actually saying look if you
want a a regular experience we can
design a wave in a wave pool and make it
as pretty and regular as you want I
don't know that we've gotten to the
point where you can dial your own
irregularities into it but maybe that's
coming though yeah I think what makes
surfing so fun is when you're on the
wave it's the unpredictability you you
can kind of read what the waves doing
and you can make the most informed and
best decisions on it but you get on
these mechanical waves like at the surf
ranch or you know these leaders Kelly
Slater's pool and it's almost like too
perfect you get on it and you're it's
like you're all of a sudden having to
figure out your own runs right you're
like okay I can do two turns here and I
can get barreled and I could do this and
you could sort of do that in the ocean
but I mean the wave pool is insane if
you want to get better because you get
the wave of the day every single time
you stand up and a lot of times you
never get the wave of the day when
you're surfing in the ocean I think
there's something about being in
saltwater and I think there's something
about kind of that natural element and
being in line with nature in one of her
most dynamic moments right that is that
it makes you feel good like really
really good but that being said as a
professional athlete the more time I
could spend in a wave fool the better
because it just means that I'm able to
focus on things that I couldn't I may
you only get one chance to try
so I surfing so hard it's the hardest
word in the world because you go out
there with the intention to learn a new
trick you may never get the opportunity
one or you may get one opportunity and
you may blow it because you're trying to
learn how to do the high-end and the
only way to get high in is in a pool
like that or to live you know you or
travel traveling a ton and for most
people they can't travel a time for me
I'm lucky that it's in my job
description to do it with big wave
surfing nothing about this would be
going surfing the wave surfing is so
rare went them times when I most want to
go out there and do something in the
most motivated the most physically fit
it just doesn't exist nowhere in the
world there's moments like right now
there's nowhere on earth that is
breaking the way out
once it's a break or a big enough so
it's like right you know you're looking
at the forecast and you're jumping on
flights two days before this wall hits
you arrive the day before
jet-lagged from Hawaii all the way to
Europe you said surfers - you said to me
surfers are some of the world's best ya
know surfers without a doubt are
probably some of the best meteorologists
because there's more at stake than just
a huge storm destroying something
there's what's at stake is your
enjoyment and and and it's personal it's
really personal so the people I talk to
that our surfers that know how to read
the ocean read the the information that
comes out of NOAA or any of these other
buoys that are scattered across the
planet satellites they they can tell you
- basically the minute when a certain
wave is gonna come in and that's what's
really cool is like you without you
knowing it you're a meteorologist
because you're like okay this is this
tide mixed with this swell Direction
mixed with these winds is gonna make it
this way and you in the really good guys
girls they can call it like okay at 7:00
a.m. the waves gonna be pumping is gonna
turn on and then you can show up 6:00
a.m. it's not really that good semi damn
boom it hits so it's it's really almost
predicting the future so another
question I had is about physics is
there's this question about what is
possible and I remember a description
back in the early skateboarding days of
like dog town yeah there was this
question about nobody knew what happened
what would happen if you went over the
lip of a swimming pool like they I think
they couldn't calculate the actual
physical consequences and so the lady in
the lip of a swimming pool well like you
know you had this drought in the early
70s in California
right right okay gotcha I was for some
reason I was thinking something
different but with skating go above it
right yeah yeah yeah and I think Tony
Alva if I recall karate was he did the
first air or something was the first guy
who said like I'm gonna try it and we'll
find out whether like they didn't know
what would happen physically or
something and it turned out that it
worked and then it was like oh okay that
is possible
now look at them and now look at them oh
my god and I wonder like are there
things where you're pretty sure it's
possible but you like you don't know
whether it's physically possible usually
you get I feel like I get about 3/4 of
the way there and any you can't go any
further and you have to just try it at a
certain point it's like it's like I
think I could do that and you've wrapped
you you've kind of played it all out in
your head like I got this equipment this
equipments gonna allow me to do that
okay I need this type of way because
it's gonna allow me what are you
thinking about what's up next that might
be possible that you don't know that's
possible you know what it's so funny
because a lot of the things just sort of
hit you like an epiphany like you're
like hit you it's like a baseball bat to
the head all of a sudden you're just
like what and I can't tell you what's an
X because because you have to kill me
well no no I don't know it's what's
crazy I'll this is how it happens
literally be sitting out in the water
and it's like all the stars all like the
five brain cells I have kind of go
ting ting ting they all line up and all
of a sudden it's like oh oh my god that
was right in front of me the whole time
it's like staring me in the face but you
don't see yet give me an example of one
of those in the past that actually works
well the epiphany was the hydrofoil for
one because everyone was riding big
waves and I was doing a lot of channel
crossings on stand-up paddleboards or
prone paddle boards or on a canoe and
that's where your your board is a wet
the wetted surface or you were the guy
who thought to put the hydrofoil into
channel crossings yeah I didn't know
that yeah so that was kind of like I
guess my sort of contribution to the
sport and it was it came from necessity
to want to go faster so I I basically
pushed my physical limits and I could
probably be faster now as I'm older and
I'm better trained blah blah blah
equipment's better but on my stand-up
paddle board for example it was like
gosh I just want to go fast all my other
sports are I'm going fast all the time
and here I'm limited to maybe maximum 14
miles an hour downwind at peak speed
average let's say 9 miles an hour 10
miles an hour and and so the it was like
gosh like all of a sudden I put like two
and two together I'm like Hydra
and then I put down winter and they sort
of cross and it's like well yeah
obviously that should work I just need a
bigger wing they were just using too
small of wings that's why you couldn't
you need more lift you get a bigger wing
and the first time I tried it in a wave
I was like this is gonna work oh my god
this is gonna work and then I went and
did it and I ended up paddling like 3
miles in the middle of the ocean and got
up for a hundred yards maybe because the
equipment wasn't quite there yet right
right but I got up and it was just
enough to go oh my god and just hit me
like in the hex I had been foiling since
I was 9 years old like on a tow board
with the jet ski and how I would do it
in bigger waves and and then with this
it was like god I've been doing it since
on iron and it took me until now I think
I was like what 24 or something no 25
2016 and it's for it to click and I'm
like oh god it was right there gonna be
the whole time I don't know if you've
ever heard about this guy Freeman Dyson
who's named Institute for Advanced Study
and he was a great physicist also
mathematician did not have a PhD in
either subject he wrote an article which
I think might be called missed
opportunities and he talks about Freeman
Dyson the physicist needed a result of
Freeman Dyson the mathematician and
Freeman Dyson the human being who was
both of these people was not having that
conversation so the only person who had
the result was Freeman Dyson the
mathematician but the physicist who was
himself could not figure out how to ask
the question to make the connection yeah
so there is this feeling that like the
the feeling of discovery is often a
feeling of stupidity like oh my god I
could have done that at anytime and I
just didn't well you just don't see it
it doesn't it's invisible and then all
of a sudden it's just there that's the
whole clear as day and you're just like
it's like how do you find your way out
of your how do you find these epiphanies
yeah and and and like then you go back
and you say to yourself well what was it
on that particular day that caused me to
look at a wall and really see that there
was probably a door and you know or
something like that and it's about being
open-minded to anything and that's I
think permeable well going back to being
uncomfortable all the time if you're
willing to be uncomfortable all the time
you're willing to see things from very
different perspectives and oftentimes
you're gonna surprise yourself I always
find myself talking a lot and then I'm
like but I everything I'm saying I
already know I got it okay you got a
list on your cell phone I mean you're
listening to yourself talking if you
don't do that I mean how shocking is
something I don't know how to convey to
people how shocking is our own voice
like if you go into a room where there
is nobody else and you actually start
talking and you realize that you're only
talking for yourself it is a terrifying
feeling realizing that the listener and
the speaker are not the same person
okay no no it's it's split personalities
for sure or I loved your inception
comment along those lines as layers and
layers there's just layers and layers
and I think some people don't ever go
beyond layer one because they don't want
you or they don't know that it or they
don't know here's a question once you've
seen that there are layers and layers do
you start looking for that everywhere in
your life like okay so give me some are
there any other transferable examples
where the same kind of breakthrough
takes place that you can talk about I
mean I think nothing I well there's a
lot of things but there's there's little
wins I call them you know when you have
like minor epiphanies or little things
that sort of just become apparent and
and and obvious and and I think it
happens with everyone whether we know it
or not we're you're doing something and
you've been trying it for a really long
time like a trick on a wave you're
trying it for a really really long time
and then all of a sudden you decide to
change one little thing and a really
good saying for surfing is letting go
yeah and it's not letting go in the fact
that you relax completely or it's
relaxing but it's different it's not
like letting go it's like letting go of
your problems you know what I mean it's
like letting go in the sense that you
have any control and and you just kind
of like feel it's you let your physical
being kind of you go to a
close to the flow state but you also let
someone else take the driving wheel you
know what I mean like in surfing it's
such a connection and that's this comes
to to these moments where I feel like
I'm in a movie sometimes and I'm in the
passenger seat and everything's
happening around me yeah but I don't
feel like I'm doing it I feel like
there's someone else doing it for me and
I'm in the movie you know I'm like
seeing it through someone else's eyes so
this is a weird case like before we're
talking about surrendering to the wave
there's also this question about
surrendering to the parts of yourself
that you don't your self control yeah
well so it's like all of a sudden I'm in
a wave and it's survival and my what I
call it you know survival mode comes on
and I'm seeing everything but my body is
moving to make it all happen to work
because it wants to make it out and it's
like it's fully in control and I'm just
visualizing and seeing it and then I get
back to the shore and I get back on the
beach and all of a sudden it's like the
switch flips back over and all of a
sudden I'm just going like did I do that
like I don't I couldn't tell you really
I can imagine I can try to recall but
like I don't really know what happened
like like like I'm scared I'll never be
able to repeat that again with because
well first of all each it's really weird
that you have things that are highly
regular and things like a bowling alley
that those pins are always more or less
the same and yeah the wave it's always
different why so I struggled for a while
like when I it's not like I start big
wave surfing and it was like I want to
be able to sort of this it was like
being a kid standing on the cliff going
figuring out the wave from that
perspective
feeling like I knew it like the back of
my head better than guys that were
riding it all of a sudden I blinked I'm
down in the water and I'm going oh my
gosh how'd this happened so fast I
thought I had so much more time and then
blink again and it's all since like I
get myself into this mess you know like
how did I get myself into the point
where I feel like I'm gonna die all the
time you do it regularly why I used to
when I first started it was like going
oh my god
and then you have like sponsors and then
you have like boats and you have safety
team and your people are on payroll it's
expensive to surf big waves is what I'm
saying what am i right that you got
yourself into trouble at some point when
there was a helicopter that had been
hired and you wanted to perform for the
helicopter and you took on risk that you
shouldn't have yeah and that's that's a
that's just that is a natural sort of
that's just natural to big wave surfing
in general like you're gonna have to go
through sir everyone goes through those
types of situations if they're willing
to go to the level that they want or the
highest level the degree in which would
be like a black belt or a like you have
to go through that at one point there's
just it's like someone telling you what
to do and they have all this wealth of
knowledge but until you go through the
experience on your own you don't truly
learn it for yourself you don't go like
it doesn't have the weight necessarily
you can be told all you want but you
almost have to experience it on your own
accord
well my right that this is so
unpredictable that like you can't say
I've got this because anything can
happen in a big wave absolutely um and
that yeah if I understand correctly your
foot at some point had the surfboard
come right at it and cleave it into oh
yeah no that was like a classic example
of like kind of going in to what you
were saying it's it was probably my
third full season surfing big waves the
waves were giant and we were we hired a
helicopter were filming and it was like
I really want to get a shot for this
movie that I'm working on I really want
to like have it blow people's minds you
know there's that ego part ego is just
the worst in big waves it's the best and
the worst in a way because you kind of
need an ego to like make yourself kind
of prop yourself up to match power with
power but am i right that you this is
something I talk about and pisses people
off like you wouldn't believe
the necessity of being both incredibly
humble and an egomaniac and having the
two of those selves fight each other
constantly yeah I think it's it's dream
that your ego
you have to undergo egodeath and I'm
thinking no you don't you have to
actually make sure that well that's the
thing it's like when people talk about
he's fearless no you you everything we
have is been an evolution in nature and
there's a necessity towards it
ego is okay there's certain situations
it's it's awesome and it's more
pleasurable for everyone around you not
to have an ego
but there's other situations like in
survival situations where you want to
think of yourself is the best there ever
was because it kind of as a male and
this is the only way I know it because
I'm a male is it's it's that alpha
inside you and it's like going against
it's it's the the the tribal instinct of
protecting your your tribe protecting
what is yours your family right but in
this case it's it's the experiences in
big waves where it's like you got a
david-and-goliath you got to match
yourself with the impossible the
undefeatable I also met your mom and
your mom is a total badass like yeah you
got a you got a situation we're gonna
make mom proud you have to go above know
exactly and it's you know I've told a
one thing that I remember when I was a
really little kid being told all the
time was like don't no one likes a big
head no one likes this and it beat there
was like kind of beating into my head so
much from Mike my mentors and certain
people around me that it made me really
shine reserved and felt like I fell I
always felt like I could handle anything
but I I don't think anyone else could
like like if I said something that was
maybe the truth or if I said somebody
that was like something that was hard or
very critical it would it would be
damaging to someone and I never wanted
to hurt anyone that's like the last
thing I'd ever want to do and so it was
actually it's been a long process trying
to overcome kind of that that habit of
like giving your power away leaving the
power away when in CERN it's okay to be
like I think the the the most powerful
the best right the the best athletes
that I've ever met
the true alphas they know how to switch
it on and off like they they're they're
able to be so humble and kind and they
don't feel like they need to exert some
but when the time comes for whatever it
is that they do they can turn it on all
of a sudden they're just these beasts
these monsters that are a joke accept
what it is that you are I'm you know I
let's be honest when I when I called you
out there isn't another surfer on the
planet that I was dying to meet because
this is not I mean I'm aware of who
Laird Hamilton is I'm aware of Kelly
Slater there tons of people like this
guy Philip Toledo yeah I mean I'm
watching all of these guys you were the
only one from outside that I absolutely
had to meet because of the level of
innovation and then when I met you it
was so disarming that you clearly know
that you're doing something very
different you can't actually deny it you
can't fully embrace it either and so I
think that one of the puzzles here is
that we have to sort of pass power back
and forth which is that you give your
power away to some extent and then the
community kind of with love just says
you know no you really need to take this
on because people are looking towards
you and it's a very weird thing to sort
of have to balance these things I think
we do a terrible disservice when we tell
people to get rid of their egos because
that'll never work you have to make sure
that the thing is like a Mexican
standoff it you have to anything you
have to face everything like if it's I
was telling my friend I had like a
certain situation that I was kind of
going through like maybe end of last
year and it's like I told myself for
this situation when I was a young kid
like cuz I was pretty aware about like
my pute the people around me and the
mistakes they had made and how I was
like I've always I always when I was
really young and when my ego is
definitely very strong inside I was like
I want to do everything perfect and I
want to do it the best anyone's ever
done it I want to be the best ever
because as a kid there's you don't have
to confront it yet you know but you can
imagine you can believe you can do all
these things because but you
I actually have to go through it yet
because you're still a little kid anyway
so I told myself this one particular
thing like I'm gonna avoid this and I'm
gonna and I'm gonna make sure I never
end up in the situation and inevitably
the one thing that you try to avoid is
the one thing that'll and eventually
come for you you know you'll eventually
meet it and I learned that that into the
head of Kung Fu Panda great yeah I love
that movie yeah so remember one often
meets ones destiny on the road one takes
to avoid it exactly ya know that movie
was so smart for and it was a kids movie
or whatever but there was not a kid's
movie dude that was a really profound
movie well yeah right exactly yeah it's
true though no it's I I know that quote
exactly what you're saying and it's like
it truly and in that movie I'm sorry I
don't mean to catch up but Luke way is
weirdly puttin Shifu on the road to his
destiny as he tries to avoid his destiny
so like there's this extra layer of his
way actually great filmmaking great
storyteller
great storytelling but I at least this
time it's whether you don't know it when
the first time you watch it or you
figure it out later
yeah it's it's it's helping you along in
your life you know there's like there's
lessons and that's what stories were all
about is meant to pass on lessons right
what happens when you bite off more than
you can chew in a situation where you
you think you can handle something and
then you look up at this thing and
you're saying I don't really know that I
can handle this but I got no choice now
I'm over I'm past the Rubicon well does
this happen to you recently or more from
before more from before I mean it's
still I mean no matter how comfortable
I've gotten in big waves yeah I'm I'm
you this impossible to totally be
comfortable because it's just terrifying
you know it's just it's huge monsters
but the thing is I've many times you
know you pop up you like this is a
perfect example actually you're standing
out there paddling you paddle over a
giant wave and then there's mist in the
air like there's just it's it's so much
spray that's coming off its hundreds
fees it's torrential downpour it's sunny
but it's downpour
in the distance you see this black face
this black kind of wall coming in and
your heart just insula drops and you're
sprinting for your life and you're and
also new you're trying to escape the
feeling or the situation by looking at
little things and focusing on that like
look at the water just rolling off there
like look at the sticker on my board
just like you're trying to find any
escape but do you realize that there's
no escape there's no you see
interstellar yeah I love that movie I
love do you remember where they end up
in the water planet and the wave starts
to form it looks just like that and if I
ever get to meet Christopher Nolan I'm
gonna tell him that that was the that
was the biggest surprise I've ever seen
in a movie because as a big wave surfer
I was like it's so rideable and look you
can do a Somali 400% man who's any big
wave surf I don't know if any but I mean
think about okay so in the movie the
waves are created by gravitational
forces right and and that's a lot like
the moon helps pull our tides right but
in the film here I'm seeing a
thousand-foot wave that's never breaking
and it's continuous for for around the
entire world and I'm like that seems
like the sick you could ride a thousand
full wave the biggest playground ever
thank you football if you fall you just
kind of cover the back and then there's
another one and I mean the person the
character dies because I can imagine if
you're going over a thousand foot wave
you get really high in the wave and it
flicks you into the air and you fall a
thousand feet and you die right or 200
feet whatever it is because I'm just
trying to I was always trying to imagine
how the person died in that film because
I had to leave them behind or whatever
and I'm like well the solution would
have been right as you get to the top
you just duck under the water and you
stay the water kind of conceals you and
you come back down the backside of it
and then you can stick your head back up
and get air or in that case you're all
wearing spacesuits perfect do you even
have to like hold your breath underwater
that's one one problem taken care of and
and they're pressurized so you can just
go through it but anyway I was just like
that is like that would be that's one
and it made me actually start thinking
like gosh I wonder if in my lifetime if
space travel is really gonna be a thing
and maybe someone goes to tighten or
Europa like because the
supposedly water some of us wait I mean
I'm obsessed with the idea of surfing
waves in this world yeah sure like if
you have the right suit on I mean in any
element you could probably go in unless
it's like lava maybe I don't know I'm
not that smart but what I do know is
that just think of all the waves in the
universe that is just firing right now
and no one out and if we maybe we have
the best waves in the universe but there
has to be better ways I often look back
in time just how do you think there
aren't great undiscovered waves 100%
where we on earth on earth do you think
we've mapped all the great waves no okay
a great example is this wave NASA this
is a great lead-in to Nezzer a Nazare
let's discover nine years ago nine years
ago i scott mhairi by a garret major
banks are here man
but ok this is just it's so crazy
Portugal part of European Union like the
middle the heart of Portugal like
there's this wave Nazare biggest wave
possibly in the world tallest most
consistent big wave that's for sure
alright and you know it's 2011 or
whatever 2012 2011 and it's discovered
this how I don't know it was just an
insight it it's it's the things it's
it's okay we go back to that point where
it's like the things that are the most
obvious aren't always um recognized
right away you know what see I never got
the history of the it's always
photographed I mean the most dramatic
shot of it is somebody gets a picture of
the observation deck looking at the wave
so yeah I me and that observation deck
looks like it wasn't built recently no
it's a it's a lighthouse but it's it's
so old it looks like a castle right and
so nazaré was first served
whatever eight or nine years ago less
than a decade in a modern era here in
Hawaii
Garrett is from Hawaii yeah he's from
wahoo and and he's always been on a
search for the best big ways and it took
someone who is always seeking it out
that long to find something because
with big waves if they're not breaking
you don't know they exist you know
there's there dormant there's there you
could we we could literally go down to a
coastline we haven't been to somewhere
in Africa that's exposed to a great part
of the Atlantic Ocean and and look at a
point and be like whoa that could be a
wave one day but you don't realize that
it's a sleeping giant and when it wakes
up it's the biggest wave on the planet
like that may exist that totally could
if you were mapping the seabed Portugal
should stick out like a sore thumb no
well okay the the bathymetry is a freak
of nature we see that word again because
I don't know symmetry okay which is kind
of the bottom contour you know it's what
what what I'm gonna start dropping that
into lots of sentences makes you sound
smarter than well it makes me sound
smarter than I am okay but so what
what's unique about Nazeri is it's the
largest Trench in all of Europe and I
believe it's an ancient it was once a
glacier that carved out a huge valley
and when all the ice caps melted it
filled in the oceans and it covered that
trench now the trench allows the swell
this raw energy from the Atlantic to
come in it gets sucked into that deep
water
it focuses it and it comes in and then
this is where the wave comes in they
call it pride they norte which is you
know note the north's beach north point
and that's where the wave breaks in
nazaré and so what happens is all the
swell comes in and then it all of a
sudden gets accelerated onto shallow
water so there's a point with a Ledge
and it's all sand it's a giant beach and
it comes in and then it focuses and what
makes Nazeri so big is two peaks two
waves and this is the concept of a rogue
wave you know you can have a really big
ocean of big waves and then it's one two
big waves come together it's the
superposition it's the superposition
yak-1 the swell comes in this way and it
matches with another one and the energy
combines and it doubles in height so it
jacks up twice as high and it's just the
perfect bottom for that perfect
situation and it it produces the tallest
waves in the world
consistently and yeah that's nazaré
nazaré is a trip you go there and it
feels biblical I mean the word the word
Nazare already sound like it's from you
know the Old Testament and then add to
this there was a guy there named Jesus
that is stands up on the lighthouse and
calls out sets if your tow surfing it's
like okay second set get out there you
know or like get the second one and his
name is Jesus from Nazareth Jesus from
Nazareth great and it's just it's
hilarious situation like so when you're
out there often you're seeing this
massive cliff 200-foot cliff and you're
seeing winds that are like half the size
of it and on really big days the same
size as the cliff because it gets that
big we haven't seen it in the time that
we've surfed out there though you see
this sort of castle lighthouse on the
point spray in the air and you're like
where am i right now I feel like I got
thrown back in time and and this just
doesn't feel real and you're looking at
these towering mountains of water that
look like interstellar looks the same
it's just walls popping up everywhere
and and it's not like there's one
breaking wave there's six breaking waves
at once and there's no channel which is
the channel is with a safe zone it's
where the deep water is and where it
doesn't break it's kind of breaking
everywhere it's a beach break it's the
world's biggest beach break it's maybe
one of the world's most terrifying big
waves to challenge in that there is no
safe zone when you're committed you're
committed and I've seen some disastrous
rescue attempts on this thing oh it's
great and every time I go there we lose
a jetski at least once is that right
luckily there's sand so pushes back up
but imagine like everything around you
was built bigger and all sudden you felt
like your scale just went really down
that's what it feels like there because
the waves are so big all sudden you feel
like really small the beach the beach is
really steep and massive and large and
you feel smaller on the beach the way
the waves that move up and down it'll
travel 50 to 60 yards up the sand before
it returns back to the ocean and you
feel like this is what it feels like to
be the size of a chihuahua do you get
off on your own insignificance like your
significance coming
in significance there's no place on
earth like like that place that wave to
make me realize how small human being is
definitely gotten used to feeling like
insignificant and my place in this whole
crazy world is not as important
necessarily as I might want to think you
know like because you look at these
waves and they're just power this power
and and you're trying to find kind of
like symmetry with it you're trying to
be one with it for just a brief moment
and you just realize like it's this
place has been here forever for a long
time and you know I guess if I can be
just in line with something that's
bigger than myself that's what I thought
what's me that's what makes me feel
really good the best feeling I get from
riding big waves is the drive home
because you've just went through this
whole crazy experience your relief he
relieved you just went through that and
and and you you you tapped into
something bigger than yourself
physically bigger than yourself - well
I'm used to seeing you on some of these
monster waves alone and then recently I
saw you get a ride it looked like it
jaws with a friend of yours yeah Nathan
Florence and I thought what is it like
to actually ride a wave like that with
somebody that you know and care about
does it feel totally different you know
what it just there's camaraderie yeah
involved you still feel kind of alone
because you on the board it's you on the
board and it's your decisions that make
the outcome and sometimes it's not even
your decision that makes the outcome
it's the waves that make the outcome you
know like you could choose a wave and
all of a sudden it it does something
completely unforeseen and different
riding that wave with Nathan we ended up
getting really big barrel out of Jaws
together and two for both of us to be in
the barrel at the same time was amazing
it's your it's finally you're
sharing the experience with somebody and
I think that's why there's a real
Brotherhood sisterhood yeah out in big
wave surfing because New York's you're
sharing an experience that's so extreme
that you know it's like
you can tell everyone all about it but
you know you still feel like they don't
understand the how do you translate the
feeling you can translate the emotions
the ideas like the through like ver like
like words but that physical feeling
like I wish I could just plug my head
into your head
yeah and you could just feel it for a
second oh I know I'm pretty sure I wish
I could do the same thing for you with
exactly with mathematics in part that's
women's work you don't know that you are
you don't know the well you brought up
an interesting question about the
brothers and sisters then we just had I
follow this other woman his name I don't
want to mangle it was just the first
woman a year to ago to be invited into
this Eddy Invitational say it and I'll
help you here Kayla yeah yeah she's
she's like she's a charm
she's amazing he's amazing and I was
just surfing with her at jaws like two
days ago
Wow yeah okay so like she's a hammer so
that's-- but clearly she's going to
pioneer something where other women are
gonna say okay yeah I totally see what
she's done I'm there too and and it's
changing the nature of the sport do you
do you think that that's gonna be a big
effect coming up yeah there's a massive
shift in women's big wave surfing and
there was there wasn't a whole lot of
progression is until recently and now
there's major strides the girls are it's
it's amazing how people like Keala
has inspired the next generation enough
to Alston step into that realm because
for the longest time there were women
that were writing big waves but not
enough it wasn't inspired maybe I don't
want to take anything away from them but
it wasn't inspiring the next of the
youth or the next generation and along
with Kayla and Paige alms
Bianca Valente they these are like three
of the top big wave female surfers yeah
they've been Maya Gaby era who's always
out at nazaré as well they've inspired
the next generation of big wave girls
it's all since step into the realm in
I've always felt that it's it's ever
big ways sports in general die when
there's not the next generation to take
it to the next level like they cease to
become relevant or even of interest and
this is my own personal perspective
because I feel like sports like action
sports in particular surfing always
needs to be constantly being pushed and
so I I do I do see these young girls
inspiring actually the older girls to
continue pushing the envelope and when
their time is up or they decide no
longer to do it right that they've had
their fill that the next generation of
girls take it to another level and I've
always felt the same way with me you
know like I saw where Laird in all these
legends took it and I wanted to take it
from where they took it to somewhere
else and I don't know where I'm gonna
take it but I hope in the future it's a
relay race you gotta hit it off to
somebody else I hope in the future that
I have the privilege of mentoring and
helping that next generation you take it
to a place that that that I couldn't
anymore because I got it to one position
I just ran out of time well I think
there's there's an interesting thing
about breaking new ground versus what
keeps us something relevant to the world
so for example in jazz there was a
period where the innovators were doing
innovations that were appreciated by the
listenership and at some point things
get so technical that unless you're
actually a performer eat well
juggling is a good example the most
technical jugglers in the world will
point to one of one of their kind and
say oh my god did you see what that guy
did and to me you can't see I can't see
it because it's already so many balls so
many rings sure it's like the whole
thing is so mind-blowing I can't slow it
down enough to understand what the
innovation was whereas at an earlier
point and this is this is one of the
reasons why I think you're kind of a
very romantic figure in this story it's
because I can see those innovations it's
not like so technical very often with
some of the skateboarding stuff
I have to slow it down a million times
to even understand what the trick was
yeah and I think that is that is really
really true and and it touches on the
point that we're still only scratching
the surface of big-wave riding you know
like it's such an act on its own but
then adding sort of next level maneuvers
and positions that one could ride at
least what's nice about big waves is and
I always say this is you have all you've
all the time you need on a big wave
small ways happen really quick yeah
things are like bam bam bam you have to
be on it really quick and it's like it's
really fast and big waves I'm always
there's a saying buy a big wave legend
from Kauai on Hawaii his name was Titus
kini maka and it was of Laird and he's
like he has the the quote goes like this
he has the ability to slow himself down
when everyone else wants to run like
hell and it's not slowing down in terms
of the speed of your board it's slowing
down your mind it's like it's like and I
work on this every single day I ride big
waves it's like I have way more time
than I think on this wave because when I
watch the footage I realized wow I could
have been this position and I could have
waited longer or I could have done this
like when I go to do a 360 don't rush
the 360 let it move the way you you have
to match the wave your but your mind
master match the way well you just got
to know I guess the time you have and a
lot of people think a lot of people feel
like they don't have the time so their
mind starts racing and then all of a
sudden the wave itself feels like it's
going really fast and everything is
moving and it's how can you compute you
know how can you keep everything like in
line and then also when you try to slow
yourself down a little bit just like
even it's I just I would say it's like
when I sometimes ride a really big wave
all almost just relax for a second and
go okay let's continue that's so cool
and then and then all of a sudden I see
things and I'm like oh I'm gonna hit
that okay here we come all right perfect
all right here comes a parallel position
all right I'm in the tube and you calm
yourself down and you and and I it's
like manipulating time for a second
you're just like I'm gonna let this wave
over
and you're not talking
to yourself through it you're just kind
of like breathing through it and my
biggest wave I ever wrote in my life
still out at jaws I was my whole focus
on the wrecks I knew was a big one was
just breathing was that the one that was
photograph that I saw at your place yeah
so that one I was just as I was dropping
in I was just going wow and I was just
and what I was trying to do is I was
just trying to slow everything down slow
it down slow it down the way was like be
find me and I just remember going to
slow down so the breathing is the only
way that you can talk to your own
autonomic nervous system effectively
it's the one thing that's under
conscious control that you can try to do
to talk to the part of you that isn't
under conscious yeah and I just tried it
like I just doing that little breathing
now I feel way more calmer but when I'm
on the wave I like I saw you okay
breathe in for to out for to breathe in
for three up for three no I'm I'm not
going to push you to talk about
something no no I can't no it's a
question being respectful when I was out
at your place I saw some crazy stuff you
were working on but I don't know whether
that's under wraps and I don't want to
you know talk about it if it's not ready
to be talked about well it's it can be
talked about but it's it's not quite
ready yet should we hold off on it
let's hold off and then I'll come back
and totally jazz yeah let me ask you
another question
when you're out in these waves surfers
are one life for him but you're not the
only ones out there yeah can you talking
about the man in the gray suit and how
he affects or she affects your your
thinking as you realize that you're part
of an ecosystem I think I've been a part
of the ecosystem so much I kind of know
my place and it's not when you see one
it's it's it's a treat when you see a
shark or even any animal for that
standard like the last time I surfed out
jaws is one of the most beautiful days
and it's it's it's funny because when
you surf out a place so beautiful it's
kind of like you forget how
gnarlie it is ya know it's like it's
masked in the fact that it's sunny
there's rainbows there's seals in the
light like like monk seals Hawaiian monk
seals in the lineup there's whales going
through the lineup like giant humpback
whales you see a shark come in and it's
just cruising and you just realize you
know you're in their domain because
that's where they live there would be a
tiger shark
we're target tiger shark could be any
type of shark we kind of have them all
in Hawaii which was a tiger shark sorry
I would say I would give tiger shark
sort of the crown is kind of the
landlord's of the that area we do get
great whites but they typically they
typically come to Hawaiian chill like
there they're there and they're they're
taking a rest between their crossing of
the Pacific from Australia to the US or
even if they come out here it's like
vacation honestly great whites come to
Hawaii for vacation we still don't know
a whole lot about them but what we do
know is when they're out here they're
there they're always full they've
definitely look full and they're kind of
like in this migration sort of pattern
where they're just they're just cruising
while tiger sharks are kind of the
garbageman of the the trash person of
the the sea because they just eat
everything you'll see they'll they'll
bite tires that are floating out at sea
they'll they'll chew anything they can't
but they you know what's awesome about
them they clean up kind of the death out
there yeah like dying fish the week gets
cold it's just nature and that's how it
is so when you confront or you're given
the opportunity to be around one in the
water showing showing confidence and
here they smell it they know it if you
showing like signs of weakness that's an
opportunity alright so you feel that by
projecting confidence they have enough
acuity to pick up they're way smarter
than you think yeah and we all think
they are I've looked in when you look
into this one of their big black eyes
yeah when you look in there there's a
soul living in there it's not just a
holiday I believe I believe people who
have like rescued sharks find that the
shark becomes friendly with them like
it's much our picture of how much is
going on with these
has changed quite like it I mean Albert
Einstein's quote and I'm putting in a
butcher it but it was like don't judge a
fish because he can't climb a tree yeah
yeah you know like he's a fish and so
but if you don't understand like we
don't we can't speak their language we
don't understand them on the the same
level I understand you so we think of
things that we don't understand is being
stupid or lesser than and and I mean
they have fin so they can't make you
know technological advancements
necessarily but who knows maybe they
have poseable fins could be a real big
problem it could be a pretty big problem
but I I do I have a huge amount of
respect for him I've had so much and
I've had so many encounters my entire
life and I've never once and knock on
wood because you never know ever felt
like I was in mortal danger but I always
felt like they were just these there
were the landlord's they're coming by to
check you out and if you showed like
confidence and respect all right then
they kind of would be like they'd kind
of it's like that that give you a little
nod professional courtesy it's like see
all right well then walk wit so there's
this island that I've been dreaming
about off of Africa called Reunion that
used to be a pretty decent surf spot
what happened to our relationship
well now different sharks in different
places you know it's like traveling in
different cultures right same thing with
the the animals of the sea Hawaii it's
one way it's I would say really respect
based but like Reunion Island and this
is from a lot of my friends who were
born and raised there and surf there is
the biggest the the what they think is
the biggest problem was when it became a
nature reserve the moment reunion became
a nature reserve the Sharks that would
once the bull sharks that would migrate
from Madagascar to Reunion all of a
sudden decides to stay because here's an
abundant amount of fish well let's just
stay and so people forget that we are
you know we altered our agreement well
the agreement all of a sudden it's just
like giving the keys to the apartment
but you're only a visitor and and and
people forget
I think people think we're not a part of
the natural cycle of we think of
ourselves too highly that we're not like
a part of we become a part of the
ecosystem by getting a certain amount of
fish and of course I believe we should
never over fish or do that but this is
from this is like a real-life experiment
from people that I know that grew up
there that's like it used to be one of
the premier surf destination especially
for French surfers they'd go there all
the time because the French you know
territory whatever it it all of a sudden
as soon as we came a natural Nature
Reserve the bull sharks came the bull
sharks became territorial very
territorial
all of a sudden realized it's really
easy to fight and attack and feed on
humans because we're pretty slow in the
water compared to most of their prey and
they became the dominant force in the
water and and then there's this big
argument now it's like well don't kill
the sharks and yeah of course don't feel
sharks but we got to also like is it's
also asserting our dominance and our
where we rank we're at the top of the
food chain too and and it's all sand
sharks learn from one another as well
I'm terrified that we have like this
weird agreement with the orcas that we
don't understand that orcas basically
essentially never attack humans in the
wild there's so ants there so I think
orcas are so smart they realize there
may be the ramifications of if I swear
to God I think it's one of the greatest
puzzles ever and I do have the sense
that they're like we should not mess
with these people it's like this is the
one species we can take anybody in the
water even the great whites leave these
guys alone and of course you have local
culture with Orca pods where they have
entirely different styles of hunting and
they pass information in ways that we
have no idea about and so I think the
fear too is that these bull sharks can
eventually pass this information to
other sharks and their offspring be it
becomes part of their DNA that's like Oh
humans are on the menu and so I think
we're have not their DNA their cultural
memes or whatever's they subtle means of
transmission yeah yeah and and it's it's
I think it's it's controversial but
I mean we at a certain point have to
assert our own dominance in in certain
ways if we want to take back Reunion
damn it exactly right or or not leave it
okay but but it's there's no there's no
middle ground here you know what I mean
it's like kids are getting eaten there
all the time
they just want to go surfing and I knew
that we get into this thing where we get
into a reverential state about nature
without realizing that we're part of it
and we've also break broken that you
bought it it's a much more complicated
relationship that we need and I think
it's important everywhere it's not the
same everywhere you know it's not the
same like what happens here in
California is not the same as in réunion
you know I think we're not gods as well
so it's like trying to like understand
things is really difficult but it's I
think I want to say leave it up to the
people yeah and leave it up to or leave
it up to the people in those places and
there's I don't think there should be
any kind of backseat sort of driving
from somewhere else because it's a
different part of the world it's a
different ocean it's a different culture
it's a different everything and let the
tribes deal with those tribe things like
we're not like everyone always argues
like we don't want a police world well
this is exactly a situation yeah we all
have our own opinions on how it should
be dealt with no one has a better
opinion than the people who live there
and understand certain things you know
like I'm just that's that's my
perspective on it I think however they
see fit to take care of this situation
is up to them and for me I live
thousands and thousands of miles away
it's not my decision so I have three
destination questions to finish this off
with I am obsessed with three islands in
the middle of the Atlantic and I have no
idea whether they have an importance in
surf culture all right so we have this
island ascension st. Helena and Tristan
da Cunha do you know about this dude you
can't tell you don't know these islands
they're right in the middle between
Africa and South America so Napoleon I
no wait the really south aren't they
yeah okay yeah I was looking at the one
of them Namibia
yeah I know no it's those Islands I
believe that they're like there's like
it's a Nature Reserve as well so you
have Edinboro of the seven seas which is
like a settlement with 300 or so people
on tristan da cunha which was evacuated
is it a volcano it's like there's a book
called Rockhopper copper about the only
policeman on the island it's totally
obscure they claim it's the most remote
island in the world
st. Hellena is above that and it's cool
man this is a gorgeous Island they just
got flights and it was so isolated you
could only visit it by ship for a long
time my friend of mine sent me a picture
and in my quest to try to find the
biggest waves in the world and find
waves that I haven't been able to surf
yet we were looking at a place like that
my gosh it's in such a perfect place
well this is the thing I track this
island I'm obsessed with this island and
you get to know like the individuals on
the Isle and the shops because it's a
tiny place but yes you got it right down
yeah
Saint Elena is actually kind of a an
outpost of civilization it's big enough
that can have like tiny little towns and
culture and roads and stuff and then the
other one is ascension which is above
that I guess it's closer to like the
Azores and things and I think that all
three of these are British overseas
territories and we dude we gotta go you
know when you said this thing to me it
was very funny like you said thanks for
the shoutout
he said we have to go surf and I was
like I don't serves like don't worry
I'll teach you I'm thinking maybe but
maybe it's too much we should go to st.
Elena check it out and get redbull to to
do one of their rampages there's a film
with the with with pioneering the stuff
I mean as much as we think we've kind of
discovered everything out there there's
I have this gut feeling there's some
massive waves out there that are so good
no one's even tapped into and it's just
waiting to be ridden discovered well so
we have to get to get through the portal
to get to these three islands well I put
the hive mind on it
yeah and come back and visit when you
can talk about the thing that we were
checking out but I don't want you to do
it prematurely I want you to wait until
it's right yeah no for sure let's so I
think come come here soon it'll be
there's a lot there's me a lot to talk
about and it's exciting every day is
really exciting guys you've been through
the portal with Kai Lenny there's been a
real dream for me to meet please go to
your web browsers to YouTube and just
put his name in in my write Kai means
wave chi minh's ocean and Hawaiian ocean
and when you'll be treated to some of
the most amazing footage you've ever
seen and with any luck you'll keep at it
and stay safe I hope so remember to
check us out on YouTube by subscribing
and clicking the bell to make sure that
you're notified when we drop new videos
and please subscribe to us wherever you
listen to podcasts kai thanks very much
and peace out we'll see everybody real
soon Shaka Zulu
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]