howdy this is Jim rut and this is the
Jim rut show
[Music]
this is a current episode currents are
shorter and less heavily produced than
our full-length episodes and generally
focus on a single topic as always links
to books articles and organizations
mentioned are available on the episode
page at Jim Rizzo calm that's Jim retro
calm today's currents episode it has is
our guest Michael Vassar a longtime
friend of mine and a very astute
independent thinker this the scene of
this episode basically came from a phone
call or conversation of some sort we had
a few weeks ago and I think I was
proclaiming and my usual in modest
matter that this was not the
revolutionary moment that the kovat this
was and this was Cove in nineteen prior
to the George Floyd event and I said
this is not the revolutionary moment
Merritt and Michael said I think you're
wrong I think this is the revolutionary
moment but this is the
passive-aggressive revolutionary moment
and I said to him say no more Michael
this will make a great podcast episode
so you know things have happened since
then
so first what did you mean when you said
passive aggressive revolutionary moment
and what do you think that all means now
so let's imagine that there was a moment
of Prayer across the country in across
the waters range of religious
denominations to think it would be hard
to get the Mormons in for this but I
think practically everyone else could
potentially be enlisted at least for a
few centerpiece of churches or any other
sort of religious affiliation now let's
say there was a some sort of attack by
American soldiers or police against
protesters who were behaving fairly
peacefully there was fairly good video
evidence of this and there was a
nationwide movement of prayer for the
defeat of the American military by the
American people that would be
great example of a passive aggressive
military revolutionary moment we have
good enough communication now in a way
that is never existed before during the
war to make opinions known any different
way including making known all the
battletram that you do not have the
support of the troops at home there
could be surprises like with troops
coming back from Vietnam and having
things thrown at them if people simply
knew that on every you know in every
office building in every you know
supermarket in every manufacturing
center there were people we're going to
church and pray for their defeat and
those were the people for making their
weapons those were the people they were
hoping to come to after home to after
the war you know they might not actually
resist but they wouldn't exactly fight
either for the most part a few
Psychopaths would but like it wouldn't
be much of a war it would just be like
creating the knowledge that no we don't
love you we're not going to help your
life don't mean anything if your deaths
don't mean anything it means less than
nothing and that's all it takes only the
American people can defeat the American
people we're the most powerful army the
world has ever known
but we're also the best finding systems
were a seventh and the army mostly
exists as support for our marketing
system the marketing system and a one on
one that one fight
I think it can win mmm interesting yes I
think that that's the concept what about
other actions that might work in a kind
of passive aggressive fashion which is
you know things like rent strikes or
failure to pay your taxes or
I don't know what refused a little send
your kids to school or the school system
loses their $15,000 a year where the
state subs state funding etc innocence
yeah exactly right there are a huge
number of places where when you are
fighting your own system is actually
very easy to fight just by not trying
very hard you don't need to be as
dedicated as at least the fictional
Oscar Schindler
the fictional version who was determined
to make sure that as factories didn't
make good ammunition in the Second World
War
with lots of great propaganda we had
countries making bad and in addition we
had torpedoes that didn't work 3/4 of
the time having torpedoes that didn't
work a hundred percent of the time if
you already have Trevino's that up with
3/4 of the time having guns that jam
having tires that explode you know just
having the lights go out in Washington
DC because of unaccountable technical
errors that are no more average just the
technical errors that meant to the proko
disaster in India I don't know if you've
read the documentary around it but you
just you know if you don't like your job
and your job is any sort of information
work we've never actually managed the
sword of panopticon that foucault you
know talks about Bentham Foucault
everything is always fundamentally
dependent on people believing in what
they did a little that's why you know
people get paid more in some countries
than others to work identical jobs
without any assistance interesting and
so the other I guess the other parallel
this is kind of a baby version of the
anarchists old tactic of the general
strike it's a you know a partial general
strike not not even working too hard at
the general strike but just sort of you
know generally being uncooperative yeah
unenthusiastic uncooperative a little
bit late I mean you know healthy Qin
Dynasty fell they know what's the
penalty for lateness
death what's the penalty for revolution
death well then
you get into that situation is because
you can create a revolution through
lateness if you have a complicated
Imperial bureaucracy as long as America
ornithologist the Qin Dynasty
intractable paperwork delays minor
logistical snafus you know it takes a
lot of people actually trying to get an
army from point A to point B a thousand
miles way even with modern technology
takes quite a few people kind of try so
I think I think you've convinced me that
this could that the tactics of
passive-aggressive could be used to
instantiate a revolution any sign to
your mind that we're actually seeing
that manifesting now I think that was
more my point that a few weeks ago
before the George Floyd situation I
wasn't seeing this as the predicate yet
for a revolution whether passive
aggressive or aggressive but I would I
would buy that a passive aggressive
revolution is possible is this a moment
where we are seeing it you know of
course what we're seeing in the streets
isn't really passive aggressive it's
more good old-fashioned aggressive
aggressive so talk about that little bit
if you would but it seems like there are
so many photographers and force flags is
kind of meaningless with the current
information infrastructure treatment
trying to decide who is starting things
at any given an incident but we pretty
much know that in a very important sense
George Floyd did not start things by
passing along a potentially counterfeit
$20 bill that's like a natural starting
point because they took until I think
today or yesterday for the police who
stood by while he was murdered to be
arrested and if it is in fact
empirically known that a fairly high
level of social disruption environments
is required together that sort of an
arrest to happen then it's federally
generally known that there was some sort
of a force that is the
violence here some sort of more than
local property tours breaking the
windows of other auto shops we have a
provocative police forces that have
given up any plausible claim to serving
and protecting the people and we have
this not just in Minneapolis because
otherwise other police forces would have
made efforts to distance themselves we
have to conclude that we have this all
throughout the country not meaning every
police force but when people say they
don't you know a few bad cops doesn't
mean there are no good cops yeah but
there's other bound to how good you can
be and not be a whistleblower in any
given organization and this depends
somewhat on what your situation is with
dependence but I think it's fair to say
that like when you released the Pentagon
Papers Daniel Ellsberg established the
upper bound on how decent person you
could be and be a top-level US military
adviser and when chelsea manning
released her videos of americans
murdering iraqis she established an
upper bound on how a decent person you
could be and even like a relatively
low-level US military officer and
snowden established a decent upper bound
for her reason the person who could
begin to be someone does contracting for
the US with a high security clearance so
there's this progressive decay of what
plausible royal motivations one
contribute to a certain group of people
and two so at some point you have to
regard people as enemy combatants and
therefore not entitled to trial like if
we've established a situation where cops
believe that when people learn to type
of a file then they've sort of
established a situation where no
reasonable person predict cops were
entitled to a trial and that doesn't
mean that they it's anyone's obligation
to fight enemy combatants there's no I
mean that they're obligated to do that
there's no legitimate regime that could
possibly command them to and it would be
dangerous and stupid you know I think
it's if I was a parent right now I would
be very worried
if I thought they were involved in like
Birmingham police presence and I would
encourage them not to do so but it would
not be at all motivated by the moral
sense that it was not virtuous to put
down police presence I would have no
qualms that it was virtuous to protect
police presence and her promise that as
a parent it's my job to protect my
children from getting carried away with
virtuous but dangerous somewhat
performative behaviors what's an
interesting perspective my god I must
say I am up considerably more
sympathetic to the police in in part
that's just personal history I come from
a police family and my father was
Washington DC policeman for his career
and then had a second career it's
federal law enforcement my brother's
federal law enforcement on my closest
first cousins was local law enforcement
and so I and to my best friends just
retired after 30 years as police
officers in Washington DC and I know a
lot of cops and I know a lot about cop
culture and the best for ponderin some
cops are solid decent actually wonderful
people with great willingness to put
their own lives on the line for all of
us and keep in mind there are 700,000
policemen in the United States 700,000
right if you had 1% bad which would be a
remarkably low number in any bureaucracy
I ever worked in that'd be 7,000 bad
cops and it's probably bigger than that
and you know with humans dealing with
life-or-death situations high pressure
and I'm gonna tell you other little
secret
most cops ain't too bright the average I
Cuba cops 105 little in a little yeah
yeah not not too good and but it may be
better in school teacher I don't know
don't know that number but it's anyway
here we have people of slightly
above-average intelligence some of them
obviously below average let's talk about
a distribution inevitably some number of
bad apples get through the screening
process to my mind to say that one
clearly depraved event should signify
that it's okay to burn down
stations strikes me as grossly excessive
so I want to say two things first of all
I'm not saying it's okay to burn dead
police officers and I'm not saying it's
okay to bring down police stations I'm
saying it's virtuous but stupid to
prevent police stations your parents to
drown you you said was morally okay
though and that's what I would object no
it's more it's more of a weekly
imperative but many things are morally
weekly imperative like not even factory
fun to meet you don't want to blame
people for not even putting a factory
 me you don't want to play people
for running down police stations you
probably don't even want to blame people
for as people unleashing a black man
slowly on camera in the sense that they
weren't arrested for several days
afterwards and you don't want to blame
people as people for fighting for the
Nazi regime did you know in the same way
you don't want to blame people as people
for participating in a system that
regards what they were doing as normal
and okay even when it's murderous but
you want to like get them therapy for
their trauma take them out of their job
relocate them to different states with
felony convictions but no jail time and
give them be good $2,000 a month basic
income and maybe you know I think that
that's kind of the right starting place
we you said there's never country to
bureaucracy with only 1% that people and
I agree the real problem is
bureaucracies not cops to some degree I
think that this situation creates a
potential hood in the door to deal with
bureaucracies so like a lot of people
are talking about defunding police
departments right now and I think that's
kind of an overkill strategy but it's
also non-trivial strategy but what I
think we really need is equal rights
between citizens to the police police
force so like you could have an
amendment where whatever your local
rules are to please they have to wear
body cams you have to wear body cams
they have to get a moment you have to
get off it warrants are applied for in a
planned manner so you don't know whether
this person the people issuing it don't
know whether you're a cop or not you
can't be
in Independence you could be working for
leggiero you could be a private
investigator and you should have exactly
the same investigative powers as a
police detective and exactly the same
constraints of the police detective that
seems like an appropriate way of dealing
with situation and maybe private
individuals don't aren't entitled to
quite the same level of like benefit of
the doubt as police for you were in a
stressful situation you were exposed to
a destructive environment we need to
regard you as not a particularly bad egg
for the damage traumatized person who
needs to be taken care of but should
never be allowed to be a gun again you
know the private investigator who
pinches someone in the street maybe we
just want to shoot him immediately and
not even really think about a trial but
for the most part the real problem seems
to be that private individuals haven't
been able to investigate the police the
guy who actually killed George Floyd was
had previously killed Tom ran his hands
up who was a Native American he has 16
complaints on his previous record this
isn't a problem of a bad guy it's a
problem of a bad system that super
impellers bad guys at the very least
yeah unfortunately there are some really
bad structural problems around police
unions protecting police officers in
fact those of us who know something
about the inside baseball about policing
know that it was very significant that
the officers were fired and the reason
was they were no longer protected by the
Union and the unions have got these very
strong contracts which can literally
forced all the prosecutors from talking
to the accused for several days let
alone arresting them and so it was a
very smart inside baseball move by the
mayor of Minneapolis to fire the police
officers so they could be dealt with in
by a law enforcement more expeditiously
it strikes me that
misconduct of a criminal sort should not
be defense against that should not be
baked into a union contract there's also
a Supreme Court decision that has a I
forget the name it damn I wish I could
remember the
that gives police a significant amount
of presumptive clearance for their
actions so that they're presumed at a
higher standard to be innocent than a
normal citizen and I think that should
also be changed by legislation if
necessary yes the cops have a tough job
and you know they're you know things
will happen but they should be held to
exactly the same same level of
accountability for actual criminal
behavior we're coming to the session of
the exact same level of opportunity for
actual investigative the prosecutor it's
interesting in Virginia it's rare very
few states do this but Virginia allows
private criminal prosecutions any
individual any citizen in the state of
Virginia
can bring a criminal prosecution against
anybody else in Virginia and has the
full the same power of subpoena etc as a
prosecutor so we do have that in a very
in a limited capacity in Virginia
whether you should have police powers
don't know it's apt to think about that
one it's an interesting idea it's an
interesting idea it's a little bit
analogous to David Brin's interesting
idea that every government agency should
have citizen observers who can go to
absolutely any meeting no matter what
the security clearance level is etc and
while they're not allowed to blow the
whistle they are allowed to blow the
whistle at the cost of a heavy
misdemeanor conviction one year in jail
which is kind of an interesting
trade-off which is if you hear something
sufficiently horrifying that you're
willing to spend a year in jail then you
can blow the whistle I thought that was
extraordinarily interesting concept on
how to how to police the powers-that-be
so that you don't have bad faith actors
because no one wants to spend a year in
jail but on the other hand if you know
about you know consciously plotted
extermination of the Chinese population
if there's ever a conflict between the
US and Russia
the US the Chinese do not have either
nuclear weapons or anything yeah
something like that yeah we were frankly
even the level of Snowden's stuff of
massive illegal surveillance of the
citizenry right you know what Snowden
have been willing or someone sitting
it's Snowden's shoulders been willing to
spend a year in jail to blow the whistle
probably so but unfortunately our laws
are way too draconian you know Snowden
faces 30 years to life
you know he's really smart not to come
back for 30 years to life come back for
a year in the local lockup yeah why
not and be a hero when you came out but
the choice wasn't both draconian and
capricious and extremely amorphous I
mean the progress of the laws our rules
their norms and put fundamentally no one
expects them to be rules but they need
to maintain something like possible
deniability event that that's in order
for the laws not to just be a race one
and so when they lose possible
deniability it actually ends up being
just a race for so hopefully we can have
peace now that we've arrested these
officers we've be established so a
little possible to my remedy we can have
new legislation to investigate these
things but you know having done this
it's not clear that it's still moral to
burn down Minneapolis Police
Department's now that they've been
arrested that seems like a personal
chase there can be some disagreement
about that the army is still 11 streets
police are still shooting journalists in
the front with bullets and resting
tremors cause traveling people with
horses hitting people with windows of
cars as the reports of Congress they
might try fine tramping them up bridges
and beating them up as they try to
escape police are still doing a lot of
major things but the things that they're
doing applause alia explainable well
some of them are plausibly explainable
and as responses to high-stress
situations and the Mester plausibly is
explainable as assault not murder and
like what Ken can't really expect that
all these people police who were caught
on camera by journalists shooting
journalists etc are going to face
charges for assault I mean
facing charges of problem because of
these always being Pro Cunha we actually
don't have a court system anymore we
don't have rules anymore and we don't
have anything like it consistent system
punishments anymore we have way too many
people in prison and we don't want to
lock up the cops any more than we want
to lock up the trucks or the innocent
people in prison were the people who did
things that should be illegal in prison
were the things that you know should
sort of be illegal in a sense like tax
evasion but we're like the laws have to
be draconian as a deterrent you know
there are a lot of types of people who
we wouldn't want to punish but we're
really bad at morality like as a species
and like we get worse at it as we get
deeper into Imperial decay yeah when
we're and we're in late and we're in the
late day cases system right now now you
didn't you mentioned the number of what
I'd call middle into moderate level bad
actions and which have occurred here but
you didn't mention the worst to my mind
and this is like the worst thing that's
happened in the United States in my
lifetime and I'm an old right I'm
66 years old I've seen a lot I was
around for the 68 assassinations and
riots and police riot in Chicago etc
yeah there's a whole bunch of bad things
well here's here's something that even
though it didn't involve death I think
was a moral culpability the worst thing
I have ever seen in the Uniting the
inside the borders of the United States
and that was Trump using ordering the
use of military force on American
territory to clear out peaceful
demonstrators in front of the Episcopal
Church across Lafayette Park from the
White House for the sole purpose of him
going over there and having a photo-op
holding a Bible backwards right this
this is so unconstitutional on so many
levels and so dangerous I mean I have
not been the in the club that has you
know I thought Trump is an evil stupid
vile human being and until late recently
I figured we'd serve
I've told January and get his
ass out of there but now crossing those
thresholds I'm willing to buy into the
you know Trump equals Hitler theory a
little bit more than I did previously I
mean the the level of outrage against
our our way of life our constitutional
norms that every single thing we expect
of a president was just so violated by
that action you know that would be
enough to get me to participate in a
passive-aggressive revolution so is the
most disgusting that is awfully
disgusting it's the thing that most
clearly needs to be established as not
acceptable for the future generations
other than the murder with impunity of
citizens which obviously is sort of
first but I see I mean personally I feel
something bike past a certain point when
people take symbolic equal actions
that's like a good thing because it
might clarify his world signs and the
problem is you know almost in conflict
in general you might say there are
people who are good at building things
for the loved it to start violent
conflicts and your people who are bad at
building things but eager to start
violent conflicts and this pattern
happens over and over throughout history
it seems to me whether it's the Union
and the Confederacy or England Germany
there's a lot of historical incidents
and anthems of Sparta where that basic
pattern hold 10db
usually the good guys win because the
people who are bad at building things
and eager to start violent conflicts are
so eager and so shameless that they
eventually provoked a response before
they've infiltrated all of the
institutions and made defense hopeless
and what I had been scared about that
like I do much safer as America had with
Trump having to file everything our
nation is never meant to
we think the profanity has ever meant
anything most unambiguous way possible
as well as telling the people to drink
bleach that seems like the sort of
country we're really glad Trump was
elected instead of Hillary because like
she wouldn't have made it so clear that
there was a very large demographic
actively opposed to believe some people
but like Mussolini sure I totally
believe equals Mussolini
trouble merciful Hitler voters sure I
totally believe that people who voted
for Trump I mean like you're losing much
more charismatic monster and like it's
really weird that someone is
uncharismatic is Pro could have won an
election it dependent of but I guess
people just want to clown yeah I mean
that's the things more likely give up
yeah I think it was really just like a
mascot to clown know what you can
seriously put up with a moderate amount
murderer in a high level family for your
strainer that's what you do when you
know you've given up I'm trying to be
civilized Republic and I will say for
the longest time I put Trump principally
in the clown box you know depraved clown
evil clown rabbit clown right and is
incompetence is it's so astounding you
know for instance if he actually were
you know a Hitler or Napoleon or or even
a mutt Cellini
the obvious play when the Koba 19
epidemic came on would just go look at a
few listen to a few radio broadcasts and
channel FDR for three months and be
guaranteed of re-election right in a
crisis people gravitate towards the
daddy party the Republicans right it's
always been that way and if he had acted
just even a little bit like FDR
Churchill and been in a mature adult and
you know gave the bad news and but gave
hope you know all the things that have
reason reasonable leader would have done
any president we've had ever would have
done even right
warren g harding have you've done its
holler above limitation to warren g
he probably would have won reelection
but no he's incapable of it he is such
an obviously demented character with his
all galactic scale narcissism and God
knows what other serious mental
illnesses
he couldn't even pull off a simple
acting job for three months to get
himself reelected and you know that bad
you know shows me that he's capable
pretty much anything so long as it feeds
his neuro his narcissistic personality
disorder and that could include going
further down the road than I thought he
might you know that and that this recent
depraved event at the Episcopal Church
demonstrated that he's willing to cross
lines and nobody's ever crossed before
so and so we didn't move back from drugs
to the Trump voters and as I said many
superb also because that headed towards
the well the police towards the
bureaucracies because that's what I do
think the real problem is and that's why
I am particularly excited about this
particular proposal like the making of
just full police networks for everyone
and but you know we should limit least
families as much as we want but like the
ability to investigate Wall Street like
privately as an individual and bring
criminal charges against Wall Street
when the stock market is up during the
worst economic disaster of all time
actually like definitely worse
depression at this point um it seems
kind of weird for the stock market to be
way up there's a lot of market
manipulation going on um the last thing
I wanted to try to say that Trump
although I don't want to try to get the
last word so you can go manic is he
seems to have always been not saying
there's gonna be hard time so we're
going to make through it yeah instead of
seems to insisted and driven in a very
hard way from the top there in a way
that strongly pressured all of his
advisers cheer along with that
there was only going to be a sixty
thousand casualties back when no one
everyone knew that that couldn't be
possible and everyone knew that
wouldn't remain secret for even a couple
weeks and I think an interesting thing
is the only way I can make sense of that
is basically market manipulation it
seems like there's this giant market
madly there's vast amounts of funds that
are dumping into the market all of the
insiders are pulling out into cash and
all of the semi insiders are going into
the least valuable assets in the market
it basically makes me think that we that
our economy is much much much more
centrally controlled than I had any
reason to believe growing up you know
like not that much less sense when we
control the Soviet Union cause and you
know that statement makes me bigger
media is not that much less centrally
controlled them before you attend once
now these sorts of things seem like the
things that we need to root out or if we
can't root them out just come to clarity
amantha like if we could just recognize
that the stock market is like a lottery
for real it is for stupid people it is
just for taking their money buy and hold
is also for stupid people nobody ever
made money by betting against Berkshire
Hathaway until now but it's a bad good
bet against Berkshire Hathaway is a
great idea in the next next couple years
that sort of thing yep
and I think again those sort of stacked
some bricks up to our to your original
theme that if we you know stack these
bricks and bring them to the public
attention maybe it motivates enough
people to move their needle into passive
aggressive revolution you know the
threshold as you pointed out you know
the threshold to passive-aggressive
revolution is a lot lower than going out
on the street throwing Molotov cocktails
taking the risk of a rubber bullet and
astroturf possibly worse so I think that
is actually the most interesting aspect
of this idea passive aggressive
revolution is for the individual agents
and let's think about from an
agent-based modeling perspective the
risks to the agents pretty low and yet
if there were indeed collective action
the result could be pretty high and
stacking these outrages one on top of
the other may at some point reach a
critical mass where the agents
are able to switch their state from you
know just being ordinary Joe's following
their nose through life
- now aligning to the passive-aggressive
revolution but it's the whole CIA
document won't have a cent ounce of
bureaucracy but you know just by calling
for too many meetings and you've seen
that right I have not but yeah I've
actually done it though but you know
just by native skill so I know how to do
that now we won't we won't tell those
stories they take too long we all got a
few minutes anyway so well no let's stop
let's stop I know a lot of troubles I
live in an electoral district where 75%
of the people voted for Trump 75% and
that's a district that normally goes
about 67 68 % Republican mr. mr. boss is
a story promoting story glamourizing
terrorism Trocadero terrorism even
unifying with Chinese and American
domestic terrorism to destroy the
American system and this was like
mainstream family television in America
more than 75% of the people at this
country want to burn it all day they
just like don't really know but now I
have a say say I know these Trump voters
and there are a complete mixed bag I
would say maybe 10% at the most or not
so much burn it all down as discussed at
all political all politicians and they
saw this as an opportunity to stick a
metal rod in the spokes of the bicycle
of politics right part of them are what
I call economic left behind who are more
or less legitimately at least from their
own perspective appalled by the impact
on them and then their community and
their opportunities for their children
of globalism you know hyper finance
hyper globalism and I think another
chunk were sincerely
fundamental or or least fundamentally
overstated strong traditional religious
backgrounds who are appalled at their
vision of the public morality of urban
Democrats essentially I know these
people right how many people mentioned
the North Carolina transgender bathroom
issue quite a few well so I think you
know this you're probably over over
stereotyping the Trump voter everything
happens at the margin you know one of
things we know if in both political
science and economics is everything
happens at the margin so the book that
Trump voters are not ready I'm most of
the vote for Hitler maybe five or ten
percent but they were willing to vote
for Trump on the other hand and he
seemed like a thug and what people who
have been traumatized wrote you when
they're scared man that God may be good
yeah that that's that's an interesting
analysis the people who especially the
ones who've been traumatized by
globalization and hyper financialization
said okay this guy sort of sounds like
he's in our side these sort of things
seems like a thug so hey let's hire our
own thug to go kick the butts of the
globalists that might be a third of the
Trump voters and then here's the most
interesting is the the most dangerous
and this is of course you know talking
about chicle Gruber again or Hitler
I'd like to call Schickel Gruber just
because it drove him crazy that was the
the net his father's name before his
father changed his name at like the age
of 40 could you imagine Heil
schicklgruber it would not have worked
too well apparently it sounds very very
humorous in German shit'll do ba
Highland would never a flaw but
at that time were often based on your
class origins because at some point they
implemented last names I believe and
people had to buy them and more classy
70 less things interesting but his
father was a government bureaucratic
customs officer of middle rank he was
not poor and he changed his name it
about the age of 40
anyway as I saying the other interesting
and dangerous and interesting parallel
is in my view about a third of Trump
voters are cynical people who who
actually saw through Trump and realized
in reality he would just be a monkey's
paw for the financial interests you know
as demonstrated by the tax cut right
that damn thing was the greatest
shoveling of money into the wealthy
people's pockets of all time these
aren't of course the money people bunny
people actually were opposed to Trump
the wall street vote bet put their
contributions about 5 to 1 and you for 4
to 1 against Trump but these are people
who of upper middle class successful
businesspeople net worth of a few
million and they say ah Trump will cut
my taxes and oh by the way probably
Trump will be good for the stock market
and he did both right stock market
soared once are on the road to that also
so including you the small small
business people who when they retire on
a net worth a two million dollars a fair
number of those that seems like a
natural thing to bring up I mean this
country was explicitly half white
nationalist or third white nationalist
much more recently but within living
memory while Germany was not not super
Denver and it transitioned without a
detoxification programmer and
equivalents your transitions in a messy
way that people still felt morally
validated but felt like they had to shut
up so it doesn't really make a lot of
sense to imagine that all of the people
who changed their stories about what
they believed back in the 60s and some
needs changed in a deep way how they
were disposed to behaving they became
like soft white nationalists who were
ashamed of it in some way but also angry
that they were ashamed of it and what
are you doing flip shame on other people
and that that sort of a pattern it's way
too many people to reasonably play it's
a culture it's a bad culture and there's
not that much that can obviously be done
about a bad culture except being clear
that it's out there and that people
actually have to take fairly lot of
steps to protect themselves from it
because they can't be protected by a
system of policing and punishment
because the system of policing and
punishment doesn't have non Bertoni and
measures and doesn't have the ability to
apply draconian measures against the
number of people who are engaged so I
think about what would have happened if
a Jewish person had been lynched in
Germany in public on video well for cop
swap did one cop did it and I think what
everyone would be without unit unified
against the world saying that okay
Germany needs to do a total overhaul and
reemployment detoxification and I don't
really see why this situation is
different and we've got some historical
precedent for somewhat effective truth
and reconciliation issues around white
nationalism like another sort of
passive-aggressive thing that I cannot
recall for in what let's say I am
calling for it is for South Africa to
call for the anti apartheid sanctions
against them to be implemented against
the United States with all this printed
see with which there were implemented
against South Africa until you know pen
pays them a ten billion dollar
consulting contract
to advise it on through the
reconciliation that should be in
everyone's interests I think actually
everyone's is even in the interest of
the white nationalist because truth and
reconciliation is helpful people need
understanding that they actually
literally don't know how to like get
over the indoctrination culture that
they were raised and they don't know how
not to hatred doesn't feel like people
it feels like something natural and
desirable from the inside it feels like
the people have to do that conveniently
how many those comes to you while they
were watching someone know later person
in front of them I'm sure they felt
anxious and terrible and confused but
they in some perverse way once they felt
like they were doing the right thing but
felt like they had to do two out of the
four were persons of color right one was
among and the other was I think part a
station and so again the thing is even
more up than we think right that
it's not as simple as that not
unfortunately because that would
actually actually the solution to the
legacy white supremacy of America is
just the calendar right if you look at
the Gallup polls in 1960 eighty-five
percent of Americans believed if someone
near to them married someone another
race they would be upset the current
number is 8% and declining and then
you're right there are some people there
Subrosa that won't tell even an
anonymous poster that but it's all on an
age gradient and of course to your
hypothesis that's why one of the reasons
Trump way stronger with old people and
is with young people so the the white
supremacy thing the calendar will take
care of it there's no constituency at
all for white supremacy in young people
other than a few fringe nutjobs and I
I don't believe that I think that be
broke all true is they went to premises
culture it's very hard to communicate
what protocol true is and it's it's a
weird sort of very own coalition white
supremacist culture where like is happy
to accept african-americans who are able
to conform extremely well to its norms
it's happy to accept Jews if they're
able to conform very well to its months
but it's not happy to accept something
like proportional people and it demands
a higher level of conformity and it's
willing to commit unlimited violence
against people who are not part of those
norms without feeling guilty yeah I
don't think about bro coach I got to
tell you I fortunately retired before
that became a thing so you know as far
as I can tell that didn't become a thing
until about 2000 2001 I was out of the
business world at that point so I never
had to deal with any of them them
 alrighty I think we're
here we're here at our stop point any
final thoughts before we sign off this
has been interesting and curious tour of
various interest ideas and possibilities
so you've been involved in chaos theory
for a long time and you're in an
unusually good place to give a
scientific opinion about whether a
unified state fair against the American
military would have effects on is this a
great place to demonstrate the power of
prayer and establish it for all time as
a scientific fact you know it depends on
it depends on it like so many things in
complex systems it depends on many
different dimensions of analysis I mean
to pray against the military let's say
pray against the military in world war
ii not gonna work too well right because
it's gonna assume it's just a number of
cranks if the military had were actually
called out and were slaughtering people
in the inner cities then i think it
probably would work pretty well because
the cops the the police would military
would know they're doing wrong and so
they would be accessible to the message
far more people be willing to
participate in such a prayer so as i is
entirely context dependent
the stuff buckets decline we peddle that
much if your theory that it's all
manipulate is correct not at all good I
feel thank you production services and
audio editing by Jared Jane's consulting
music by Tom Muller at modern space
music.com
[Music]