welcome to the stola the stoah is a
digital campfire where we go here and
dialogue about what matters most at the
night's edge what's happening now
[Music]
okay I'm ready mmm people still coming
in all right so due to popular request I
tried to side slay sidestep it we're
going to deal with lust today but before
we jump into that we need to step back
in the middle and look at the common
what we what we derive so far all right
so we can then see that lust is actually
in the same kind of sensory motor cycle
but it's it's got some really cool
features to it so I'm going to start off
by talking about the relationship
between effect perception and action
they got to mention this over the course
of the last two weeks but we're just
trying to summarize it here and that is
that effect is an intentional
motivational state it could be sometimes
it's called a mood or you know it's just
it's it Prime's you effect Prime's you
to move somehow right and then we have
these different qualities of aspect we
we talked about last week so we're in
the basic core self we're going to call
it the sensory motor cycle is that
effective energy arises it moves toward
perception perception is like you know
in the in our Western tradition we talk
about perception a very passive way like
your eyes are just receiving light and
sound ways they're just bouncing off
your ears this is not exactly what
happens your perceptual organs are
primed biathlete to go somewhere right
they're evolved to go somewhere so this
is why for example if you are you know
like phantom
when syndrome all these things or if you
if you if you do dark cave meditation
and you robbed your eyes a sensory
stimulation you'll start to hallucinate
because they they have an active core to
them also right they will be primed by
what are other effect is operating in
you to go somewhere and absent the world
they will you can feel that aspect of
sensory perception and hallucination and
stuff because that's the movement toward
the world okay so we have to understand
this is how we understand these things
as a process from a process
phenomenological standpoint so we have
an effective energy than we have
perception and in that cycle in terms of
the sensory motor core wants to
discharge as action right it kind of
discharges the energies cathartic and
anew so you know these are micro cycles
and new cycles come up that's called the
a low centric mode the energy comes from
the world you know your gut biome and
whatever the situation in the world
through your stimulation configures your
effective system which is also part of
your vagus system in your homeostasis
and all of that and then that Prime's
perception and that discharges this
action in the world we talked about
story and we can see story is the inward
curving of that arc
so from effect it doesn't get to
perception it starts to curve inward
into story into the virtualization could
be image or story okay and that's called
the egocentric pathway these are neural
phenomena logically distinct pathways if
you want to read about them there's this
book called Zen in the brain by James
Austin's really excellents a very big
book but these two pathways the
allocentric and the egocentric pathway
are distinct
they've done these perceptual
experiences that show
yeah it's kind of complicated but
anyways they're very they're very
distinct people who have brain lesions
that cut off the egocentric pathway I
can't find they have these mystical
experiences because the egocentric
pathway Orient's the world towards
yourself the allopathic sand pathway
Orient's objects in space without
reference to the self right so mountain
climbers who have hypoxia they often
have this thing called you know no head
syndrome because they lose the
egocentric pathway and this this notion
of pointing back to yourself doesn't
exist and you have this like 360
panoramic surround perceptual bleed
where you and the perception are one
taste really right so these are actually
neuro phenomenologically distinct so
more so that would be the curve into
virtual space following the egocentric
pathway and then that curving in in
creates the narrative self imputes the
default self that so we have the core
self and it's sensory motor that
perception action cycle and then we have
the false ass self which is this
imputation into the virtual reality in
the story so and then we'll get to the
third mode so when we look at lust this
way one of the things I said last week
is lust is the the care the seeking and
the connection the seeking and the play
mastery there there's you know there's
their semi independence they certainly
interact with each other but the lust
pathway seems to not be its own thing it
seems to take all those three things and
prime them for a different type of
action right so when you think of lust
it's driven by care right and panic it's
all tied up into that and it's driven by
a connection and it's driven by play and
anger a lot and it's driven by you know
it's driven by what's the third one fear
seeking and fear so somehow lost
catalyzes all the other effects you know
and complexify the situation the more of
those that are online the more
polymorphic kind of lust you have write
them and so so now you have the this
somehow lost has got all these things
engaged toward an object discharged an
object in the world though it wants to
meet the world which is no okay so let
me go slow
okay let me back up and answer this
egocentric is effect instead of
discharging into perception it curves
into the mind it curves into thought and
then you create your it doesn't even get
to perception its truncated at that part
of the sensory motor cycle you see
people who like as I said that one week
you know I meet people who work with the
horses and they're almost gonna get
kicked and then I say like how would you
know if you're in danger and then while
I go inside you know they don't use
their they don't use their perception
this is this is a problem with
meditation if not done correctly we end
up creating people who are looping
inside their own kind of manufactured
reality for ever and ever
yeah okay yeah these these little
questions that you know in these
sessions go fast and they talk to us so
heads up for the liking system in the
lust system in I don't think pan except
says like there's care and nurture he
has he has fear play seeking care panic
and lust okay so in terms of the neuro
chemistry of it they're not distinct
chemicals they're distinct cocktails of
those chemicals so if you think of being
at a cocktail bar the bartender only has
so many things to use but the
combinations and the amounts and the
order that they come and stuff like that
will make will make a different kind of
effect okay
so there's actually only a handful of
neuro chemicals and even those neuro
chemicals
the same molecules so it's very fine to
complex it out of simple rules and we
know that from complexity theory simple
rules generate complex processes complex
rules generate complicated situations
right so we're building on simple rules
these are all really good questions and
it's good because then like you take our
time to get to lust okay so less would
be the same thing there's some kind of
an effect energy and what I described it
as this is my guess I mean doing my own
arrow phenomenology it seems to me that
it's not you know it's driven by seeking
when you're lusting the seeking drive is
really on and so is the the care panic
you know that you can in and the play
anger is really right there right there
in the cocktail right there in the mix
so does that resonate with everyone I
mean this is why all those types of
sexual experiences are there all those
you know and then a lot of times after
the sexual after orgasm they all come
flooding in the lust is gone and then
these you know what other your typology
is you could start crying or you could
start sometimes I mean men and women you
get really angry right because there's
these these dreams are somehow
highlighted in interrupted by lust you
could think of lust as the main stallion
and you know he's you know normally all
the herd is just eating doing that
things then the main stallion starts to
drive them all there's something like
that that everything comes online and
your perception comes online you know
more to everything is heightened right
so you you're piling your your eyes you
might find yourself staring at certain
parts of the body
your smell is just usually pretty
passive comes online taste is really
activated the desire the oral desire in
your mouth is highly activated all these
things so this again is that effect
coming in in priming the perceptual
organs and what the way I just described
it the perceptual organs there's
different perceptual organs that are
usually passive in our society that come
online like the or you know the mouth
obviously the genitals obviously your
ear loves all these little points that I
know usually just kind of like chill
right so somehow it also prawns
different out so then all we can start
to look at our body as having it's part
of it because perceptual organs right
these these little places we all know of
some no more of them than others and you
start to see that there's a polymorphic
kind of perceptual field that is
activated with lust that is not so much
activated by the other ethics dreams
does that make sense yeah so that's one
thing the other thing we want to look at
interests in terms of the note the the
other the normal the non lustful the
virtuous Alex you're a Catholic versus
the simple ones is all ethics also have
something called another way to put it I
called it effect perception action the
other way we can look at it that's part
of this is desire duration and
satisfaction now this touches on what's
a hot question what did she ask wait I
got to go to this sexually turn-on by
ideas yes
what's that called sapiosexual yeah I
mean I think you're just working with
the we're gonna go into Tantra at the
end of this and I think we'll get into
that then when we go from Tantra to just
ideas yeah those are Donwood causation
and then there's something else okay so
we're on our way there to answering that
so we can also look at this as desired
duration and satisfaction now robber
barons work he this is what he's trying
to get at he's trying he's saying
something like there is and there is no
such thing as non-attachment or not
desired he has a cool phrase right that
I'm not going to remember because he's
saying that every moment of perception
is actually a desire okay so it's like a
desire false lust is fetishism okay so
that and and we can talk about that let
me let me make sure I get to how that
works so you know and he he's working in
this realm where he's noticing even
every act of perception has a desire in
it and that has to do with this notion
of wanting to go somewhere being primed
to meet the world right so so if you
start paying attention you noticed like
if you're kind of letting your eyes
wander outside in nature there's certain
greens that feel like wow that really
satisfied my eyes like you can start to
feel the subtle movement of perception
toward satisfaction and we don't
experience this very well because all
our language and the way we talk about
our sexual our sexual organs our which
you could become eyes will say like our
perceptual organs our sexual organs
because they all work the same way does
design that seek satisfaction
same with sound if you're listening to
Mozart was great at this a Bach even
better he could set up a symphony so you
were dying for a certain tone that he
wouldn't give you and he wouldn't give
you and he wouldn't give you until
finally gives you there's great books
written about the this technique and
when he wrote one of his symphonies I
can't remember it might be the the
Easter the Easter one if the quarter
goes on and on and on for like 45
minutes at the end and you're just dying
for the resolution and then he slightly
changes the pitch to a fifth and then
this and that when he first showed that
there was a riot because people thought
it was too sexual it's the same thing
it's too sexual it's this too designer
than the duration this is the Tantra and
then the satisfaction of the desire okay
and all perception is like this I just
showed you that music is it's all like
this so
so lust isn't different than that it's
just that the object of satisfaction is
specific in certain sense you know we
we're trying to talk about the bones of
this but the objects of satisfaction is
specific and it's and it's all across
the board I mean there are people who
you know there's I forget what the name
of it there are people who are zoo you
know they're objects of satisfaction or
animals there are people who are like
fall in love with machines like and it's
really sexual that I don't understand I
don't understand we're the imagistic you
know how this is this is same thing with
homosexuality how the object of that it
is set in the mind I don't I don't know
that but some but it's up but you know
it's there's many many varieties of what
the object that creates a satisfaction
is in lust
just like in sounds and stuff like that
so so then we have so then we have so
the egocentric mode which doesn't mean
you masturbate we're talking about the
egocentric mode when it turns into a
into a a story okay so that's something
else because if you masturbate you can
make the object where they called
autoeroticism auto-erotic homosexuality
or transgender that's contra points
talks about it like that that's
different than imagining you know
someone using an imagination and
masturbating because that that is
the object of it is still this other
object okay then we go on to Tantra but
let me see what questions look
appropriate here yeah there is a book
about this Bach manipulating thing I
wrote I wrote it I read it a long time
ago if I find it I'll send it off to
Peter or just you know if I can find the
music I have it here I think it's his I
find what music it is yeah Robert Baird
I'd recently okay yeah it's a desiring
to know is something in this action
perception perception cycle okay so
Tantra so Tantra obviously is not
curving the desire into a thought and
worrying or whatever or having some kind
of mental masturbation but it's holding
open this duration between the desire
and the object it's just living in this
so those of you who did my course it's
still hunting you just still hunt for as
long as you can and if you do this with
another person the energies cohere
become resonant incoherent in a way
which this increases the energy of
course this is something that people
only have a certain capacity you know
your nervous system your the narrow
dynamics you have to build capacity for
this and while you're doing that you're
also vulnerable to in in chigo and they
call it microcosmic orbit you're
vulnerable to
[Music]
upwelling these other kinds of emotional
content because all those other FX
dreams are also searching for
satisfaction so you're holding all this
open and and you know wants a story or
it wants some you know so it's it can be
like detoxifying because if you can if
you can maintain it because you're
you're cleansing out all the available
objects that can cause X is Freud would
say the energy until you can just have
free flow energy and because for lust it
heightens all of those if you have
something in your care connection or
fear or panic then then that will tend
to present itself in Tantra
so it's about expanding this duration
that's different in fetishes and
fetishism is projecting that on an
object of desire and then telling you
you can't have it that creates a
different type of attachment or pursuit
that has to do with psychological
incoherence it's very similar to those
those experiments they did a long time
ago with with rats where if you
randomized when they get shot you get
you go crazy
so fetishism is kind of like that it's
it's because it's a double bind it's
it's increasing your desire for
something and saying you're not allowed
to have it at the same time but then
you're a passive kind of being
manipulated in that this is different
than being an active participant in
holding open the duration of your desire
yeah now the interesting thing about all
of this is that if you hold open the
duration of that desire long enough
something rather marvelous can happen
and to talk about that I first want to
go you know go over use a few more
terminology so we can understand this
without too much complexity so if you
look at any kind of perception so the an
effective energy is gonna come up and
then it's going to drive perception this
allocentric mode if you look at any kind
of perception you see something very
interesting and that is there there's a
subject object shift in the narrow
phenomenology a perception when you look
really closely so for example I make it
very easy if I'm making a soup and I'm
putting in different spices and I'm not
I'm just smelling it you know I'm
smelling it so I'm smelling something
that's qualia right that's subjective
experience but if I look looking looking
look at what's happening
pretty soon I'm talking about the
molecular structure of cinnamon or
coriander and that sounds like the world
that sounds like object right so when we
investigate this way that language makes
it to hardest cut we realize that
subjective perception bleeds into world
seamlessly now in between what we call
qualia of subjective content phenomenon
and world where it gets very tricky
which is which I call the halo zoic sown
halos always am is a terminology from
sustainable architecture where they make
for example building blocks that have
semi living components so they self heal
so the highes up is something that's not
necessarily objective or alive you know
it's this kind of intermediate zone it's
the same thing for example with your
balance feeling balance feeling dizzy
feeling tipsy all of these things having
vertigo depends upon mechanisms in your
inner ear and it depends upon these
little these little crystals of the
calcium that sit atop the cilia and they
move in the saddle of your middle ear
now the calcium calcium when I say that
term calcium and then I could say I
don't forget what it is it Matt you know
I could give you the formula that sounds
like a part piece of the world it's the
same stuff in the rock so when we look
at what is the perceptual organ what is
the perceptual organ of taste it's not
confined to my mouth it's the whole
entire thread from mouth to world and
back again right this is why Goethe said
every thing correctly seen opens a new
organ of perception because it's a new
thread through the world
Gibson's theory ecological theory of
perception talks about this really well
it's kind of complicated
but so the highlight so what we're
saying is that every organ or perception
that is not contained you get beyond
seeing perception of having a subject
object quality when you hold open the
duration of satisfaction this becomes
very clear it's a kind of Satori where
you can't tell if the world is like for
example seeing you or you're seeing the
world and it's because you've lost the
illusion that there is separateness that
perception in the world are separate
you can experience the molecules gifting
you that the way they taste versus I'm
tasting the soup I mean there becomes
agency becomes omnidirectional
everything becomes animated everything
is without the world I could not see
so there is an aspect there's there's an
aspect of Tantra where you can drive
lust to the same place instead of into
an object that that satisfies into this
experience of the world as vital eros
some people say people make too much
make it sound too much like a Platonic
ideal the creative force you see that
that's in the world it's not it's not in
you and then you know you can resurrect
your your relationship to it
are there any where where it does what
do we are there any questions I mean
they could be you know they could be
specific questions maybe had a really
good question maybe you want to go off
and you maybe ask it - Bonita you're on
mute still you're rapping you know I
feel like you might have addressed it a
lot already with this falselist but
maybe you could go a little bit into
more how the commodification of sex and
like the mediation of sex through all of
these kind of consumer contexts
maybe increases the amount of
fetishization that we have and steers us
away from contract practice yeah so
let's talk about another simple set of
words we can use and then I'll ask you
questions in doing this work the
question is what's online and what's
offline so if you imagine the situation
you're describing a fetish of a fetish
for something when someone's having that
experience what's online is there a
story online
is there a cultural structure online is
there early attachment psychological
structures online so these are all
egocentric forms these are all curving
into
the mind before it goes into action
right so now it's that's so and again
it's what's online what's offline what
sequence maybe we could talk about
States next time I have a really cool
way to figure out the different state
experiences across all the traditions
but so what's online and what's offline
is very important right so is your sense
of self online offline is there a
thought a story or narrative subtly in
there but also the sequence so if I you
know you know if I see someone with a
cigar and it makes me think of a phallus
it's not clear which came first it's not
clear that like first I'm like the guy's
like sexy and then I project that onto
the cigar so the order in which these
micro kind of cycles come is also
important you know for me I know that in
them in most cases things like sexual
jokes and these little ways we are
usually comes from that their bodies are
already excited and then you know you
just don't see those things they don't
provoke you in the same way yeah so it's
usually you know the other the other
direction when you see that that famous
sequence with Groucho Marx the housewife
she comes up and he's like he's got her
already you know or who's great at this
Russell Brand talking to those news
people like that's operating already so
they can hunt she can hardly she doesn't
even want to talk because all she can
think of her sexual things to say and
she doesn't want to say them so that
order is is upward causation right
versus something that
because cultural or thought or some
experience downwardly causes me to be
aroused and there's no sensorimotor
action cycle in that that's I mean these
still are natural phenomenon for humans
but it's not it's not this more kind of
like natural order of things yeah
there's a Russell Russell Brand who's he
talking to that woman that woman
broadcast her with the Morning Joe I
think he comes on and he's just like
yeah I love watching him work for people
like so yeah so this notion of what's
online and what's offline in the order
in which they appear and that can answer
your question about oh can I ask a
question yes I apologize if I'm breaking
the protocol here I mean I'm muting
myself because I put it in chat but I
don't think it was noticed um thank you
buying this is very illuminating I was
very curious about that curve and the
nature of the overlap between perceptual
systems and sin estate as synesthesia is
the overlaps between the visual auditory
kinesthetic taste and touch it's not
obvious how this happens and many
different since or eum's process in very
different ways a touch for some persons
is so acute they can see somebody have
an experience and they can register it
in a very robust way
in there and the interior so I think
it's that nature of the of your what you
said the resurrection of your
relationship to lust something like lust
and the nature of them of the poetic
imagination and I can only do this for
the story actually because it's only a
metaphor and story that I can translate
adequately to other people what's going
on for instance when I was in college we
studied race scenes Phaedra it's a it's
a tragedy it's about a young woman with
a married to an older man very powerful
and it's a unequal relationship and she
falls in love with her husband's son I
don't think you were here in the first
one this is a series over called source
code analysis we're trying to get two
simple powerful protocols and not
complex story so the story scene is
really complex but you should read this
book by Harry hunt called the nature of
consciousness okay I have value in terms
of his relationship to that notion of
synesthesia so yeah if your comment
could be what is the core protocols in
the story why do I when the teacher
asked does anyone identify with Phaedra
and her lust for her I did I did wrongly
identified with tiara even though as a
gay man I lusted for a lot of people
that I could not have so I identified
with that at that level but I did not
say yes I do identify with the hour trip
because of the social setting I was in
and nobody Rose their hand
nobody identified with the Audrey which
I found very remarkable and no one could
identify with this character the
question I'm having about resurrection
how can we through art and through the
imagination create
a kind of resurrection so that these
kinds of loops do not torment us and do
not meant us but actually augment or
elaborate certain kinds of tensions that
we then can modify modulate just as Bach
did in his music so I hope some of that
made sense yeah it's an interesting
question like people always have in the
West have always argued that what is it
called when you take those kind of
primal energies you turn them into our
sublimation there's a movie with Diane
Keaton and Jack Nicholson perfect
popular people have always argued that
sublimation without sublimation you
wouldn't have the great arts this does
not ring true for like indigenous people
you know for them it's like there's too
much messiness in it but this is not a
place to argue that but that's where I
would say that question lives and it's a
it's a fantastic question any thoughts
in most way this maps on to experience
of child sexual abuse
so what we're trying to talk about is
the sensorimotor action cycle a percent
of these these effects must being the
same one in their flow State they can
either discharge as action effect
perception action or you can open the
duration and they they flow you get the
sense of flow Shinzon beyond this time
you just feel the energy itself it's not
suppressed it's not dissatisfied it
starts to create its own kind of tantric
cycle if the way understands and now I'm
out of my league here but the way I
understand sexual abuse is that again
most of these traumas are double bind
double bind in the sense that there's
something that arises naturally and
you're put in a double-blind situation
so the natural fear of abuse is arising
with the same need for the parent to
protect you
let's say so you're in a double bind in
both these both these are completely
authentic
neither of these experiences in the
child are made up so the double binds at
the level of the authentic self you have
to choose between something that's
authentic in yourself the same with like
you know it still goes on in parts of
the world but same with young people who
especially in my generation were
homosexuals the homosexual the object of
desire arises naturally right and yet
the culture is saying no so this builds
shamed the difference between shame and
guilt is shame is the cultural when
something that is authentic in you
is rejected whereas guilt is you kind of
know you broke the rules and you'll you
can take the hit for it right so shame
that's why shames hard to work with
because its nature you you're asked to
be skeptical about something that
authentically arises that might be part
of what you were saying John you know
like the silence might have said now how
could you how could you identify with
that now because of this way in which
lust seems to tie into all these other
categories it can couple with rage let's
say are a couple withing or couple with
panic you know whatever energy though
those strings are highlighted and if you
have an energy signature which could
have been set in early childhood by your
relationship with your parents might
have been angry people you might have
anger might have been coupled with
affection or lost yeah all these things
start to build complexity I don't know
did I did I help her make that worse the
future is really lost in its analgesic
function in the face of social loss oh
that's a great question can do can you
talk around that question ally yeah yeah
that's something I wanted to learn
research more about from what I've been
reading lust is not mediated by dopamine
da like you said it's separate from the
seeking system but it uses the seeking
system along with other systems in in
some sense and and these are tensions
brain molecules and they're thought they
have evolved initially for play
but then they came to later to be used
for analgesic purposes in face of social
loss from what I have read and we know
this because lust follows the panic
grief effect and and this is compared to
opiate in some ways and some scholars
hands say lust is dangerous in this
aspect because it replaces things
they're rewarded and replacing things as
opposed to the reward being in the chase
so that's yeah so I just have a question
for you but you know Jesus do you mean
like spaced out and or do you mean like
content and just just a relieve pain
just okay six if you yeah so a couple of
things I think you know this already
I'll just laid out the seeking system is
you don't get your hit of dopamine when
you find what you're seeking for you get
it at the height of anticipation the
anticipatory aspect this is and this is
related to this tantric learning how to
become the perfect seeker the duration
of the seeking is held out without an
object you accept the desire and the
movement toward but you keep the
duration open for as long as possible
and well I would suspect that opioids
kill your sex drive do that does it or
I mean eventually you know some of these
things yeah it's interesting to figure
out what the yeah I can't talk to the
neuropharmacology of opioid abuse I
haven't experienced it yeah the interest
an interesting question and of course
these things have different you know
different effects on different people
what they what they exacerbate what they
take offline what they amplify what they
diminish and your system I always
thought it was interesting when I was a
kid
younger person how the different
alcohols could have such different
effects when it's just alcohol you know
some would make you kind of like lazy
and chill and some would make me really
like like I mean I can't I can't change
Inc martinis anymore but when I went to
the city you know we it would just make
me really like sharp and energized right
so we so I think it would might might be
different across different opioids
certainly across different people yeah
it's interesting question I'm kind of
spacing out on it because I'm so angry
at the old people who invented opioid
and how little meaning a culture makes
around it how little attention it gets
and who suffers alright yeah kind of
distracted by that sorry
let's see there's a question here can
you say more about double bonds yeah so
double bonds is actually very important
it's again if you're working you know
working with these simple protocols
doesn't it doesn't answer everything but
he gave you a strong understanding of a
lot of things Wilber early on wrote
about the the commonality of a double
bind in psychopathologies and double
bind is there's many different forms but
it's when you're receiving information
and they're contradicting each other
it's more it's and so you are like the
parent might be saying I love you but
they're raping you or after they rape
you they say something nice and you
start to I mean a response to this is
dissociation you don't know where to be
which there is no real real reality
there's no way to gauge which is a
reality and so people dissociate from
their body because the body is actually
part of why it's it's a double bind
because the body is online saying
something no no this is real and then
the world is saying something else and
yeah there and then there's millions of
small ways in our society that we set up
double binds all the time and we mostly
do it with what's called performative
contradiction someone's body saying the
opposite of what they're telling you
we most so people this is why a lot of
times even on Facebook threads but in
collective insight practice when things
are getting heated I'll say don't pay
attention to the words the words are
just cathartic action like at a certain
point just stop paying attention to the
words get and try to get down to what's
really happening first by trusting your
body and that's one way to avoid double
binds it's very frustrating I know I
think pray deep is going to agree with
me here when you're in a social
situation and it's so clear to you that
someone's bullshitting and everyone's
like yeah and you're just like what the
 is going on here like it's like and
then you realize what's online for
people it's just communicating
transactions there's perceptions and
there I had a very interesting
experience once with a member of my
family who've gotten into not a gang of
people who were not nice he was like a
grifter a ripoff artist and then they
got my mother involved and they came
over to our house one day which I was
really mad at because I lived at the
time in the ill attend a little house
isolation didn't want these people to
know why I lived but this grifter it was
like everything you asked him he was
just yeah like my way we talked about my
nephew was a good baseball player he's
like yeah yeah I know this guy's a
baseball player and this person oh yeah
yeah I know like everything was like
like he was so good at everything
everything was so he had so many cool
things to talk about
and I'm just like he's just a grifter
and my family was really mad at me
you know same thing in business when you
could tell people I'm like
she'sshe's stealing from you so obvious
how could she be stealing from us she's
like the nicest worker in the you know
so clear so there's a lot of this going
in our society our society is so like
 up so if you experience society
about that when I'm here to reflect back
to you is that that's what's real so
you're really seeing the reality and
yeah if I could ask a follow-up Anita
what are some of the ways that double
binds resolved themselves either no good
or constructive way or a bad or
destructively so I don't know if you're
gonna like this answer I don't even like
it right now but it came up and it's
like just say it Bonnie
you have to stop complexified things
like I've worked with people that go
round and around and around or where I
used to work about their boss and I'm
like he's an asshole that's all I mean
the guy's an asshole
what you just seeing as an asshole you
could just deal with it it's like don't
try to fix it don't get it like like
there's too much complexity in our
psyches like there's too much we can
somebody talked about Cesar Romo the guy
who works with the dog whisperer you
know like so much we could get 90% of
this done but understanding our animal
nature enjoying doing it well and so
like yeah there's just our Jordan Hall
will say you know there's too much
 thinking so how do you fix it
you don't fix it it's like oh you just
you ignore it like this is the other
thing we're always walking toward when
people work with the horses and they're
starting to get like an see the horses
walk away and a person will say why is
the horse walking away I'm like because
the energies talks
so they lean what do people do when the
energy is toxic on Facebook that's where
we go that it's like crazy because we
are crazy we're in this double Bonnie
you know and then the opposite happens
I'll do coaching sections with two
people in relationship don't like each
other then I have a horse in the barn
and they're sitting there just looking
at each other the horse was packed over
the corner wanting to get out and then
little by little as their hearts melt
the horse will come in and put himself
right in the middle of those two people
sitting there and they'll say why did
the horse do that I said because they
like sweet energy it doesn't have to be
more complicated than that
use your complexity of your mind for
interesting creative things like John
said don't get all like up in
this drama of psycho lack psychotic and
sociopathic people who is which is who
we are
and so you know be like a horse
walk towards sweet energy and just walk
away from toxic that's 90% of it
good question that's my best answer I
mean that's how I live my life yeah and
it's you know it's what's interesting is
this is part I'm now I'm gonna get even
more in trouble this is part of the
message that the right is trying to tell
you now they don't have it worked out
either but some does a sense of just you
know not over complexity things it's got
kind of a postmodern
problem you can make a double bind by
trying in your own self by trying to fix
a double bind right now a lot of times
you then you say well why can't I walk
away from it and then you'll find that
you probably have an inward curve and a
story and a narrative maybe some
psychological unresolved psychological
material or something but so it's easier
said than done but once you get the
habit of it yeah you don't want to walk
away until
it's time to walk away but if it's time
to walk away you just walk away from
there and yeah are there any therapeutic
techniques that you can better
understand like ah that's how it works
based on this like you kind of walk away
or ignore it you know so we have to do
is experiment
there's no one's gonna tell you be able
to help you move in this direction so
you experiment in ways that feel risky
but you know are safe like it's
interesting because I'm June first I'm
going to leave Facebook deactivate my
house and I can feel this is risky or it
does is distasteful to me you know so
it's an experiment I mean I know that
the way my mind like so today Daniels
Mountain burger invites me on Facebook
to a secret group and I'm like oh man
I'm gonna have Facebook like I can feel
all these like you know but I'm going to
walk away because I don't I can't answer
the question until I try and I know that
the risk I feel is actually kind of
silly I mean from my intellectual
standpoint so you look for things like
that you know you look for opportunities
if you got a job and you're
kind of feeling like leaving anyways
instead of leaving you could push push
it close to the needle to where you're
gonna get fired and then maybe you don't
walk away or you just walk away you know
these these things are better resolved
by trying little experiments interrupt
your normal habit of responding over
engaging
yeah okay
Peter Bonita thank you thank you
so we're coming back next week same time
same channel we want to talk about the
imagination I didn't have any ideas on
what to do but some of you have talked
about the I imagine Asia and we could do
my States my States little States source
code to all the different states of the
Yanis and stuff like that yeah great
it's not that I don't want to come back
I just you know I but you know now I got
some idea of what we could do that is
interesting interesting to the audience
so we can do you want to close out no
miracles oh okay well Thank You Bonita
thank you everyone we have a bunch of
events coming up but today I think like
for lined up and just check out the
website the store that ca1 coming up at
12:00 p.m. Eastern time Israel box
collective presence ting which is really
really good if you haven't checked it
out yet
yeah just we're the websites time for
listserv and check out the next economy
all right thanks everyone