good morning YouTube my tripod was not
working this morning to go on periscope
which to me meant the universe wanted me
on YouTube so I read this amazing
Twitter story people tweet a lot of
things in a row but if my friends post
it and then I posted it and I wanted to
read it because it does explain so much
for me so we can get through without
crying because I was bawling this
morning when I was reading it it's by at
mykola with UK hey how's this for autism
awareness month some percentage of you
who are reading this tweet are actually
autistic already and aren't aware of it
I'm gonna post a bunch of questions I
wish I had been asked in this context
years ago this is not a diagnosis but it
is instructive now if I can figure out
how to scroll around work can I help
before pressing go do you need a lot of
time alone
even in a relationship or family even
when you really love the other people in
your life even especially when there
isn't anything particularly pressing for
you to do do loud noises caused you to
stress or background sounds that won't
quite stop do you prefer to keep the
lights off are the foods you can't eat
or fabrics you can't wear because the
texture just feel bad in a way that you
can't explain
when you think about interacting with
strangers acquaintances friends family
how much effort do you put into me and
understood are you compensating without
realizing it for the fact that nobody
understands you unless you refrain it in
terms you slowly learned they rock when
you see a complex system does your brain
get excited do you just automatically
find that your awareness can easily flow
through the system consider its many
parts in a relation to each other and
the whole do you understand more than
you can say in that content in this
context big time do you struggle with
emotions especially with emotions around
other people
do you sometimes suspect you're not
having the right emotional response to
something do you get really fixated on
things like fairness or truth or
correctness do you find that there are a
small number of people in your life with
whom you've connected immediately
powerfully felt like they're they've
known that you've known them all your
life people who can finish your thoughts
and then add more you push you rather
than slow you down are these people rare
when you first entered society for me it
was Kindergarten did you have the sense
that everyone else must have somehow
already known each other but they all
somehow knew the rules and didn't or and
you didn't or something did you spend
five 10 to 15 years playing catch-up
[Music]
everyone knows autistic people take
everything literally right well sort of
do you make puns do you hear double
meetings and things others say and riff
on them even to the point of annoying
others you compulsively point out
ambiguity even if you've parsed it I
don't person things but yeah did you
find that you had some days or you can't
human are you like mostly fine because
that little voice in your head says
everything is on fire is easy enough to
ignore until it isn't and you spent
hours solving for reasons you don't
understand many if not most autistic
people would answer yes to some subset
of these questions there are others the
same is when you've met one person with
autism you've met one person with autism
but this isn't a disability I hear you
say well right autism leads to
disability when an autistic trait is so
pronounced that you can't reconcile it
with your surroundings when your
emotions compel you to self-harm when
your systems-thinking makes you mute but
not every trait not all the time so many
autistic people done their own research
and compared notes have arrived at the
following conclusion Auto autism is
massively under diagnosed you only get a
usually when you're disabled and many of
us can hide or ignore disability for
years or decades that doesn't mean we
aren't struggling that doesn't mean that
our brains work the way everyone else's
brain works it just means that as long
as we've put forward sustained effort
every day for our entire lives we can
feel more or less normal and we learn to
hate ourselves our real selves many
autistic people have a couple of
subjects that they just cannot get
enough of we call these special
interests this can be like researching
the civil war or collecting stamps or
being super into video games anything we
can focus on all deeply and never get
bored when engaging in our special
interests we can become oddly defensive
of our time you pulled away can be
really painful and I guess annoying it's
not like no I want to keep thinking
about X I don't want to eat sleep sex
social whatever until my mid-20s I would
just straight-up copy mannerisms
expressions and even values for my
friends I would find the most socially
competent person in the room and just
practice being them masking is about not
being yourself because it doesn't work
in public look a lot of people can say
yes to a lot of these questions and not
be at all disabled right and because
autism is often spoken of as a
disability in and of itself anyone who
has a ton of autistic traits but is fine
in life doesn't get diagnosed autism can
directly lead to any number of
disabilities 100% a lot of autistic
people need a lot of support but that's
not because they have difficult
different traits it's because they
experience one or more of these traits
way more strongly than others for
instance needing a lot of time alone
Eenie a lot of alone time is fine
needing to be alone all the time is
debilitating and paralyzing and a great
way to get diagnosed with all sorts of
 sensory processing issues are
annoying to me but there are folks for
whom physical touch feels like fire
imagine not being able to tell this once
this one's the whole the whole reason
I'm on here imagine not being able to
translate your thoughts into words
imagine if it's not just hard but
literally impossible for you to turn a
really meaningful and complex thing you
fully understand and care about into
communication to any other being and
that was the end of it but there was a
little bit more that I posted on Twitter
because it's me it's this it's creating
a world that works for everyone and so
sitting here with this knowing that I
mean I've known for a while and I am I
am actually autistic and that it is
simultaneously something that society is
very against and expects you to conform
and expects you to behave in a certain
way and I've been giving up on that on
repeat before I even knew I had autism
and that that is powerful and what I
talked about about becoming my more
authentic self is that that like Who I
am is more important than fitting into
society on a deep level and I think for
autistic people that's maybe even more
so true than the rest
then there's Autism Awareness Month
Autism Speaks which is a organization
more or less designed for the parents of
autistic kids who want their kids to be
normal who want them to like speak and
make eye contact and and have find a
cure for it and their logo is a puzzle
piece and people with autism are like
but I'm not a puzzle piece I'm not
broken I'm not and the irony being for
me both at the label of autism makes
puzzles fit within me but also my whole
thing that I'm trying to explain to the
world is that we are puzzle pieces
not just people with neurodiversity but
every single human being has their own
unique puzzle piece it's everything that
is you it is that what your
intelligences are and aren't and your
your
talents and your limitations and that
finding your other puzzle pieces that
you click with so that you can be a
functioning group is what we are going
to do together because there's something
amazing about finding those people those
people who get you and who make up the
traits that you don't and I can see in
my life where I've always had that
missing being that missing puzzle piece
not necessarily the autism but the whole
being of me and how I love creating
worlds and even sometimes characters but
can't tell the story so like clearly I
can't be a writer where I can think of
the entire complex way that we can save
all of humanity but I can't send a
freaking email like or get people
involved in it and I see how powerful
that is how important that is because
everyone is a puzzle piece everyone has
things they can't do and most people who
are neurotypical are like yeah but i
buyed hate emails and then I send them
I'm like right oh how much more powerful
was your life be if that wasn't a
requirement if just because something
was super hard for you you didn't have
to do it we created the tools that made
it easy for you to be you and let the
people who rock it things and who are
amazing at them and it's super easy and
like for do those things that only works
in a society with the technology to back
it up where we have the platforms to be
able to make life easier we're honoring
where it's not easy and so I have this
dream of finding a board of directors
and it keeps fluctuating and all of my
things but what I really want is a board
of neurodiverse physically diverse
emotionally diverse humans who have done
enough of the interpersonal work that
they kind of know what is their
 and what should a society is adding
to work through all of that in public so
that we can work through the the
company's in public so that
everyone can see
because that process is going to be
powerful that process of creating the
corporation that is the cooperative
that's going to create the tech that's
going to save humanity and doing it in
public with transparency means our
membership trusts it means it is just
more powerful to also be way more
vulnerable for the board of directors
and so it has to be people who are okay
with that and we have to have a
membership base that is accepting of the
neurodiversity and not not trolling it
that it is about there's just so much so
we need to figure out but I am looking
for our neurodiversity
people who have ADHD and autism and OCD
and anything that makes your brain think
differently than someone who is
neurotypical because we are not gonna
fit in we are going to hone those super
powers and figure out how to be exactly
ourselves and we're gonna use our neural
divergence to save all of humanity for
the normies for us for everybody so who
wants to come play Nick please like and
subscribe