all right so we've hit the record button
now so we've been meeting to have
conversations
well actually Arthur and I have over a
number of months and the four of us with
a couple other additions met for
conversation at the end of last year and
before things in the world changed quite
a bit and these conversations for me are
about us coming together to do in fact
what we've begun discussing already and
it's that mixture of tuning into what to
care about and understanding how to take
effective action to make effective
choices in light of that so so yeah
perhaps I could say a little bit about
what I take this in fact to be and bring
in a couple figures that I think I've
influenced influenced some of us here in
various ways one of them Nora Bateson I
know James you are interested in her
work and had been a collaborator of hers
and so the the term that I think is very
helpful she has a term called samatha C
and I I don't know how the term that
term itself is going to catch but but
the meaning is one that I very much
wants to do my part in helping to catch
and that is this notion of a mutual
learning environment and Arthur this is
something I think you can speak to with
a with loads of fidelity and I have a
bunch of things to say about that as
well because what is learning okay what
does it mean to mutually learn how can
we participate together and when we have
the notion of environment we have this
understanding that well together we are
a part of and creating a context which
itself is enabling informing our
education as well and it strikes me that
the creation the all of these mutual
learning environments primarily to begin
with I think given the time we're in to
take place online in a forum just like
this with 2 to 10 to 20 people who knows
how many we can really get this to work
with it's an extremely powerful one
because if anyone who could be listening
or watching this right now at least from
my perspective the the call to action is
now quite explicit where previously I've
been trying to have conversations in a
way that helped inform people and spark
some insight and communicate a sort of
resonance that might entice someone to
engage in a conversation a certain kind
of way creatively philosophically about
what's worth caring about to engage in a
process of understanding to become more
in touch with themselves and the world
this is more explicit now like this is
about actually do the thing and come and
do it here come and be part of this
conversation be part of conversations in
akin networks and then have those
networks intermingle this is about
actively participating in understanding
what's going on through creating a
shared sense of understanding with each
other participating in a shared
consciousness that's that's seeking from
the heart from a place of what's worth
caring about what is effective to do and
yeah it's always a privilege for me to
have the opportunity to do that so I'm
really grateful for you guys being here
and yeah I so we've been talking for
about half an hour now and we've only
time just turned the recording button on
recently so I'd be interested to sort of
and I do think we've crystallized some
themes and so I'd be interested to maybe
maybe James to hear your sort of sense
of how you've been observing this
interaction now and if you're getting a
sense of the point you made to begin
with was that you've been going through
a process of really looking to pay
attention to discern what's worth paying
attention to what's valuable like what
are we valuing our society what am i
coming to value more is an individual
and then how to act from there I'm just
wondering if like how you're feeling in
this moment in light of what I've just
said in light of what we've shared
together with respect to all of that
[Music]
okay so what is what is coming up for me
is a maybe you need for clarity around
what we what we mean by action you know
I made the point earlier when we weren't
recording around
that that for me it felt like it there
was there was it felt like a call to
action and then I've receded that's
that's receded for me and then it's more
of a call into into into into more
presence and just just noticing to see
what was most salient and I think what
I'm trying to get out there is that the
the impulse to to action of a particular
kind and I think we should probably come
back around to that what we're calling
action that that impulse a lot of time
can come from I think there's something
within our culture which places a high
premium on on action and I guess what I
feel like I'm being called into is a
humility so it's not a denial of action
but it is a acceptance in this instant
that that we are in as Arthur put it in
in a moment of chaos insofar as there's
high uncertainty it's difficult to
discern here cause and effect if if at
all
and so there's a requirement to come to
terms with that and and there is an
impulse which I've noticed in
professional circles and elsewhere also
and even just in what I'm watching
unfolding in in the media there's an
impulse to act to control act to are to
to manage and I'm noticing the the
language that is being used even in in
so far as that is being attempted its to
clearly define the enemy and it's to go
on to a war footing and it's to wage a a
fierce battle and defeat
this this thing which to me reeks of
more of the same more of the same mom
from what we've always done and I I
completely expect that to have some
pretty big
yes shortcomings if not outright our
failing is in the in the months ahead
and so when I'm talking about a greater
sort of stillness and and their presence
in order to notice what I'm talking
about there is a as a kind of humility
which at the outset that that that any
any action that we might do we might
generate out of this sort of and you
know you have subsequent discussions I
would I would like for me to be based
out of the humility that this is is it's
very little about this which is in is
within my direct control that there is a
a sense of a greater calling back into
into it into unity with with the greater
organism which is our our planet in some
sense I consider this a a kind of a
process of deceit of this intermediation
in so far as we've been mediated our
lives of in media and the other things
that we've valued have been so heavily
mediated by all of these very fragile
structures for such of such a long time
which is coming great benefit but then
just under the surface as Arthur I think
described just under the surface there
is a fragility whereby if just nudged a
little further it collapses and so I
always feel like I I feel it's it's it's
necessary for me to dwell in that that
that space for a little while
- I'd well in that with that space of
being decent immediated to the extent to
the limited degree that I have been so
far apparently affected in a minor way
so far so so as to have that that that
deep humility underpin any action that
we that we choose I guess it's a it's
almost almost always the precautionary
principle insofar as I don't understand
a fraction of this situation and I'm
grasping it at frameworks and all that
and reference points to be able to make
sense of it at the same time as feeling
pulled to actually let go of all of
those frameworks ok can I add a couple
of things to that that really makes a
lot of sense James and that's deeply
reflective which is what's required in
situations like this this is where
sense-making comes in in the Keynesian
framework which is this framework for
decision making in what they call
ordered or unordered spaces so this
comes out of the work of David Snowden
in an ordered space this is like a
simple or maybe a complicated or an
obvious circumstance there's a direct
relationship between cause and effect so
you know if I do this that's going to
happen if I drop my pen that's gonna
fall to the earth at 9.8 meters per
second per second you're depending on
the elevation and wind resistance you
know we can calculate all of that it's
known in unordered spaces even if it's
not known at the time it can be learnt
yeah
so the difference for is simple and
complicated is that you can you know it
right now if
simple you can come to learn it and you
understand the relationship between
cause and effect in the complicated
space in the complex space which is the
complex and chaos or the unawarded
spaces or the unordered context that
we're dealing with and human society is
complex it's not complicated it's
complex what that means is there is not
a predictable or repeatable relationship
between cause and effect now we can come
to understand why things happen in
retrospect but we can't reliably predict
what's what's going to happen and and
now in this space what we already know
can actually cause more damage than
stepping into the unknown because what
we know is based on past contexts and
past patterns now if we go back and look
at you know previous pandemics and we're
drawing experiences from that even
though it's not in our own personal
experiences
we may be making better decisions but
we're really uncomfortable because we
just don't know as you said you know
what we're trying to do is is to get
that control to get more understanding
of what works and what doesn't and
that's why in these circumstances the
you know act sense respond is better for
us I mean if you think you know what to
do a less humble person was our life
this is easy we just got to go out and
do that you know chances are you could
kill lots and lots of people and in in
effect that's what Trump did right I
mean he just denied that it was there
and no no no no we're gonna be back to
work by Easter and you know it's all
okay and whatever and all of a sudden
you know sort of Americans have more
cases of Kobe then than anyone else in
the world China included so in assuming
you know and trying to take that control
position in the unknown where you can't
predict the relationship between cause
and effect you then they can actually
create a lot more damage then then you
solve that doesn't mean that control is
completely wrong control what you can
and then make sense of the stuff that
you don't know use the bits that are
controllable and manage those to gather
more insights more knowledge more
understanding within the existing
context which then informs your decision
making in the bits that you don't know
and you you have to literally learn as
you go so you know Sean's reflective
practice he talked about you know
learning in action and learning on a
channel LearningRx earnest we did this
last time how can that inform us
learning in action is about well okay oh
my god well gone down this path whoops
hang on a minute you know that's not
working and and cycling as you're doing
it and this is where things like agile
methodology comes from you're cycling
because you thought you knew but now
you've actually discovered in the moment
not later but in the moment you learn
and adjust according to that learning so
you're learning real-time and adjusting
your path of action real time and that's
what we need to do here in order to not
control the situation
but learn more about what's going on in
the relationships between you know world
leaders has been phenomenal
they've just gathered the data but how
do we use that data in order to inform
our decisions and things like well what
the hell did South Korea and who was it
Singapore do that we're not doing what
is it and would that work for us maybe
it won't but at least there's an
indication that they're doing something
that is actually working and it's
working better than what we're doing and
that's how the real kind of learning
happens
okay so the importance of the importance
of a right relationship a right
relationship between humility and
nevertheless the courage to actually act
and make sense of that as we go which i
think is a really interesting dynamic
that we can use to understand what it is
to participate in a conversation itself
because often we can come to
interactions and think we know the thing
to say right someone opens their mouth
and starts talking and we know already
what we want to say in response
oh but the macrocosm of this whole
situation that's playing out in the
world right now it's it's quite easy for
people to look out the window and see
people don't really know actually what's
quite going on here we can't really make
sense of it and that very process it
also plays out in a microcosm of a
conversation so we can learn I think how
to be in a better relationship with the
world
through learning what it is to be in
better relationship with each other in
the process of making sense itself in it
and and I wonder the process like when
people here making sense I wonder if
there's a selection of the population
who hears that and thinks it's you know
a too restrictive intellectual kind of
matter in a way that's prohibitive and
something that's been prohibitive of
them being a part of because it's like
oh I'm not I'm not smart you know I
couldn't I couldn't do that or I feel
you know I don't feel worthy of doing
that kind of thing you know or this is
going too fast for me or something and
often it's really that they're having an
emotional response to the thing and it's
not really even an intellectual response
they're having an emotional response in
relationship to their own kind of
identity in a space and and and the key
thing here is to recognize that actually
emotions are a totally reasonable and
necessary part of this and always
involved and so making sense is not
about it
not some just a purely abstract thing
it's a deep it's it's crucial to be
oriented we are already oriented by
something we're caring about and those
who are more in touch with what it is
they are caring about and more in touch
with their emotions and can be in
relationship with others through the
process of making sense are extremely
crucial to the whole the whole process
here so this humility thing is really
interesting because we have to be
willing to say I don't know and sit in
that and people are always talking about
that you know be with the not knowing
and I don't mean to say that you know
with division the people who are saying
this are invariably people I respect for
that kind of wisdom and then there's the
part of it that is this attempt then to
say some things about what we maybe do
know because it's not about being stuck
not knowing we are doing both things
right so the courage then to step out
and express you know like what is it you
have understood so as an example of your
own articulation James and this is not
to turn it back on you in any way like
that because I I know you I know you
know this but in the articulation of the
importance of coming into your not
knowing you are communicating a certain
knowing you have about how to be in
right relationship with the process of
making sense of what they care about and
making sense of the world so these are
the kind of things I'd like to I'd like
to presents for people listening in to
in particular not knowing is this
perfectly is it so important and having
the courage to say you don't understand
and then as a listener to recognize if
you can add to that if you can help in
some way but but but not not to try and
not to try and go let's just chuck
everything we can at this right now to
sit in that too and have the humility to
say look I can't speak to all of that
but here's what I do understand and how
does that inform our situation
this move - movement towards
collaboration and a sense that together
we we can be in touch with more is
something that I I just like to
emphasize it just as a bit of a meta
point about what we're doing right now
because as I said this is something that
I I'm inviting people very much to get
involved with hmm I think the UM Sakai
dynamics that are at play here and not
always at play and how important it is
to to be thinking of that when you're
when you're participating in any kind of
conversation I think that's that's
always been something of what was
remarkable but just coming off what you
were saying Tim knowing maybe what level
of attribution you're you're applying
when you're participating or reacting or
responding okay well where are we having
conversations that are on the basis of
of something that's directly observable
as data as information that we could
easily come around and inform of former
pretty common view on why are we going
up in you know ladders of inference
we're starting to attribute personal
values experiences that that create a
reality around what's what's being
observed and even further up where we're
starting to really apply those societal
you know values and beliefs and mental
models that create the reality of what
we're observing so I think that
and knowing that it's okay in the
conversation to be saying yeah I'm
having an emotional reaction to this I'm
probably you know from an attribution
perspective as I can it psychodynamics
perspective I'm I'm sensing this in
feeling this through maybe a lens or a
mental model that I've created and
that's why I feel this way or perhaps my
contribution here is very heavily being
affected by attribution that comes from
societal views that I've taken on that
like that I see as truths or as mental
models that I ascribe to so I think that
that that level of what we say humility
part of that is the knowledge and the
acceptance that it's okay and to be
reacting whether that is to directly
observable things that are easy to agree
on or emotional reactions that are
coming from there were many different
personal mental models that we've taken
on all those societal models so I think
that's it's always remarkable in every
into human interaction to to stop and
sense that in yourself but what's more
remarkable is being comfortable enough
in a space to to make it known and
advocate and say actually I see what's
happening here my my mental model at the
moment is being driven by this there's
emotion attached to it and I'm
contributing this and it's okay
that's um yeah that's I really felt that
that that deeply there's a and even I
guess in in your reflections Tim and
Angela just then on acknowledging I
guess where you are you are you running
your scripts is important and and it's
not to actually call that out as a
necessarily as a as a problem but to be
aware of it and I know that that Tim you
mentioned Nora Bateson then who and her
work and I know that one of the
observations from the warm data lab
experiences that actually the reason why
it seems to work is because what it
calls people into in terms of those
interactions and those engagements with
others is is a really human and a
natural form of engagements of just
telling stories and so usually when when
people are invited into the conversation
of a particular topic we did a bunch of
two different contexts and let's say the
context is the other topic is what it is
well being in the context of of
Education and that question triggers
them typically to tell a personal their
personal anecdote which is laden heavily
with emotion and and that through that
exchange of others doing that and the
mutual learning that that that they can
they can therefore unfold is from from
those other it's it's with the
perspective of of complexity it's
acknowledging that we as human beings as
our our sense making apparatus
he's not completely like neocortex it's
not all about the rationality in actual
fact the vast majority of it is whole of
body it it's its emotion it's all
intertwined and unless we can have
conversations where we are permitted and
enabled to bring that completely to bear
then we're not bringing the the full
complexity of our how of our humanity to
bear and as a result the kinds of
actions that we will I will formulate if
that's the right language off the back
of that are also not going to be complex
and and I think that you know I think
you mentioned here Dave Snowden's what
work and I know that the the exercise in
that the anecdote on the Elector circles
is playing on it of the same thing they
want people to be able to to give an
experience from from within because
that's going to give you the data that
you need to be able to understand what
is the real experience not what is just
a cold a statistical data telling you
what is the real lived experience of of
complexity and what what are the
interesting things if if anybody has any
any concerns about not be I want to
engage in this kind of process because
it's how I mind and all sort of
intellectual and and after the purpose
of this conversation it might be skewed
in that direction just by virtue of the
fact of each of our backgrounds but it's
absolutely critical that we have that
that broader diversity which is able to
sense making in different ways what
we've noticed with the world data labs
is that what it's brought into a
community of people who is say a
workplace or a university who are really
hardwired in their in their roles as
intellectuals as thickest also it's it's
actually a flatter dynamic
they actually have a harder time pulling
out the complexity out of the question
that if you bring it into a community
who doesn't have that level of education
who is operating on raw experience and
able to conjure the anecdotes been able
to able to type I'm going to tell that
first person the experience of the world
and to be able to exchange that and to
be able to then I then notice where are
the points of tension where are the
points of intersection that's what's
really really astounding or it should it
be but but it's like you know people
have been I think it's probably only a
recent phenomenon where we've where
we've we focus the sense-making right up
here you know and probably to integrate
birth and then on the other hand to add
a great detriment to because we've it's
it's reduced the solutions to to utter
things which don't do our humanity
justice and so I yeah I think I think
that you know in part just I just coming
back to that idea of the of the script
what your are you running it to extent I
I have to acknowledge that that called
other context humility I'm not sure how
much of a script that actually is but I
think words born of is partly an
emotional reaction for for me to
watching again and again the other
violence that has been has been done by
acting too soon and and so there is a
there is a slight recoil at that at that
at that notion and and so I'm very I'm
I'm watching that in myself as this
conversation is unfolding and and and
but that's where it's born out of it's
born out of the deep desire to avoid the
kinds of unintended consequences that we
have failed to avoid timer timing
as as a as a civilization or even in our
individual lives so so thanks for I
guess helping to bring that conversation
or around to be able to from you
acknowledge that dig a bit deeper into
what why that is we're on I'm starting
yes it's beautifully articulated James
really beautifully articulated yeah this
this optimization function of the
neocortex yeah the the efficiency
component is what came up for me a lot
out there at the end there this this the
mistake of yeah it's the mistake of
being who I suppose purely data-driven
when you've already defined the context
in advance and the objective was just to
make more money in a shorter in a
shorter more competitively successful
way now that's obviously a bit broad to
tar everything with that brush but there
is a there is a clear relation there for
me it's if we isolate the parts of
ourselves that just looked her optimize
something that's been cut away from the
whole there's value in that but only to
the extent that that has a relationship
of adaptation again back to the whole
and how do we tune back again into the
whole how do we tune back into the right
relationship with each other ourselves
and ecology all of those interdependent
processes that we find ourselves in and
that we're encountered that we encounter
every day offer
through a lens of this truncated
complicatedness as evidenced by our
supermarkets threatening to run out of
food or wherever it is and disrupted
supply chains and the relative ease of
that but the ease of getting the food
when everything's going okay and then
the utter ignorance we have when we
can't we can't get it and the fear we
have because there's just been these
layers of efficiency to build on top of
one another and all of a sudden the
embeddedness of that complicated system
the embeddedness of that efficient
structure that we in principle can
understand how it's working once we fix
the core dynamics that we're playing
with here but you know it's that short
term it's that short term thinking we
fall away from a relationship with
transcendent we lose awareness of how we
are connected and now we have an
opportunity to come into that awareness
we have an opportunity to come into that
connectedness and that is the exciting
thing about this time so what I'm left
with is actually feeling like I want to
optimize very much how it is I
personally go about entering into
processes of humility with other people
right in a way
[Music]
I just want to be more efficient at
opening the space and being part of some
coordination inspiration mechanism for
people to engage in things like this and
there's something I have to be aware of
there a lot and that can come out very
simply and we'll just what is my
capacity so if I decide to sort of
optimize myself or try to optimize
myself beyond what the whole of me can
sustain then I'm gonna burn out and not
be able to do it and so we always have
to be aware of of the stresses we're
putting on all aspects of the system and
recognizing that we're not actually
aware of all of those aspects of the
system and that's and that's a strange
thing yeah that's like I feel the I
guess the are you pre-empting you the
burden of what what could what could be
there in in trying to perform you like
that that kind of action and I get that
that um that's something that I felt
also I just I was trying to tether that
to what ather was saying earlier about
how you act how you act in a chaotic
environment of high uncertainty unknown
unknown cause and effect and what that
looks like and I'm reminded of I guess I
think it was does anyone know you you
and simple at all no so he's he's
actually a friend of danger students but
so he was out in Gippsland
late last year and he he reminded I
think I've heard of previously but he
reminded me of the concept of how the
the special forces operate in
environments of uncertainty where the
battle-plan kind of goes awry and like
as much as I loathe to use a war
metaphor
I think this can be quite easily adapted
to a to two-piece time in great utility
for in because it actually requires
humility to be able to do so if if if
the battle plan goes awry then then
their other their default position is to
is to do three things it's to is to keep
moving this is to stay in touch and it's
it's to is to head for the high ground
and that's not directed from from from
the the war room because they don't know
the context other local context in which
any given you know squadron a battalion
whoever is is operating so those
decisions have to be made and acted upon
and locally and it's very much in terms
of that act sense respond your framework
and so what i i'm reminded of there if
that's the appropriate way to act in
this environment if there are actions to
be done it seems to me that one really
core component of that is that it's
acting in whatever capacity you can
within the constraints of above that
capacity within whatever you consider to
be your local context and so and that
that could be geographically bounded but
if you have have networks and
relationships that span the globe that
you are able to able to consider a local
to you in some sense then it's it's
equally the same principle i think we've
lost after have we we have he will make
his way back in again just like you did
before so please continue james that's
um i think that's very very interesting
so is it's a and it's a way of getting
back to that idea of the overwhelm that
can occur when you're thinking about
your capacity in comparison to the
enormous size of the
challenges the uncertainty that we have
ahead you know what's funny what came to
mind then was my daughter actually
actually both my daughter's do a two and
four years old have been oddly obsessed
with I was frozen to the dizzy film and
I know that the likes of Jordan Peterson
were not a big fan of frozen part one
but I suspect that he might be really
impressed by frozen too because it's a
much more much more nuanced uh their
storyline and it's really okay
like I don't know how they how they how
the creators came up with this but it's
really timely because what it's
describing have you have you seen the
film edge thanks to you haven't seen I
actually recommend it to you because
what it it it seems to me like the other
narrative is informed heavily by ideas
about the liminal and about what you do
when when there's such high uncertainty
even to the point where they've got a
whole song in this which is about I
think it was Princess Anna who sees when
when you can see no future then then
then the only thing you can do is the
next right thing if you kind of like
like I said that now my daughter's you
know he's beginning to understand how to
how to operate in in the liminal with
that very simple bit of of advice but I
mean you know like Jack about it but the
actuality there's that to make me back
to this this idea of operating in the
context of your of your of your local
operating in the context of what it is
you can perceive and that you have the
capacity to be it you know the time the
emotional capacity the intellectual
capacity then that is the domain in
which which feels to me like the most
appropriate domain for action and I know
that that that Angelo for instance could
probably talk about this because I think
that what he's done in the last eight or
so months has been precisely to to to
gather up other decisions and the
changes that he knew he he needed to
make in order to affect what was most
local to him to from what I can tell an
edge pretty enormous positive effect and
if so I guess to end on a question there
that I I think to invite people into
that and even there's you know there's a
bit of JPM is to because it's about
since taking responsibility think and
cleaning your own room to an extent you
know is that because that's actually
what for a lot of people who are not in
in the position that I mean you know
where I've got a degree I don't have a
lot of time but I've got it I've got a
degree of security that allows me to
have these kinds of conversations which
is extending beyond what others can I
can necessarily do so just inviting them
into like if this is my way if they're
beginning to act in that in that local
one way to be able to able to gather a
bit of sovereignty that might not look
the same for the next person but what
are the mobilizing principles which
which invite them into that and give
them some way to orient themselves and
you know I would suggested other
princess Arnaz advice is actually
actually some of the best that will
probably get do the next right thing
yeah I underlined that in my little
notes here bore that I underlined
everything else yeah awesome awesome
well Angela I'm interested to hear you
follow up from that because James did
allude to to you here in acting in your
local community in a way that involves
many of these principles I personally
love to hear the story of that if you
don't mind sharing there's something
else more resonant go ahead but please I
just think I want to I think James was
talking about principles and just before
anything else just my reaction to that
is one of those is around a principle of
minimalism and not just in the sort of
popular sense of that in terms of
materiality or material things but just
minimalism as a broader concept you know
extending to know the monopolization of
your time in in any sense I think that's
that's a real challenge but to be seeing
your time as being one of the most you
know highest value commodities
that's not renewable and positioning
yourself in a way that you that you're
true to that and I think that's that's
definitely from it from a principles
perspective I think one that's made a
difference
there is there is no there's no way to
turn time into a renewable resource oh
and that being at the heart of an
approach to minimalism I think is really
interesting what it can do because in
the end like the cleaning your room type
analogy is really about creating the
time it's about not having the the
clutter mental or physical that gets in
the way of property to do maybe
something else that is more meaningful
whether it's a conversation like this
whether it's some an opportunity to you
know go fishing with your child or
whatever that is factor that you can
that you can give yourself that time to
find what is more meaningful and then
apply more of that really precious
resource on to it so I think that's one
thing that's been a real kind of clear
yeah counterpoint to just kind of test
you know how much of this is it's just
scripted how much of this is just yeah
rolling out another mental model or how
much of this is really being driven by
by me at the core so yeah so really
that's that's really the driver work
less in terms of that monopolization
again not everyone has that opportunity
but if you do I think it's um I think
it's something that you you mayn't maybe
you're being called to do that hearing
the call
and with a little bit of extra time not
a lot just a little bit of extra time
and the opportunity to devote to that
consideration of what is important to me
a lot of things can change really
quickly but I think you know Arthur was
saying it before you know the way things
are set up and it's they were talking
before about optimization and supply
chains and no jobs and all these things
that people devote a lot of time to
they're really not set up to make it
easy for people to to get back time
but what's really interesting now is
that there's a bit of a hybrid going on
that maybe the jobs that are essential
are continuing however they're
continuing in a in a very new
environment an environment to me looks
more closely like the kind of
environment that I was trying to
generate for me and my family regardless
of pandemics so people are at home
people are surrounded by their children
or by their you know their friends or
housemates pets no I'm just really
interested to see what this is going to
do what is post covert life going to
look like and what I'm really afraid of
is are we not going to have taken the
advantage of maybe some time that's
given or new environment that's been
given to us in this situation to notice
how valuable these opportunities are to
be in a different environment to be
closer to your loved ones to you know to
soak up that joy of having a pet next to
you all day my fear is more that we're
not going to we're not going to see that
it's being valuable enough that it means
to be retained and it needs to become
what we see is a default back to that
rush rush rush around you know do our
cycle of activity pay our empower
mortgage and again the so the handcuffs
are not not given them the time to have
that opportunity for a circuit breaker
so this is this potentially could be a
huge circuit breaker for how our society
I guess identifies what's really
valuable and how we try to set up a
postcode well that that honors the value
of these things that are seemingly don't
have value I think James talked about
you know before that example of an of a
person who's a homemaker
or a person who stock shelves you know
or a person who makes sure your computer
is working you're not not even down with
some virus like there's a lot of valuing
this stuff a person who works from home
you know I think this is really
interesting for me now and again
noticing trying to notice and fingers
and toes crossed that we don't get to a
point that we just go oh well that's
over now let's go back to what was a way
of life that I think was really
constricting for people to have that
opportunity to find to discuss what's
valuable to find it for themselves and
then make some changes so that their
life becomes more about that um like you
you really did a good job they're
talking about the like what we're
talking earlier about about the value
because that's I guess at the heart of
it that appears to be that the fear is
that we will that we are given it we are
being given in some sense a lot of us
maybe not equally and uniformly but a
lot of us hopefully enough of us being
given a glimpse again as to what's
actually valuable and it's it's so
interesting to me that one of the
discussions that is playing out in the
in the mainstream media is the
discussion around you know in terms of
what's going to be open and what's going
to be closed the question is what is
essential and and I think that that's
actually is a super pertinent question
as people are going into their their you
know your their homes they're being
reminded of what is essential because
you know one part of you is is thinking
about well you know there's a there's
kind of a survival impulse that kicks in
after when you got a little bit of a
panic going on so that brings to the
fore the question
around food medications and your your
your healthcare but what you you're more
or less comfortable than that is not
evaporating too quickly or or to
destabilize then you begin to look at
those those other things that are
slightly higher up the Maslow's
hierarchy in terms of your relationships
and your your well-being and that we're
given the opportunity now to be as as
you say age with our you know with our
children like I'm spending I'm getting
up early in order to work and then I'm
finishing early and I'm getting the
afternoons with my children I didn't
have that book before now that's not
that's not a luxury that everybody has
necessarily but I know quite a few
people who are experiencing that that
you know it's not to say that that is
always super easy that's actually taken
some some adjustment and it's made me
realize that you know I've had so little
time to do that that I almost don't feel
practiced at making fun for my children
and so when I see ads pop up on on
Facebook or articles which are asking
the question you know or which are
putting putting forward articles about
how to how to play with your kids
journey in lockdown and at the same time
is that making me feel sad about the
state of that that that's even an
article that has to be written there's
this subpart of it in myself also that
I'm disappointed that on that I have not
been that I've not been afforded or
taken the opportunity previously to to
really pay attention to that to really
pay attention to it
but now just in the last few days it's
just been a whole new experience so just
learning as I'm as I'm going along when
the richness that is he's developing
it's still challenging sometimes you
know at 24 years old that's kind of what
they do they challenge you but um but
then the richness of experience that I'm
having as an embodied experience that I
could have I could hypothesize about
previously but I didn't have it to be
able to say it with with conviction now
what we've got I think you know on the
positive implications of this of this
Osbourne situation is a whole population
a large percentage of which hopefully
will have a similar experience yes it's
going to be trying and all of that but
maybe with enough space enough my
stillness and time to be able to work
our way into that to be able to learn
ourselves into that then that creates an
embodied experience which you actually
like people are kind of throwing out the
hash tag I like don't go back to normal
I think it's it feels like there is a
possibility that that's almost going to
be always going to be redundant in terms
of it being so imbued in the collective
consciousness that that arm the hash tag
would be too obvious to even put out
there that's a hope anyway I know I
acknowledged that it's not all roses for
for everybody there are some some
downsides also for those households that
there are you know have issues with
domestic violence and with abuse and all
that kind of things so that's a whole
different kettle of fish maybe there's
enough of the positive to help us to
make that shift hmm yeah beautifully
said James and an Angelo before so I'd
like to say something and then open up a
question that we can perhaps close on
and I'd be interested in if if Angelo
what you've sort of been working on low
bears on this on this on the question
but first the point I'd like to make
which is that following on from what
you're referencing here James and and
the the in response to the fear that you
presence tangelo that what happens if we
don't take the time to notice the value
we're being offered to perceive in this
time and James with your examples of the
value you are perceiving in this time
this increased opportunity for
relationality with with people we care
about where that is the case and to
otherwise evaluate how essential what
I'm doing is and oh and importantly that
that if this lasts for long enough that
this presence this stillness can become
an embodiment that did we can that this
can inform our consciousness that
there's some transforms us in an
important degree well I'd like to make
and and I think that's that's necessary
right otherwise we will just go back to
normal or worse or we have to learn
certainly this is about learning and so
what I'd like to say is that it is these
conversations not only not only but what
I'm interested in is connecting
connecting the small world networks that
are maybe forming in the family these
perceptions of stillness is what's worth
caring about
and then to share that understanding
with others it's in the intermeshing of
that in the development of that
embodiment that that's going to inform
let that's a mechanism that I see as
being something which can enable us to
come out of this whatever this is and
whatever out of it is with that wider
sense of connectedness because a fear I
have is that like so many things and I
experience this so much in conversation
sometimes is that you can be you know in
this and for those just listening you
know I'm making it
reference with my hands to just a sort
of a tights fear you can be in a space
you can inhabit a domain with someone
and it can be wonderful and then you
might leave that and we'll where's the
continuity where's the continuity
between that we're feeling now and
everyone else altered states of
consciousness and the whole this is
integration fundamentally how do we
integrate the what we are learning in
this time to it within the collective so
that the collective is itself and
becomes part of the network we're
connecting nodes in the network here so
that's why this call to action of to
participate in conversations like this
is so important in this time and that
doesn't that could be through whatever
for whatever forum that is but in in
sharing these stories and sharing these
experiences in collaboratively
resonating about what we are realizing
is there to care about that is one way I
think that we can be taking action now
that is informing what we come out of
this with it is it is building that mesh
of connections you know and and your
piece in that sharing is necessary for
that
it's truly necessary so this call for
deep participation has been there for
some time is now is now very much
important now so the sharing of presents
together you know this is what it comes
down to being here now together having
are here and now informed by the being
of each other and that's the point I'd
like to make and and of course I invite
either of you to just respond to that as
it is but the question I had in mind is
what have either of you learned in
taking actions locally in in reaching
out and building community in in
Gippsland taking and taking the view of
how do we take responsibility for our
community what has been learned in terms
of
helps people step into that space of
building connectivity together in a way
that's I suppose related importantly to
what I'm trying to get out here with the
sharing of presence and and otherwise I
just want to say thank you so much for
this wonderful conversation
you
Wow
you
yeah oh I love what you're saying I
thought I see it I can feel it
I don't know I don't know where there's
some certainty in
what a coupe contributors options around
that thoughts where there is a little
bit more certainty or comfort for me is
that without the local focus and that
level of localness could be down to the
individual the atomic view or the family
your neighbor your neighborhood your
street whatever that is without the
focus on that for me first or not first
as in sequentially but at least it needs
to be where it begins
even now that that's been something that
I have been trying to do more so I still
don't feel like it's giving me any kind
of great insight into what's what's the
potential for that further connection
for that
that expansion what was the word that
you used the integration I don't know I
still feel like I'm struggling with that
we're on my
way to kind of ask her a related
question is like how does how does
community build how does it does the
benefits Geographic or otherwise and I
and I think that it is I don't know like
I'd like on having having difficulty
coming up with a really coherent answer
to that question I don't really know no
but I have some intuition I guess that
that that question around how does one
actually actually build community give
us gives maybe some some direction
insofar as the the answer to that for me
is is really with Ajax and with H with H
engagement and and so I'm I'm thinking
about how there are different types of
people who might be only listening or
who might join these kinds of
conversations in the future and gonna
have differing appetites for the meta
framing my conversation and they're
gonna have have different appetites for
the super project-oriented down in the
in the in the grassroots action based v
stuff and it's going to be that's a
whole whole spectrum and I think that
that that idea of just being able to do
what it is within your world that is he
so he's most immediate and that his most
his most needed he's actually a way to
build to build community and for and for
for me just to give one I give one
concrete example of that
one of the things that we've done in the
last couple of weeks is to put together
a group like like private Facebook group
just for just for those of mine in in my
Street and it hasn't been a lot of
activity on it yet and there's been
varying levels of enthusiasm and
interestingly even one even I mean one
neighbor that I approached a few doors
up had kind of said ah you know I'm good
thanks alright I'm good I've got our
networks like I came well it's it's
obviously not not salient for them so so
move on and and what I guess what what
we were hoping for there was to at least
establish the possibility of new
connections which we we don't know what
our situation is as neighbors is going
to be in the next three months or six
months and at the moment I think people
are kind of like oh yeah that's kind of
a cool idea not really super needed
right now but cool idea let's do that
let's see where it goes so that's me
pre-empting a potential need and another
one is as simple as the kinds of local
local acts that are taking place to
support critical businesses and it's and
it's not the project itself like for
instance the other local Gazette the
newspaper which has been around for 110
you know years or so is having a pretty
hard time because obviously obviously
businesses are closing there therefore
not advertising why would they advertise
if they're closing therefore because
that's not making the money it needs to
continue going now from a purely a
utilitarian point of view you could say
well that's a good thing to engage in
its supporting that that institution
because it's
what part of our local media okay fine
but but the corollary of doing that is
actually what's really interesting for
me in that once you begin to engage in
that with others in your community like
I'm meeting new people that I have not
have not met in my community before I'm
forming new relationships that were not
there I'm strengthening it existing ones
all through pretty small it in some ways
perhaps on a grand scale they're trivial
acts on a local local scale they are
they may actually be really significant
and so I hope through each act of an
attempt to to strengthen that that
community for our mutual support that
that we are able to invite people
increasingly into a space where they
understand what is essential what is
valued and and that they don't need to
engage in them in in the meta
conversation you can it's fun too but
but they don't need to so so I'm
thinking it like it's essential for me
to engage in that I feel I feel like
it's kind of like in my bones but but I
I am but I know it's not for everybody
so I'm thinking about how to make that
conversation irrelevant to everybody or
how that unfolds at scale if you like
yeah anyway it's it sounds parochial got
actually in joking I've been joking
around with the term neo parochialism
because it's kind of like a its
operating on on the principle that well
if there is rot right action at the
local scale toward your community
towards your your ecology your family
then if it's truly you know what I what
Daniel schmuck Dan burger would call
Omni considerate if it's truly Omni
considerate
right action then it's not only good for
only good for your community and your
ecology it's actually good for a lot so
yeah I I've been I've been toying around
with that one lately just as a as a way
to frame this kind of it's kind of my
said it is parochial in some sense that
it's narrowly focused but it's for the
point of agency it's for the point of
being able to do what you can do within
your capacity and do it and do it
powerfully and with humility and that's
so beautiful James know thyself be
thyself take the next right action yeah
yeah and so much more I was being a bit
glib with the whole thing but but yeah
man this has been awesome and you're
someone who just personally I found
exemplify this as much as anyone I've
I've had the pleasure of meeting over
the last six months or so the connection
you made between Norah and myself and
what we were able to create there and
side people reaching out to me from
different parts of the world saying they
valued it and that it was helpful for
them and so you in extending you know an
invitation to me and helping coordinate
something that was both very vitalizing
for me and my girlfriend to do helped us
create something that extended its value
in in just such the way that you that
you talk about in taking that right
action to your capacity locally and
having that effect and ripple on
throughout the ecology and from what I
see in the various communities where
part of online yeah it's a it's
inspirational to see how you're sort of
showing up and doing things so I
appreciate you very much and and Angela
I appreciate you too as well sharing
this time in conversation here and I
look forward to what the
what the future holds and yeah I'm
pleased to be on this on this journey
with you both in whatever capacity that
is so yeah I'm going to stop the
recording now if that's all right with
you and just say thank you thank one's
own awesome thanks keep doing what
you're doing team it's very important
yes thank you