[Music]
this meeting is significant in a number
of ways one way being that all of the
participants here are what I would call
best-in-class for the work that they do
so they exemplify the best practices
that are needed for doing things like
restoring forests across large areas of
land or for things like building
economic models for how to help
communities participate in regenerative
practices and so what I'm feeling as I'm
sitting in this group of people over the
last few days is that we actually have
the ability to do this so unlike other
meetings that I've been to where I felt
there was mostly the ability to do it
here we have a match of people capable
and a place that is ready and this is
beautifully exemplified by Rancho Margot
because as you walk around these grounds
and look at what they've done here you
have this feeling of human beings who
care about a piece of land walking into
the jungle and making it a place that
exemplifies regeneration and that as we
sit down for every meal we know the food
was grown within walking distance of
where we're sitting and all of the
buildings are built from materials taken
from the land around us and carried by
hand or with small equipment that's on a
human scale it lets us know that not
only is this tangible impossible but
that it's already happening so this
combination of being in a place where
it's already happening and we can feel
the significance of what it is like to
live into that on a daily basis while
we're here enables us to dream really
big and believe we can actually achieve
it so what I feel from this meeting is a
sense of inevitability
which doesn't mean that we'll definitely
succeed but that we have stacked the
deck for our success and so if we don't
do our very best right now to try to
succeed this inevitability this feeling
that is so urgently needed will fade
away so as we're here I feel a moral
calling to step up and take the actions
that are needed and it's something that
this meeting in this place together have
have created within me
[Music]
you
[Music]