[Music]
over the last month or so been putting
out a few films that we shot with ken
wilber and the integral philosopher and
they've had a lot of views a lot of
really interesting comments a little bit
of really interesting feedback both in
the comments on the videos and also kind
of on some of the integral forums and
we're recording this because we wanted
to kind of talk about why we think that
Ken's work is so significant Y the
integral work is so significant and also
why where we see it fitting into the
conversation that's kind of emergent at
the moment we talked to John Verve a key
about this quite recently and John bhave
key also kind of has this sense there's
the potential for the integration of a
lot of the wisdom traditions of the past
with modern science cognitive science in
his perspective but also this kind of
map that integral talked about a long
time ago there could be a sense that
this is the time that integral talked
about like integral and we're also going
to explain a few of the sort of key
concepts of integral why we think
they're relevant and why we think that
they they illustrate or illuminate
what's happening at the moment and one
of the key points is that integral
predicted that there would be a kind of
new level of consciousness called
integral that would be able to where a
lot of the paradoxes of previous levels
of consciousness would be resolved and
that's sort of the potential for a new
synthesis would would come about I think
it's worth just even if we rewind all
the way to what what is integral because
it's quite a complicated philosophy for
for anyone looking from the outside he
doesn't engage with it but and why does
it matter to the conversation we have
been covering like how does it relate to
the intellectual darkweb phenomena and
and everything else we've had on the
channel I think if I had to break down
in incredibly simple terms I think one
of the things that integral is about as
a kind of philosophical model is that we
as people and as societies never stop
developing and growing
we keep evolving so it's interesting
present in our culture we have no
problem recognizing that an 8 year old
is different in many ways to an 18 year
old just you know we develop but we have
this sense that at some point in our
early 20s maybe we just stopped
developing and we're just an adult then
integral points out and not just
integral as we're saying so there's lots
of different developmental models people
like Robert Keegan and many many more a
lot of people have put a lot of work
into looking at how do we develop over
time and I suppose the genius of Ken
Wilber and integral is that he made
amongst other things a map of maps so he
took all not all of them but many many
many different developmental models and
synthesized them into one meta model
I suppose so and why I think that's
important is just before we go into the
different aspects of it having a
framework on the world and what's
happening in our culture and why people
can't get along with each other and all
that the polarity we're seeing having a
developmental model as a map the map is
not the territory there's probably
another thing we should talk about but
having that model makes things easier to
navigate and understand in my opinion
has been certainly for me I think for us
in general with the channel it's been
quite a useful filter through which to
see and understand more about what's
going on in the culture right now yeah
and it's important as well to sort of
just take a step back as well because I
think one of the the problems with
integral is that because there's a lot
of cognitive framework there's the
colors there's the different quadrants
it can get very the the conversation can
become very jargon heavy very quickly
and it can become a very inside baseball
kind of conversation as you'll see if
you go to any of the integral sites and
so but this but this developmental piece
the idea that how we think is as
important as what we're thinking which
is also at John for a key is also
talking about quite a lot which is
really interesting with cognitive
science is at least as
because it actually frames what we think
far more than we realize and that that
an our sense is that that developmental
piece is a key ingredient in the
evolving conversation that the
intellectual dark web is a part of we're
a part of this sense that people have
where the conversation is going
somewhere there is a need for a
developmental the developmental piece is
such a key part of that and integral
ease is is probably the best-known
school that deals with the developmental
model but it's not the only one and it's
also for example Jean Piaget who was
Jordan Pederson talks about as a key
influencer looked at kind of how
children develop as a but also his
ultimate aim was to unite science and
ethics religion morality and was able to
do that in a way of kind of looking at
how we develop so I think it's important
to put the sort of flag there and say
that it's not just about integral and
also I think what we're interested in
doing and I've seen a few people reflect
on this on online it's like is now a
good time to look at the legacy of
integral like what it's what it's done
really well what it's done less less
well and I think so and I think that's
something that we're interested in
looking at we've got an interview with
Jamie wheel coming up who's one of our
kind of real who's been a star of the
channel for quite a while and also has a
real history with integrity was part of
kind of the integral movement from quite
a while ago so just going to play a clip
from him that we've got in the the film
that's coming up it seems to be the case
as we move into these you know nominally
transpersonal communities is that all of
these thought leaders who have been
breaking trail right there but they
brought they brought through something
profound something unique something
useful they're bringing a tool to our
shared collective
and by default and/or by design
we're all wounded healers we all need
the thing that we've built more than
anybody else needs it and I think that
that same case is probably true for Ken
and rather than having the people who
have experienced and benefited from
integral theory then rise up in some
sort of unreconciled slay the father
angry child dynamic can there be instead
the sense of hey wow your life's work
has lit things up in me has helped guide
my path right has brought me to places I
never had imagined and perhaps can we
then turn around and give back the
wounded healer the realized gift that
they offered in the first place and not
needs to not no need to knock them down
off pedestals and no need to kind of
reclaim our gold and kind of Angry and
dysfunctional ways but to say thank you
so much and let us return the favor let
us return academic acknowledgment let us
return community let us return love
appreciation affection and challenge let
us show up as the humans you've been
writing about all along and let's help
you take that final step for yourself we
don't all need all of our teachers to be
Moses leading people to the promised
land and getting stuck on the edge we
can actually welcome the folks that
helped guide us to that land to to the
party itself so the connection with Ken
came out quite synchronistically because
we wrote a piece on the intellectual
dark web as an emerging integral
conversation and it became kind of one
of the most read articles that I've put
on medium and in that so they're about
halfway down I talked about how the
integral framework was really useful to
look at what was going on and how the
intellectual dark web could be seen as
an emerging integral conversation and
can read that and also read a piece in
that where I think I said
okay we're going to try and summarize
integral theory in three paragraphs and
you actually wrote that piece and he
said he read that like someone's gonna
summarize integral theory and three
paragraphs was like I'd like to see you
try and actually was quite impressed
that it was a pretty good job of
interpreting integral Theory in a very
short space of time so he got in touch
with us or Ken's people got in touch
with us and suggested an interview and
the interview was like a four and a half
hour epic which if you want to see in
full you can see by becoming a
subscriber and then we turned it into
three documentaries the Jordan Peterson
Jon and Peterson and the evolution of
thought which is the central one that's
had about 80,000 views then another one
called the intellectual dark web an
integral conversation and then another
one Jordan peace and Sam Harris how
integral Theory can illustrate their
different conceptions of truth I think
that points to another useful aspect of
integral is that it has a it provides a
map of reality again it's a map of the
territory and they're to put it very
very simply it's kind of a four quadrant
model but it divides into the kind of
inner experience and the outer
experience we can have so my inner
experience of being me and the
subjective reality of that has its own
language and a way of inquiring into
that and studying that and our shared
understanding of the outside world that
has its own language of the language of
science of you know measurement and
those are great those it's it's always
yes and with integral those two aspects
of reality they're not mutually
exclusive they're both happening at the
same time and when for example with
Jordan peterson and sam harris they were
talking from those two different
quadrants in this model so that in
integral that can't work because there's
different language it's a different kind
of order of thinking required and you
can't collapse one truth claim into the
other truth claim so science does not
and that's often what happens with
science where they just don't accept the
the reality of the interior experience
yes yeah exactly so that's that's a key
you know that's an example of where this
model can be used to have a better
understanding of you know in particular
why
can't people agree on something I find
that very interesting thing especially
in a very polarized environment it's
easier for us to agree on things that we
can parse out go okay well this is an
internal experience I'm trying to apply
it to something else that's not going to
work I just have to really put it's
holding lots of different things in your
mind and in your awareness at the same
time so so Jordan Pederson famously kind
of is always going on about
post-modernism and that the kind of
pathologies of post-modernism what's
really interesting is that Ken Wilber
actually diagnose what he called Boomer
itis back a couple of decades ago and
and at the time so so Ken's conception
of where that goes wrong I think is much
more sophisticated than Jordan
Peterson's I think Jordan Peterson can
become quite one-dimensional when he
talks about post-modernism and he
doesn't seem to appreciate or at least
doesn't speak to the value of
post-modernism that actually there was a
stage where it was quite there is some
use in it there is a pathology about it
when it dissolves into relativism and to
kind of the associated narcissism that
that Ken talks about that Ken also can
just diagnose a long time ago like that
this particular way of looking at the
world that he called green kind of multi
perspectival respecting sort of
different perspectives had the potential
to go bad there he called boomer itis
and diagnose that that would mean that
it would effectively collapse into if
this sort of paradox of no no truth
claim is is kind of canonical becomes
all truth claims are equally valid and
then eventually you just collapse into
this kind of morass of relativism and
what's really interesting is that a lot
of people at the time when Ken was
saying this was sort of saying while
he's going over the D he's going off the
deep end it's not gonna be that bad now
it's quite clear like the pathology of
Greene the pathology of post-modernism
is so rampant that a lot of people are
now saying whoa he was he was very
prescient he actually spotted it a long
time ago and and has been borne out by
what's been happening in the culture
since I think it's week that's the
really nice example because it
applies to where we might be going I
think with any developmental model is
very useful because if you look at when
green the this kind of pluralistic
relativistic how it arose it arose
against the context of like the 1950s
and everything had to come before that
and just I think it's often good to put
oneself back in that world where there
was segregation where there was very
rigid thought structures whether you
know that was an incredibly cutting edge
inspiring you know civil rights comes
out of it art starts to change there's a
freeing of sexual mores and there's
people are experimenting with their
consciousness like that is a natural
developmental it's like a teenager
getting finally being free from a really
stifling home it's a natural
developmental thing and yes it went sour
for sure but what's interesting for me
is that you can look at that in context
it adds a certain understanding and
compassion which i think is needed for
us ever any of us ever getting into a
proper dialogue where something new can
emerge instead of being in our kind of
ideological camps in the same way i
wouldn't be rate an eight-year-old for
not being particularly good at drawing a
square because they're an eight-year-old
you know and so we all as human beings
and as cultures go through processes and
then the question is okay where are we
going now how can we use that to kind of
understand what's happening right now
and where we might be going in a sense
we never know where we're going you
don't know what the next this is you
never know where the next stages you
don't but at the same time there is a
sense I think from a lot of people who
are following our content and we're in
dialogue with that there is a sense of
there's a teleology to this conversation
as a tote there is a sense that a lot of
people have it is going somewhere
yes the it came from the like we saw the
the kind of eruption and the the
phenomenon of Jordan Peterson we've seen
a real kind of intellectual awakening
online the intellectual dark web is one
manifestation of that the kind of this
bottom-up sense making process coming
out and I mean my sense of where it's
going also John bhave key pretty much
confirmed that in a recent interview is
a conscious reintegration of of the
wisdom traditions and and a the
potential for a grand synthesis which I
think a lot of us are really sensing
it's like okay there's a real sense of
that coming and also what we really
found was like Ken Wilber is a really
important voice to be part of this
conversation
and that was ultimately our aim with
doing the interview with him is to bring
him into this conversation and I think I
mean we'll we'll see where it goes from
here but the interesting thing as well
is that it's it's now a very networked
decentralized two-way process and I
think that's very different from how it
probably was back in the days when
integrals first arising it's also
interesting a lot of the a lot of our
sort of most dedicated followers and a
lot of our subscribers as well are also
have a history with integral there's a
sense of that there is it's very
attractive to people who are trying to
make sense of the world in terms of big
picture big patterns and they I think
they also recognize that's what we're
trying to do with with rebel wisdom is
to create a sense making enterprise and
to try and put see okay how does this
fit so for example Jamie wheel is a good
example it's like Jamie wheel for me is
holding a really crucial piece around
flows but flow states embodied wisdom
transformational stuff which is as far
as I can see kind of he's holding that
particular piece in the constellation
and the yeah the constellation that
we're aware of and different people are
holding different places but I think
what's interesting now is that it's a
much more two-way conversation and I I
wonder I think Ken and the people around
him I would invite them to enter that
conversation more in a two-way process
and I'm not sure that that's something
that integral has had before in that
same way yeah and I think I think it's a
key point because you know we've talked
a lot we've we've had people
Jorden Greenhalgh Daniel schmackdown
burger on the channel talking about the
importance of this decentralized
collective intelligence as an antidote
to the collapse of the institutions that
aren't really working right now in our
society we need to decentralize and get
into this mode where something new
emerges through the interaction between
us and implicit in that is this level of
openness and this level of not quite
knowing the answer and feeding back to
one another and this is what we're
trying to do it the rebel ISM summit as
well it's this kind of process and to
really land that yeah it's shifting for
as Jordan Greenhalgh it's shifting from
this broadcast modality to a more
networked collective modality and that
has to happen as individuals as
individuals we can get stuck in a
broadcast mode and we're just
broadcasting to each other rather than
trying to make sense together and I
think that's the next process that's
what needs to happen yeah and just
something else that just comes up in
terms of why people have traditionally
been very interested in integral is that
it's also a map or a model that allows
for what we were just talking about
allows for those other states to come in
you know that kind of getting into this
liminal space and for spiritual
experience and mystical experiences to
be contextualized in quite largely quite
a useful way whereas the opposite of
that is someone has these experiences or
gets into these states and the only
Avenue is some kind of New Age cranker
II that tries to interpret it you know
that's what I've one of the things I
found very useful about integral you
know understanding how to deal with a
shadow understanding how to you know the
relationship between states we can get
into like the flow state and how we then
interpret the world you know we
interpret that state or whatever stage
we're at so there's lots of very useful
stuff in there that allows for a kind of
maybe a more mature understanding of the
metaphysical let's say so yeah we're
really interested in exploring the
legacy of integral and the first person
I thought to call was Jamie wheel
because Jamie Jamie I knew had a big
history with integral going back quite a
long time and is also kind of one of the
most impressive thinkers that we've
interviewed in the time that we've been
doing the channel if you haven't watched
his piece stealing fire from the gods
then you should because it's amazing and
he he had quite a lot of
appreciation but also quite a few
criticisms of integral and I think it's
it's it's got to be done I think it's
time for if we're going to do this
properly we need to to bring that level
of kind of transparency and honesty to
this is what integral did really well
this is what integral didn't do so well
and and so that's what that's the kind
of conversation that we were interested
in in hosting is is both sides of the
coin yeah something Jamie said as well
is that there's a lot of people walking
around running integral OS like an
operating system you know I'd class
myself as one of those people and I
think that that there's a necessary
distinction between integral OS and when
integral becomes the only map someone is
using for example you know that one of
the difficulties in integral communities
is that this that those very complex
things levels of you know different
models are spiral dynamics there's all
these different things they can a be
kind of hijacked by the ego so we can
hide in them in a sense and be they can
create shadows of their own because it's
very common for people to kind of accuse
each other of being not integral you
know this happens quite a lot and that's
something that's a very first tier thing
to say yeah this is something I think
needs to be I think a lot of people in
the integral communities are aware of it
I think it seems to be out and explicit
and explored this is it yeah if you
spend any time on any integral forum
you'll see that kind of integral
one-upmanship yes like I'm more second
tier than you and so that I mean there
is a difficulty and a danger within all
of these developmental Maps like I think
we need to recover hierarchy like we
have sort of one of the insights of
integral is that we've had a green
postmodern consciousness it's
obliterated all hierarchies and so we're
in flat land and we can't navigate
because we don't know what up is but at
the same time implicit in any
hierarchies is it's a dangerous business
because you're automatically in some
sense creating this diet this dynamic of
I'm more developed than you it's very
it's very
that it's a very difficult space to
navigate yeah the irony is that it's
that whole model of saying yes and going
to the next stage and then like Russian
dolls kind of growing more and more
integrated is is based mainly on empathy
for the pre you know that and and
there's not I have not seen a huge
amount of empathy sometimes in a lot of
the integral communities you know and
yeah like we were talking before about
you know the movement from the 1950s so
this kind of green pluralistic modality
i think jeff salesman pointed out that a
lot of people missed out who were born
after that missed out on the traditional
values so that's a good example of it
you don't say oh now screw that like we
you know to screw the nineteen fifty we
were wrong we're gonna go into another
thing it's yes there's truth in that
and let's integrate that where's my own
traditionalism where's my own morality
that maps more to that hold it integrate
it have it as part of myself and also
have the pluralistic side as part of
myself and all the other bits and pieces
all of that relies on empathy and
openness genuine empathy and openness
and if it can't like that that's place
to start I think and I think that's
where I'd like to see the conversation
go as well and for all of us who are
interested in this to ask hard questions
of ourselves am I really am I really
coming from a place of openness or am i
coming from a place of you know like
that word you mentioned one-upsmanship
so yeah the Jamie wheel piece about the
legacy of integral is going out pretty
much at the same time as this or very
shortly afterwards and yeah we're gonna
we're gonna see I'm interested in doing
maybe another couple of interviews about
the legacy of integral people who might
have something really worthwhile to talk
about kind of developmental thinking why
it's useful where it can go wrong kind
of the lessons that we can learn from
the past and for example Robert Keegan
is a very well-known Harvard
developmental psychologist who hopefully
will govern interview with coming up at
the end of April and yeah they're
interested in sort of seeing where this
conversation is going and the
developmental piece being just something
absolutely crucial to bring in so just
some quick updates to close
we had the Revel wisdom summit coming up
on the 12th of May which is a one-day
event
with Jordan Greenhalgh Ian McGilchrist
brett Weinstein and Heather huiying and
so very excited about that and thank you
to everyone who's coming it's sold out
now is gonna be about 150 people and the
first of what we hope will be many
spaces where we can get into this kind
of collaborative conversation where we
practice really seeing we can let
something emerge between us that's more
than the sum of our parts so as well as
that separately we have finally after
many months set up the rebel wisdom
store so if anyone likes the t-shirts
that we sometimes wear in the videos and
just would like teach or even we even
have baby onesies and all sorts so I
will put that a link to that in the show
notes and membership so you put a load
more content on for subscribers we've
got a couple of really great pieces with
Jeffrey Miller and Diana Fleischman
including the Polly professors which
polyamorous professors I should say
which is going to be which is still in
it remember exclusive or a little bit
longer it will go on the main channel
but remember exclusive you want to see
it early and an amazing piece with
Jeffrey called the neurodiversity case
for free speech which i think is one of
the best arguments I've heard for a long
time and what else we got on they've got
the whole four and a half hour Ken
Wilber interview and we have yeah a
really excellent extra piece with Jon
Vevey key on flow States and
psychedelics so if you want to see those
go and become a subscriber and also yeah
if you subscribe at high enough level
you can also join the regular zoom calls
that we do with other people in the
community and that is becoming
increasingly yeah a good source of kind
of collaborative sense making between
everyone who's on those calls so yeah
come and join the community see you soon
[Music]
you
[Music]