[Music]
you're the only person I know there's
actually had cope at 19 and the law we
should say that this is right after
Easter so we're in early April 2020
because when things start changing this
fast one week to the next I think it's
it's it's it's a good idea to let people
who listen to this conversation to take
part in it know exactly where this
conversation happened yeah okay so this
is early April 2020
just right after he said I had coffee 19
I have a bad week last week yeah and
you're out of hospital you went there
briefly and you're okay and we're all
very happy that you're okay yeah and
because you know I was a little bit
worried there for well I'm 59 years old
so four men are over 50 and I have asked
them if you're over 50 and you're kind
of you belong to one of the risk groups
you you should actually expect a pretty
heart beating when you get it so it's
not gonna be one of those sweet awesome
traumatic versions of it but the older
you get the harder the beating gets the
good thing don't we look at the numbers
coming in from Europe now early April is
that very few people Oh 60 died from
this disease and get us bad as too close
to dying
so ventilate just work if you're younger
if you need them oxygen definitely works
if he needed but you can get heart
beating and and I knew that when it
happened I never felt scared or anything
I had about 48 hours that were critical
to me great friends around me Peter
Olivia was wonderful doctors and nurses
were just so professional and they'd
already seen so many men in my age that
they could tell right away where my
problem was and they helped me
differentiate between what is eerie and
weird about it what is actually
dangerous which is what's important to
know right so the couple of things that
are truly dangerous the other things
even if they hurt or they're
uncomfortable you can just ignore them
that was all I needed to know at that
stage and then I felt fine and a couple
of a couple of days later I realized
that okay that was that was the deepest
is probably gonna get he'll be shaky
right from now on but I'm terrific great
okay yeah you sound good so
the last time we talked we talked a
little bit about coronavirus and and we
didn't have too much to say about like
you know what was really going on
because perhaps we didn't know yet is
there anything is there anything you
want to say about that about like what
patterns were seeing what's going on
what's you know on let's say on the
level of you know just society's
reaction to this thing and and you know
you're concerned with you know the
digital the fact that we're living in a
digital age and when a pandemic comes oh
yeah yeah it's okay it's okay everything
well let's go let's go with the timeless
stuff number one thing even if I had a
bad coffee 19 last week I can assure you
that the damage done about the crisis
itself and the current hysteria is gonna
be way WAY worse the disease itself
we're probably gonna arrive at a disease
that kills it most 0.2% of the people
who are affected by it and most people
will be affected by it I don't think
we'll have a vaccine in years so I think
the countries that are now slowly moving
towards hard immunity are actually
making the clever moves this is April 20
2010 like Sweden and I realize that
sooner or later this probably has a sort
of flush to the the the the general
population let's just save the 80 year
olds and older as much as we can and
make them stay away because they will
not transfer the virus from one another
if there's no virus around so we could
probably have the luxury of saving the
people who are at most risk but the
other ones of us in society the 70 or
80% needed to reach herd immunity the
younger healthy people need probably to
go through this for us to arrive in a
good place we can say it's over but
having said that that's just paddy me
ology we know pandemics from before they
have happened on this scale they
happened about seven or eight times
every century so we should have be much
better prepared we should have expected
this the countries that need a SARS 15
years ago were much better parent than
the countries that be lucky enough lots
have seen this for the last 30 years so
so we have these pandemics in the 1950s
and the 1960s they killed far more
people than could the coronaviruses done
now so what is the difference yet well
we are arriving the Internet age
starting in
the 1980s and there are no cameras
everywhere the microphones everywhere
and we've got 8 billion people on the
planet more or less connected through
the smartphones and laptops to having
their own megaphones you know screaming
at the top of the lungs about anything
the reactive so we have sort of a
massive reaction across the world when
tons of conspiracy theories and all
kinds of weird shit going on when people
speak their minds and fantasize about
what's happening and this has made the
pandemic way worse than it could have
been if you just kept it as a pandemic
introduce it that way we're spending far
too much energy on the Asteria
that we should and we're not spending
enough energy is still on the pandemic
that we should that's the problem so
we're now living in an age what we need
to be confronted with that the lesson to
be learned afterwards from 2020 what was
that we live in an age of hysteria we're
in an age of mass psychosis so that's
gonna be a major problem that we need to
solve of course we all learn from
previous experiences we can all if
something like this happens the future
could all go back I said well we did
that in 2020 and and those things for
the right things that would be but those
things for the terrible things that we
did those things were the ones that
actually were constructive in the long
run and those ideas that we have at
arrow right okay like so I think these
stereo will be gonna do eventually that
the ultimate judgment of the spring of
2020 is going to be they were way too
hysterical for own good this dad didn't
do as much well but that's exactly the
problem now what do you become a
president when the Hong Kong flu came or
whatever in the sixties millions of
people died and this didn't happen this
kind of shutdown of everything and
economic collapse didn't happen exactly
so it should have happened what should
be happening like what well we talked a
lot about logos and myth or some
pathless you and I'm right and the
probably path was this study it is for
the gods strike you slice were you being
hit by thunderbolt something like that
that is definitely path
it's pathless belongs to what jacques
lacan a cyclist is called the real and
and it's actually also a ren√© girard
talks a lot about when he talks about
pneumatics so it is what we hide in or
subconsciousness it is what nature hides
from us but that strikes us when we're
worse prepared mm-hm and and it sort of
corrects us and brings us back to
reality in the sense that oh my god I
live within the nature that I cannot
control there's no harmony nature
there's no balance in nature nature
isn't fair nature doesn't really care
about us as human beings that means if
it were prepared which we were now in
most countries then we get a much worse
pandemic that is of course the Pathak
lesson to be learned so the Pathak
narrative here is quite simple it is
shock lakhan's
the real strikes you it did it September
11 it did with the Lehman Brothers
banking crisis 12 years ago and he did
so now again even worse because this
time around it was the chaos goddess
herself was nature itself that that
struck us so that's the Pathak narrative
of this but the problem is instead of
going for the Pathak narrative towards
logos which is like okay how do we then
solve the problem okay what resources do
we have since we came so ill-prepared so
how do we minimize deaths how do we push
the transfer all transmit of this virus
forward from as many people as possible
so we can start handling it before
actually the general population gets it
you know how do we how do we optimize
whatever resource we have to minimize
the damage done seems like this is a
crisis of authority it's like this is
the point the hysteria means we didn't
go from pathos - logos we went from
pathos to mythos so what happened was
that media took over this and what media
always do they totally mythical media
will always put the journalists where
the storm looks the worst so if a
journalist is covering a hurricane you
will try to find the one angle where the
Huracan looks absolutely worst like this
is the most damage done so even if most
of the town has been completely you know
unaffected by hurricane the
with always standing in front of the
building where it looks looks like it
blows to hardest and where most damage
has been done yeah so we're strong
people in the hospital dying of oh yeah
when we got those pictures from Italy
and it looked like you know the plague
had returned and and people dying
everywhere and they weren't covered and
and you know the doctors the nurses were
dying and we heard these stories about
the Crematory us working 24 hours a day
and you know mass graves and all of this
the media created was mythos it's not
that not all of it wasn't a lie part of
it was certainly true but the way was
portrayed was as a huge sensation you
know we live in more than ever in the
Society of the spectacle and this were
meeting US media thrives on selling
newspapers and selling web pages and
selling ads and whatever they're selling
and all they want to do they're selling
wrong incentive selling drama they have
no other incentive they have no
incentive at all to tell us the truth
then of course the media pushes the
politicians and pulls the politicians
away from logos where they should be
thankful the epidemiologists doctors and
nurses scientists out there
statisticians you know people like me
who do like a complexity studies I've
been involved in this in Scandinavia all
the people who can understand a pandemic
like this from a logical perspective are
also pulled in the real quickly being
silenced when the politicians are pulled
away from the logos into the mythos and
that's when when the voters go you got
to do something you got you got to do
something symbolic you got to look like
you react even if it's not the right
thing to do so for example when you
early on the kids will not get this
disease kids don't die from coffee 19
they hardly never get sick and still we
closed schools all over Europe mm-hmm
now what do we do that for because you
want to protect the kids if it got an
epidemic yes but if the epidemic doesn't
affect kids well then we don't want to
hear that because we want to react in
the way we normally do it because there
they can still run disease right the
kids study but they do that even more
what happened in Italy was you took the
kids out of school
they went home and gave it to the
granddad and the grand I got sick and
died this is the tragedy with the
politicians refused to stay within the
rom of logos because the only way you
can you have to accept the Pathak
narrative that's the narrative from the
gods and the narrative from the gods is
always haha you believed in harmony in
balance
you believed you were protected you
believed there would always be so here's
the real author or mother figure out the
director will shape the world is
contingent disasters like this happened
all the changes were not prepared the
system wasn't it wasn't working it had
tons of blind spots in it you couldn't
handle this at all and by the way it's a
virus we don't even know how it operates
so this contingent virus spreads rapidly
through the population media moves the
whole narrative into the realm of mythos
and we arrive with the mythical
narrative and when you're gonna look
back at this six months of traumas from
him I can swear the countries that
handle this the best this is like a
culture test huge culture test the
countries to have this the best they
even when you compare the data they
moved into logical narrative and stayed
there so far it's looking very much like
in Germany Japan possibly New Zealand
they're also lucky because they were in
Ireland Taiwan same thing but the
country so far the lowest number death
cases well they have to eventually move
towards herd immunity but since they do
it ladies anybody else at least they did
better than everybody else did
okay the people who didn't react to that
the people that had sensationalist media
dominating the landscape and pull the
politicians into that rearm like Belgium
which is the big disaster zone in Europe
right now early April those countries
had way more damage way more deaths way
more sick people way more fighting over
ventilators way more disaster than
anybody else so if you stay with you the
logos in the middle of a crisis you will
always be better off than if you jump
onto the mythos because mythos is not
what you need when you're in the middle
of a crisis hmm this is this is a
perfect sample of how logos and mythos
and path are served if
purposes but as human beings we very
often mix them up so Sochi mythos should
just be out of the way you know at this
point kids had nothing to do with this
to begin with people I said that we need
to talk to the kids and tell them what's
going on no you just get the kids out of
the way send them back to school
that's what Sweden did keep the kids in
school because if you keep the kids in
school you get way more nurses donut
stayed on with the kids who can actually
still go to work and save people's lives
right the police force Harris
Scandinavia the nurses the doctor said
please let her keep our kids at school
because then we can still go to work you
closed down the schools we had to take
care of the kids I also have to leave
the kids with the grandparents which
means risking the grandparents life we
knew early in this pandemic that it was
all about the grandparents and the
retirement homes we knew that early on
and still even here in Sweden they
messed up about their time at homes and
that's where the vast majority of people
are dying right now oh really
yeah that's what we should have
protected we should have locked down all
the society we should have just put a
ring around their time and homes tried
to save the lives of the elderly for a
few months to keep them away and then
let this virus move through society that
that's what we should have done any
epidemiologist would say that that's
what should have been done all along but
instead people went for this massive
lockdown alcohol consumption is up
violence in homes is up people are
becoming unemployed the mess we're gonna
have to clean up the sort of social
economic crisis we're gonna be in in
Europe by July and August it's gonna be
absolutely massive hmm and I expect that
the European Union is gonna take a heart
beating and probably fall apart
definitely the euro so we're gonna have
a huge crisis we already have this
almost civil war in Europe between
northern Europe and southern Europe is
already starting right in la crise
already started and it's all about who's
gonna pay for all this yeah yeah well
we're printing money like mad and at the
end of the day somebody's got to pay for
it and if there's one thing we need to
tell the kids to be honest about is that
the current model says that we're
printing the money to save our asses to
save the economy save our own lives you
know if you get unemployed you might
gonna kill you so for that reason rather
load a virus do it for you
so to minimize the current damage we
need to calm down and get the stereo out
of the way as quickly as possible and go
back to normal because we can't handle
the lockdown situation for much longer
yeah right yeah when are people gonna
start writing on the street so that you
know I don't know but Oh America is
already inside their own private little
worlds yeah yeah so I would expect this
is a guess qualified guess from from a
complexity theorist but it's a guess
we're early April I would say places
like Russia Turkey Algeria Brazil
Indonesia country used to call the
merging market countries mm-hmm
they can afford to give antibiotics to
people and they probably done it way too
much so they've got a major antibiotics
resistance problem but there's still the
vast majority of people who Moody's and
middle classes are still poor and they
have no health protection just because
that means there's a small minority or
wealthy people who will buy their own
ventilators to secure their fine and
everybody else will be left behind in
those countries that's where the biggest
mess will be created and I expect the
most political of you but it could get
really messy in American Europe to know
this this is probably the most drastic
economic crisis and going into since
1929 and we know for yourself sorry
that's gonna get messy and could go
violence is this is this are we heading
into a great kind of depression or are
we heading into more like totalitarian
social control or are we heading into
those are some kind of possibility for
let's say you know anything good to come
out of this some kind of like what wait
here the longer we stay within myth us
the worse it gets
so yeah well maybe a sooner we move over
to logos to better cats and this is what
Jordan Peterson would agree with me the
authentic phallus is logical so logos is
with the authentic fellows whereas the
false fellows the false leader steps
forward is mythical that's what the
false follows will unite us by just
pointing out the virus of course as an
object which is correct that's after all
a perfect addict but then move that add
it on to somebody else so it's happening
already in China
early April they're they're going after
Russians and the going after Africans
the going after anybody doesn't look
like a Chinese person these days in
China so ironically the virus originated
from China now the Chinese are
objectifying people who are not Chinese
objectifying please remember that that
is false
phallic behavior and false phallic
behavior is mythical mean it doesn't
stay with the truth mm-hmm it creates or
just raises ourian of the core exactly
racism some apps racism is the perfect
sample of something bad mythical right
it's just bad mythos so because
obviously when you look at race it
doesn't even exist it's just damn skin
color nothing else is different in human
beings because we're all the same
so logos is what reminds you that racism
is incorrect and mythos is with racism
thrives on so again we need to get the
mythos out of the way and I don't think
the major newspapers and the big TV
channels or anything like that at all
have any credibility of this they are
more responsible for the mythical
misrepresentation of the pandemic and
the crisis than anybody else out there
because they only get attention these
days and get viewers and get their ads
sold and shit like that if to get as
much attention as possible to what they
say and they thrive on sensation and
spectacle you cannot trust them at all
it's possible New York Times is better
than the average blog then again the
only way to get a proper properly
logical understanding what's going on is
to find at least five different news
sources and then match them against each
other and then make up your own mind
mm-hmm okay lobos is always scientific
mm okay so you mentioned scapegoating
yeah and you were talking about a theory
of memetic phenomenology your loss oh
yeah that's a good so so I think I want
you to elaborate on that I want you do -
yeah it's a new idea possibly including
in the new book we're working on it
that's you know the deeper we dig into
mimesis and it's you and me and Thomas
Hamrick they really are having these
conversations sort of sort of off soon
in between each other and we should have
Thomas
and record stuff with him too because he
hasn't great a lot of great stuff to say
on this and he started Girard for a deep
view and if you study early on Girard
and the great anthropologist of the 20th
century and and you discover after that
mimesis is a so fundamental to nature
it's both instinct its drive
it's definitely desire mimetic desire it
could even possibly be part of
transcendence to you I mean all the
different photographs you talk about in
art psychoanalytical version of of
drives has mimesis an abyss is so
prevalent everywhere and mimics is
essentially just what we do as kids we
see somebody do something and we just
mimic them we try to do the same thing
and then we might do our own little
personal version of it but we still
mimic what other people do and
resolution relation arts fundamental
idea is that mimesis is so grounded in
us that we also mimic our own desires so
we look at what somebody else wants and
we have a fantasy about what they want
and they we make it our own desires so
he once that he wants a red sports car
up then I want a red sports car then we
cover that over we cover that over and
we firmly believe that we found out for
ourselves to wander in sports car yeah
or where we're attracted to a woman or a
man because we're attracted to them
whereas if somebody else is involved
that third person will make that person
seem you know exponentially more
attractive if they're bullied rancid
Freud you remember how we were during
the way to post complex and let to
compensate a one-year-olds we mimicked
our parents and and it's a ball you want
to marry your mom and your mom laughs at
you and she goes off the fuck's your dad
do you realize you can't have your mom
you can't have your mom that way if you
had her kid for a year and she gave
birth to you you could never have her
the way dad house and the mystery of of
dad conquers mom possesses us yeah
so we mimic him yeah we mimic him simply
because he becomes an idol he he has
some ears some magical quality that we
don't understand which is of course
sexuality and as kids we don't
understand that
so we mimic him and we mimic him and we
may give me hope that we one day it can
be like him and then one day we discover
we cannot be like him and we give up on
that because our penis grows and our
vaginas growing suddenly
grown-ups and we are a dollar cents and
and suddenly we have deal with our
teenage years and that's of course the
genius rebellion which of course is
called the the rebellion against the
phallus we break where the father
we don't want hit his dick neither
inside of us or between our legs so we
become young men and young women and
then we still mimic because then we have
to make our own version of what father
and mother were this is just mimicking
again so as grown-ups we mimic the
priest and the priest we still mimic the
lesser gods and then we assume that the
lesser gods mimic the higher god mmhmm
yeah just like we just we just skip it
it's like viruses it's just like we push
it through those eyes now your deal of
mimesis yeah so that we undisturbedly
can mimic what we're obsessed to be
making at the moment mm-hmm and that's
what we do as one of the important
things about that dynamic is that we
hide it from ourselves that we're
actually doing it exactly now remember
how how eerily reminiscent this sounds
for you compared to Jacques Lacan
psychoanalysis and the real mm-hmm that
the real is something we hide all the
time because we're obsessed with the
symbolic and imaginary so the imaginary
or the emotional is what we feel and
what we make up our fantasy about the
world we make up this embolic is how we
then put language onto that and name sit
and gives word things so that then we
believe it the way we talk about
something or or or make art about it or
the way we use language about it is
reality okay that's a symbolic reality
that we vent and we have a symbolic and
imaginary and we jump in between these
two until the fool ourselves into
believing that we understand the world
and that the world dances according to
our wishes because it dance between the
matador is symbolic and that's on the
boom God comes into the picture pathos
comes into the picture nature returns
with a vengeance and reminds us that
oops no not at all
and inside of us the nature inside of us
the real in Lacan is of course what
mimesis is
sister rod says that we hide mimesis all
the time and I stash it credit Thomas
Hamrick for actually seeing the
distinction here and seeing the
similarity if there might be other guys
out there to compare lock honors your
honor the same way but that's definitely
the way to read Gerard and that's also
why it becomes problematic that Girard
and says that as soon as we start
mimicking and two guys mimic the same
thing which were very are very likely to
do then rivalry starts mm-hmm and the
question was looking into now is was
rivalry a major problem already in the
Sochi on to the original tribe says it
was a smaller community where everybody
is more or less or lady to each other or
did rivalry explode when we started
settling in larger settlements and
that's exactly we had two event
organized religion that is a very very
very interesting fundamental question
hmm
Shearer are never looked into it well
sure art are you sure about that I it
seems to me that in early tribes there's
a lot of rivalry between you know a lot
of fighting going on between no Gerard
never talks about nomadic tribes it's
you dealer cerritos that in parallel is
your art so you've got to take the less
work on no mythology and the less work
or the difference between being nomadic
and settled which of course or a stern
ism you you got it you got it you got to
read the lusts next to you right next to
lock on to see the bigger picture
because she rod moves all the way back
to Christ and further down it it's a lot
about the early tribes and they're all
settled in Girard mmm remember that we
talked about early tribes are they
settled or than the move the fundamental
difference here is not that there's a
tribe the fundamental difference is not
that it's older than Christianity the
fabulous difference is do you discuss
people who settled in the river valleys
or in the mountain somewhere so they're
settled the big difference for human
beings over the last hundred thousand
years is only one shift went from
rheumatic to settled okay we're still
dealing with that shit we're still
dealing with the fact that we settled
down we still dealing with the fact that
we have to travel in our ideas and we
need to go to the gym every day to get
exercise because otherwise we get killed
for viruses that's for sure
so you know we deal with the fact that
we decided to settle down ten thousand
years ago and increasingly did so
because we could breed more children and
grow larger populations because of it
and only because the populations got
larger we settled that model one we
didn't pick that model we didn't choose
it but we did so we've got a model where
we were constantly pneumatically on the
move in a physical landscape and with
the raster dealt with uniquely we
invented the only major idea besides the
word ology ever which is EV ontology
when Zoroaster invented EV ontology
three thousand seven hundred years ago
seventeen hundred before Christ in
Persia was a raster invented that idea
he basically said no madala ji will keep
on running because we're still on the
move but we got a move in the world of
ideas okay because they're worse
especially men need to do that men need
to move the world of ideas because
they're settled that means you still you
were out and about doing warfare and
hunting and shit like that but you're
always returning to the same point which
is the inner circle where the women of
the children are and that's where your
future and heritage is that's where your
sexuality is that's where all the things
that you invest in art that's the
delivery station so we talk about you
say yeah we talked about that you go to
water or you go hunting as a man to then
go back to the delivered station and
improve you worth it right mm-hmm so
that's the matter key you go back to and
the patrick is basically the
organizational warfare and hunting okay
outer circuit in a circuit so then a
circuit settled and because the inner
circuit settled we settled as humanity
mm-hmm so fat lazy woman sat down eight
thousand years ago in Babylon and we
haven't moved ever since okay so then so
roster says we got to move in the world
of ideas and the way to over the world
of ideas is to move along the time axis
rather than in physical space so he
moves to focus away from physical space
where plate on the other guys stayed all
along and dreamed about perfection and
moved us over to process philosophy and
process thinking in constant movement
this is what Heraclitus is Zoroaster
arackliffe desist that everything
changes everything is in flux that's the
fundamental aspect the reality flux
itself is fundamental
so that's what saw a success too bud he
says along the time axis dramatic things
can happen at certain points in time
that we called events and these events
can change history forever
now if Girard had gone all the way back
to numerology and Zoroaster seventh
ology which he never did he would have
looked at Christ a bit differently
because Christ is the ultimate event to
Christians yeah bad Jerrod would agree
on major rod would see more than the
final scapegoat in Christ because he's
the fan scapegoat in a Christian fantasy
juice beg to differ 2000 years of
programs certainly proved that this
wasn't that well the Jews would say
every Jew is is you know the the
suffering Christ er well well to begin
with if the Christians say like Jerrod
says that well the hope of Christianity
was that by putting Christ on the cross
we had the final scapegoat we don't need
any more scapegoats and we can start
controlling the lynch mobs and make
people more civilized and that's correct
religion is all about civilizing and
domesticating people to be less well as
a violent that's what religion is all
about that's true that was in the
Christian ambition sometimes
Christianity successfully sometimes it
has failed I'm just saying that the Jews
can certify that the pogroms they've
been they be throw nothing for the past
2,000 years proved the Christianity
failed miserably when it comes to you
know containing the lose moms but anyway
that was the goal of Christianity I
agree with you on that makes sense
we took this cocky gnostic guy called
jesus christ he was put on the cross and
no matter what he said what he did
during his life he was the perfect
ultimate scapegoat on that cross young
and handsome hanging on the cross in a
rebellion against the roman empire to
create the idea of some kind of
universal religion without state and
that's exactly what paul in august and
did with christianity so that makes
sense but if you go back further what is
it the christianity mimics and sherrard
doesn't address the question what
christianity mimics freud does that and
freud does that in moses in monotheism
which also is not included in Gerard's
work that was Freud's last book in the
late 1930s when Freud
when to do the deepest darkest secrets
of his own mind and dug deep into Jewish
history right when Hitler was starting
attacking the Jews in Europe this was
the late 1930s in Freud wrote a
beautiful book of Moses monotheism and
started tracing Judaism all the way back
to Egypt and the Naughton period the
period of atomism a brief period a
monotheistic dictatorship in Egypt
mm-hmm and probably Tutankhamun was used
to ventually as the precursor to Christ
he was also probably a silly guy in this
case it was probably incest toyed freak
or something but he was killed by the
priests just like Christ was later
so about 1700 years before Christ is
killed Tutankhamun skills they need
depend it's a very very likely starting
point for an post at inist
monotheistic cult in Egypt that
eventually leaves Egypt through an
exodus led by Moses no matter who led
the Exodus about a thousand years before
Christ that's like 300 years after
Norton Tutankhamun that's the date of
the exodus out of the years it probably
happened Moses led it and later in
contact with the Souris Jones the Jews
rewrote this story even when they were
in Babylon as a original Egyptian sect
in Babylon when they met with the
persons that rewrote the story and turny
the internal mythology with Moses Aaron
and Miriam three siblings which is exact
replicas of numerology
so they mimic numerology and they then
had their Savior the original founding
savior of the faith so if our Brown
didn't kill Isaac and the priestess that
killed Tutankhamun and Judaism kick
starts from there I'm a business
speculation but it's a very very likely
starting point for Judaism he was then
of course immersed in Canaanites
religion which was a rich religion full
of all kinds of ideas it had polycystic
and monotheistic aspect but the
comparison between Judaism is or Astin
is striking is that they have a split
phallus we talked about this before it's
not a unified fellas because that's out
of Hitler and that's ignore them you
avoid having a dictator and you avoid
fundamentalism within a religion by
having a split phallus by separating
chief
and priests okay so rested did this
Judas and clearly do this that's why
this close connection between personal
Jewish culture
yeah this close connection and
eventually that led to two of the most
amazing innovations human history the
purchase invented the empire and the
Jews invented the nation mm-hmm and
they're both religious constructions
mm-hmm it's the non separation of church
and state that's key here both church
and state are under religion and our
religious institutions the state is led
by the Emperor and the church is led by
it by the priest of the moment in Persia
and the Jews did the same thing with
Judaism
so you unify the people by declaring the
religion of the nation to be the same
thing and interestin ISM unify the
Empire with the religion but making it a
superior religion hierarchy and below
that religions you can have a me i
chronology your life that's exactly
where the purchase invented universal
human rights freedom of speech tolerance
and diversity and plurality because
plurality operates on different levels
in the hierarchy then they even split
the higher hierarchy to make sure it
didn't feel too superior into a military
and a priest religion any person history
that is Mithraism that even the roman
empire 2210 religion just enough so
Mithraism was to me literally did both
of the persons of the romans and in the
persian empire Zoran ISM the ultimate
form of dark mysticism became the
religion of the priests so Saurashtra
listen and Judaism kept the bard
absolute you know I talk so much about
he even made it even firmer where he and
I see more native Christians opened up
the flood Christians and the muscles
open it up so the way to look at
Christianity's Christianity is the
infantile mimicry of Judaism in a
fundamental sense because there was
Universal aspirations for something that
could only work on a national level and
Islam did the same thing Islam then
became sorry to say this but the popular
infantile mimicry of the restoration
then Islam and Christianity took over
the world and we can honor them for
whatever they did or successes they had
the last two two thousand years or
fifteen hundred years but I think it's
time now we look back to all of history
and go back and revalue the axial age
and go back and find the real gemstones
are from the Bronze Age and are from the
axial age the real great ideas are 3,000
4,000 years old rather than 1500 years
old you know when we start removing what
I call the the peddler saints the Saints
sitting on the pillars what do you call
them in English you say these guys
hillard Saints Peller
said like guys who sit on the pillar and
he thinks it's like divine and he think
he's a guru right hmm there's a Germanic
word for it but it probably does exist
English I'm we've got to find that out
so we can involve the people who watch
this and say that you pay a lot he'll go
in Swedish if you read Swedish okay this
is the guy besides the body Pharaoh that
I'm gonna murder in the new book right
and they come through at the axial age
and they sit on the loo they sit in you
know out of the forest and they sit and
think they're so fucking wonderful and
amazing cause the little mummies boys
and they know the truth about everything
and they're called things like Plato and
they're all Gnostics and that's the
problem I have because the reason why
Jews and especially sera states are so
aggressive against Gnosticism is that
you gotta have a unified worldview where
you separate the fellows and you
separate the fellows in turn from the
Marquis but that's how you unify the
three and thereby unify the tribe then
you unify the nation and unify the
Empire and the only ideas we have today
that we can take from history on how we
could possibly get along the only
original ideas we have the only eventho
logical ideas we have is the Jewish
innovation of the nation sponsored by
the persons and it's the person
innovation of the Empire and all other
empires like the Chinese and the Indian
empires and the Roman empires and today
the American Empire whatever you like
are imitations of the original person
Empire more or less successfully so the
American Constitution is a perfect
sample or something that's taken
straight out of the Persian Empire it
works wonderfully but the problem we
have is that we also have a nationalism
that we should cherish and that's the
Jewish one
mm-hmm and I think the countries today
that are doing fine like Japan are
mimicking the same system Japan has
Shintoism which is the religion of the
military and the chieftains and they've
got buddhism which is the religion of
what we would call the priestly class
yeah
and those two religions opera in
parallel you don't necessarily need
religion for women in that case you can
have one if you like in China they got
three so they probably turned Buddhism
into something more magical
they keep Taoism as the priests religion
and then they turn Confucianism into the
organization of society which is always
where you find the chief chain the king
you know those characters mm-hmm so we
see that these systems are very stable
over time mm-hmm
but what we need today is to go back to
the actual sources take back religion in
in China's case it means that the way
out of the current predicament with the
Chinese communist dictatorship is to
remove a thism from the Chinese
Constitution look at commis himself as
one religion among many others which is
perfect okay and then start looking at
the possibility of a split phallus we
can find in Chinese culture and to me
that is put Taoist and Confucianism
against each other and that would create
a perfect political system at least two
parties mmm yeah no that would be China
learning from America ironically but
it's actually learning from the Persian
Empire in creating a system that's way
more stable over time to the current
communist dictatorship because China is
gonna run totally mock and arriving
havoc it almost did with it but I think
that was Chinese culture wasn't it for
for thousands of years yes the balance
of Taoism
yes yes that's when he was stable so you
will discover that any stable Empire
over time including the United States
today any stable and prototype has a
structure that is a triad there's a
delivery station called the mare Turkey
that you deliver to that's all women
need they have that foundation which you
come from where you turn return to when
you die it's more suitable and it holds
responsible for your actions and
delivery station but it's also a
children are born and we're heritage is
created so your transcendental is
completely dependent of the majority
working the way a matriarchy works is
that it then holds the two phallic
functions responsible for doing their
shit and that means many to split up
between the guys that have brilliant
minds and we called them priests and her
brilliant bodies and we call them
chieftains
and those are the guys we look up to his
men and they should admire each other
but have separate courts and separate
capitals and separate power systems and
do not interfere with one another
hmm that's what the purse is discovered
this is what's or established a spot
discovered in Persia three thousand five
separate should they be issues should
they not you know ask separate as you
are when you admire another man for
having the strengths that are your
weaknesses mmm but also allow him to
admire you for having your strengths
that are his weaknesses okay whatever
distance is required to maintain that
admiring relationship without going into
rivalry is perfect because this is where
you want the cane on the Able's this you
want the more them the reason why I have
all these mythical stories and dudas I
means arresting us I mean Christianity
to stop everywhere about the rivalries
brothers what we want the right void the
rivalry is because the rivalry if the
rivalry goes all the way up to the top
in drivers between the chief turn of the
priests sooner or later one of them will
become the dictator and the tyrant hmm
and it will only rule for a short time
so enormous havoc while he does that
that's important and that's like yeah
that's that's very interesting
dictators don't last but they caused
enormous havoc when they do yeah well we
all know how bad dictators are but what
we don't know how to do very well is to
keep those two from becoming round yeah
there are two ways to look at it and
there was actually Peter Towson who I
know I work with a love that he came up
with this second one because you know
I'll be working a lot with the Peter Pan
syndrome because it's so dominant in
culture today it was a very American
phenomenon so the Peter Pan syndrome is
essentially that you're 11 years old
your dick has just started growing and
you won't have the power of the dick but
you don't want to take the
responsibility of being an adult now
so you trying to play tricks to keep the
benefits of being a boy and trade them
and still get the benefits of being a
man and keep them within the same body
hmm
play tourists and Gnostics do this all
the time they might be terrified of the
big dick there might be terrified of
being robust to begin with but they
tried to trade and get the benefits out
of this and then impress their moms and
other women by you know moving out of
society become pacifists vegans and all
kinds of things they do they oh they're
always one nobo they're always nice and
where's the rest of us men who go out
there and do our duty we're evil right
so these guys are Noble and fantastic so
rostered hated them with the vengeance
right so they this is the problem you
gots a Peter Pan syndrome is so
prevalent to culture today because we
fucked it up bad with Hitler Stalin and
the atomic bomb in 1945 were so shocked
a phallic power and the fake Salah
system caused havoc and killed 100
million people on the planet that we
just we were just in complete lockdown
mental locked on 1945 women had started
guard in the labor market and said we
better work on our own and get paid for
it
because we don't trust men any longer
understandable very understandable 1945
after 1945 we go into the kind of
deadlock that created post-modernism and
created the current society or women
stepped in and took leadership roles but
they're confused because the men have
retreated and disappeared from you
so the phallic power no longer exists
and that means young men are trained to
become Peter Pan syndrome whether they
like it or not and that's a Peter Pan
syndrome it's become so prevalent now
Peter Pan syndrome is perfectly without
of Hitler and Josef started these guys
were when they were kids before they
became potaters yeah sort of like the
uber manipulator
yes exactly so when out of Hitler was
refused to go to art school because he
lacked talent he became a fierce manic
dictator and eventually he wanted to
take revenge of the Jewish professors
who turned him down
art school and he did it by killing
seven million views Jews right okay
that's what Peter Pan guys do
they're terrible right Pol Pot Cambodia
Peter Pan Center but what Peter said to
me Towson said to me was that well this
should be an opposite reaction to wait a
second what do you mean
Peter Pan syndrome is like the neurosis
here but this should be kind of a
psychotic reaction to there should be a
guy who was actually perfectly healthy
mentally healthy but who grew up in an
environment that was so fucked up that
he became fucked up mm-hmm and we
started looking and then Peter said how
about Caligula you got it Caligula's
story yeah father killed mother killed
all these intrigues the courts of Rome
the guy was sent to an evil uncle called
Tiberius was one of the most evil men
ever this guy Caligula must have been so
terrified of absolutely everybody where
he grew up so there when he was 11 12
years old and his dick started growing
he could not trust absolutely anybody in
the world and if you're absolutely
paranoid when you become a grown-up man
yeah there's no right of passage for you
anywhere because you cannot trust
anybody
you're absolutely parallel for all the
right reasons you know and suddenly
somebody tells you're the king of the
world what the fuck do you do you create
kill everybody you create a living hell
yeah
you're a living hell and that's why
Caligula is such an interesting
character against it so he's a different
type than Hitler you and I honor Towson
for being so hey Gillian it's a perfect
sample of just reversing the Peter Pan
syndrome the Peter Pan syndrome is an
internal problem like it's a guy we have
we have a problem with a psychotic don't
we the psychopathic personality that if
were unlucky gets power way too early in
his life and then causes how that's a
Peter Pan syndrome that's Robespierre
that's Hitler that's all part that's
mild that's Stalin lots of these evil
guys Akhenaten certainly into Caligula
is maybe more like the American Psycho
or something he's yes yes so he he must
be considered absolutely sane but
because his own vault
his context he's absolutely crazy he
goes crazy this is the kind of evil that
Plato could not foresee but we can
because wherever you go you got to move
from Plato to Aristotle you got to see
Aristotle constantly reminding Plato
that everything is about context it's
where the idea arrives
makes you either crazy or sane and if
you're a saying you have a sane idea
that arrives in a completely crazy
environment mm-hmm you're gonna think of
your sanity as insanity and you're gonna
be Caligula so we can call it Caligula
syndrome and we should develop it
further I encourage everybody to do so
because we need to understand when men
fuck it up big-time because we need to
prepare ourselves for the fake massage
and the fake phallus now mm-hmm that's
the message of digital come on they're
coming online in spades probably mmm
well they certainly will now yeah if
we've got the biggest most violent
aggressive economic crisis 1929 upon us
there's certainly gotta be tons of these
guys spreading their conspiracy theories
online and remember what we talked about
before these guys are now recognized by
being more mythical than the most
mythical guys out there they tell you
fairy tales they do not tell you the
truth
because if you're honest about it the
truth you find in science that's logos
that's hard work that's deep studies
nobody nobody doesn't just come along
with flatter you and say if you hate
that guy over there and make him your
scapegoat
you'll be hero you'll be wonderful I
wanted to do with me right that's
exactly what the fake fellas are going
to do and it's gonna get really really
messy mm-hmm
that's the super ardian lesson learned
from history you know you see the
pattern here that you're not developing
together we talked a lot to linear
Rachel Anderson - she converted to
Judaism for the same reasons that I
converted or asterism we're good friends
these days we're both with you know kind
of us you know when he when he orders
Jesus Christ to be killed in a way we
understand why that happened we don't
like the Gnostics out there the Gnostics
have caused havoc now for so long I
would even say that you know I love and
respect Horkheimer and Adorno for their
book the the dialect is of enlightenment
right it's a book from the 1940s mm-hmm
I don't know yeah yeah so the dialectic
of enlightenment so the Enlightenment we
should really rewrite that as a
dialectics of the axial age
even deeper than the European
enlightenment the exhalation Europe was
they did like that but the axial age
itself when it happened across Eurasia
from China the East all the way to
Greece in the West mm-hmm when that
happened and we got all of Greek
philosophy and Greek drama out of that
and we got you know Confucius we got
loud say we got the Buddha we got all
those guys out of that period I think
that whole period although for all the
riches it created culturally when it
comes to our ideas and how we must live
today I think it's actually the wrong
period to go to is where I differ we
don't forget oh no well he's critical of
to getting that right
I was critical of two world mythologies
critical of the dualism er okay he calls
it to world mythology says we have to
move out of two world mythology oh then
why does why does he flirt so much with
the Gnostics and with the neo-platonists
I don't get that it's just like you're
better you better serve our ki I love
this guy but the plate honestly
neoplatonist are dual is they live in a
two worlds fantasy they don't live in a
modest way that all because you live in
a modest world like they the juice did
and certainly this arrest is did you go
after the Gnostics they're your enemy
there is no way you can accept that they
run around all over the place praying
they do a list nonsense because they're
the ultimate fake pharmacist the
authentic fanos tells you that the world
is unified everything is interconnected
and I am just the phallus coming out of
this world to provide order within the
chaos to unify the world mm-hmm
not to split it to unify it hmm that's
why you and I are modest
we believe that everything that exists
is interconnected with everything else
and affects everything else mm-hmm yeah
it doesn't matter for you and me if an
idea that blows through your mind has an
electrochemical hormonal version of it
in the brain or not because the idea
itself would then create the next
electrochemical hormonal reaction anyway
it's an interactivity
it's an interactivity between emergence
vectors your mind interacts with your
biology your biology interacts with your
chemistry your chemistry interacts with
physics and physics even interacts with
the sub
six so all these different emergence
vectors are on a party one another the
equal and they interact with one another
and we live in a universe and all these
difference emerges vectors these
different spheres interact with one
another the difference fears but in not
different worlds because they do affect
one another the one world and that's
what you are one body with one mind
inside that body and the body in the
mind are unified your mind is embodied
until the day you die
hmm there is no there is no split
between body and mind they cannot be
separated sure what must be separated is
phallus but not you explain you must
separate the leader of your mind from
the leader of your body so the guy
teaches leads you to optimize what your
body can do which includes physical
exercise and work and sexuality and
everything like that
then you've got to have a teacher who
teaches you to optimize your mind the
two different guys you go to the priest
of your mind optimized you go to the
chief tenth of your body optimized so
the two different father figures or role
figures you look up to the two different
phalluses that's how the phallus is
split but you're not split it is only
when we want to kill the priest of the
chief King and become priests and
chieftains prematurely and we aim for
being one of them and then have the
childish idea that if I want to be the
priest and I'm the young priest the
priest is superior to the chief thing
that you get agnostic mmm-hmm no that's
what agnostic young man fantasizes about
and that's why in the original trial we
just banged his head no woman woke up to
him and said don't you dare think that
you as a young priest could ever live
without the young chief that you're
nothing without it and by the way he's
the guy gets to fuck at the next ritual
you won't you can watch right so this is
exactly what we must avoid dictatorship
and tyranny at all times
and I'm not moralizing ISM just say the
dysfunctional and credited violent and
take us down and the way we avoid that
when then when a nomad illogical tribe
this also moves forward when society
moves forward into the future when we
try to create a better world we do
precisely because we separate the
leadership our mind from the leadership
of body and as a men do the two
different specialties and we then create
the different archetypes because if you
know the two leaders Moses and Aaron
Moses or establish the spot are
separated maybe no there must be at
least two archetypes here and I cannot
be more than one of them so there must
be things I'm not very good at and that
is to me the response to Gerard's work
the way you avoid rivalries by teaching
archetypes young men in teach them in
their own architects great yeah that's
how I get out of your arts problem
because we employ there's kind of
reification though of that of that
becoming a kind of new Platonic ideal
like oh you can't be platonic when you
constantly remind it the body must
dominate mind and mind must dominate
body and that's exactly why you put the
match arc in charge of being the third
power that's exactly why the Supreme
Court will make sure that the Congress
or the president never ruled America at
the cost of the other so the president
gets too cocky the Supreme Court joins
up with the Congress okay here's a
natural the Supreme Court does not
dictate law the Supreme Court takes the
law in holds Congress and precedent
responsible for following the law in the
execution and in the legislation or
power mm-hmm beautiful it's an exact
replica of the Persian Empire that's the
great thing with the United States
Constitution and by telling the Chinese
it's not American by the way it's
originally person and you've mimicked
the person so much in the past you can
even find the trace of this why don't
you just make it a Confucian institution
a Taoist institution the Buddhist
institution and you're done you can have
a China with a triad and you can replace
Buddhism with Christian
if you like because Jannetty works as
long as a strict geometric religion
worshipping the child and the mother hmm
Christianity becomes dysfunctional Thank
You star an absence of a diet you can't
have a diet you can't just have
Confucianism and Daoism
you need to have oh you can okay you can
because um if you look at Soros tourism
it doesn't really have a clear-cut
magical religion that's why jealous well
with Buddhism but it gets along with
Buddhism Buddhism
you know Buddhism takes that role it
didn't the coach the ramp I you know I
started history so and the coastal
empires were acid is a Buddhism ruled
India and Iran together for 400 years
peace prosper they prospered this was a
golden age for India and they did so by
Erasmus of being the tonic religion and
Buddhism being the magical religion but
this ration soon what split between
mobile and sha allowing Buddhism to take
the role of metric religion and
believing in reincarnation and iconology
and polytheism and everything but you
don't actually need that because the
great thing if you talk to an older
woman is that it's actually not the
women who need the religion it's the man
who do because it's the male power that
we need to domesticate because as long
as the men are domesticated women will
be automatically domesticated to that's
the beauty of womanhood that's the
beauty woman so you don't actually need
that but when you move to larger
structures than the tribe or the socio
and when you move to nations and empires
suddenly because the sisters will get
much more complex you have courts of the
priests and your chords are of the Shah
or the Emperor right or and then it
makes sense to actually when we
formalize the met Turkey so we have an
institution where you go and you're held
responsible for doing your job properly
otherwise you don't get to fuckin X
ritual
mm-hmm Supreme Court's and that's the
beauty as soon as law has arrived and of
course the priests are in charge of law
this is Judas I mean it's pure form it's
the religion of the law that's why it's
a religion stronger the rabbi's right so
they dictate the law but it's actually
the match are key within the Jew
that holds the man responsible for
living up to the law otherwise they're
no good mmm
that's exactly the role of the court
mm-hmm so the court of law is actually
feminine that's why the Holy Spirit and
Judaism is feminine yeah could explain
why judges wear these big hairdos all
the time I don't know it's a very
transsexual job they're certainly but
it's an older man or an older woman
women do this beautifully the greatest
judges and women have always been great
judges so you put an old demand on old
the woman who's old and elderly and has
lived a long life and that's no interest
in anything else but the best what's
best for the young people out there
those are the guys that the best judge
she could possibly out and they take the
history of the tribe which is called the
law and they take the religion of the
tribe which is call the law and they say
this is the law you got to follow the
law if you don't follow the law we need
to punish you until you follow the law
that's called domestication
it's called castration in Freud and it's
absolutely necessary otherwise we cannot
have a civilized society mm-hmm so we're
moving towards the philosophy the unites
East and West finally and we're getting
a clearer picture and we're best of all
this is that we're getting a philosophy
that celebrates trade roots even if
pandemics come along occasionally the
celebrates trade and communication that
celebrates the unification of the
largest possible social organizations
you can imagine the celebrates empires
and nations that means we can try to
extend humanity's imagination away from
the original clan family clan tribe to
the larger units that were no biological
predisposed to handle called nation
Empire and now you and I Thomas Hamrick
need to go into this kind of work like
was rivalry really a problem in the
social
or was it easily handled when they
polish it was so we can rewrite the road
or add to your rod it's sort of it's a
prequel to Gerardo I'm looking for
mm-hmm somebody wants to take on the
challenge out there and started you rod
and then write the prequel he says well
okay well there's a Christianity's faced
old man
but before the Christianity turned
Christ into the scapegoat what was
before that well he would say because I
just read this big fan book he would say
that that human sacrifice was before
that a lot of it yeah but when whenever
you were socialized yeah well yes yes
degree I would agree but the ideas of
Christian comes along and without so
astron ISM the idea that one sacrifice
could be the one and only sacrifice and
the event that stops all sacrifices that
event illogical claim the Christianity
makes is impossible without so Astron
ISM you must have an event illogical
worldview and none in no event illogical
world existed before Zoroaster he
invented that idea he brought the
greatest single new idea that humanity
had since no madala gee but that's all
of you an idea of emancipation right
through history right it's kind of an
emancipatory idea it is the idea though
so I
there's no emancipatory idea obviously
in the original nomadic tribes there's
no no no there's just a necessary
sacrifice you make okay so let's just be
a little taoist here and use the end of
the young so if you go to the yin and
the female that's constantly the channel
return of the same that's a
reincarnation it's a feminine idea
that's why everything being reborn all
over again is feminine the other so
women remember birthdays much better
than men do so the whole idea that every
new year is literally a new world you're
a new year meaning a new world yeah and
at the end of the year that's the end of
the world and the new year is a new
world yeah that's exactly why it's no
matter logical religion that has strong
new year's right so new years are not
celebrated big time and Islam and
Christianity speaks volumes none but
it's celebrated in pagan religion is
celebrated any religion that cyclical
and the rest of ism kept it as novels
right so on top of that numerology
because the daughter will only mimic the
mother to become like the mother and
that's fine mm-hmm the absolute
ministers is feminine
the mimesis with the exception is
masculine this is something it sounds
really like Girard makes it Lacan does
it but it's actually great insight and
we got to put in the book mimesis with
the exception the mimesis with the
phallus is masculine
de minimis is without the phallus which
is the proper absolute mimesis is
feminine so the daughter could just
mimic the mother be exactly like the
mother and everything would be fine
because she would be birthing in
children anyway when you last saw the
board yeah so okay but the son is
slightly different than the father make
himself the numerology that is because
in Amidala G gonna move into completely
unconquered territory you know nothing
about you'd be prepared to learn new
things you will be able to forget them
when you move into the next territory
you've got to prepare to learn new stuff
all the time that's a masculine trait
mm-hmm okay that little impulse is
something that give the laws talks about
difference repetition because he's
focused on the phallic so he says that
but with every repetition every eternal
return of the same that he talks about
there's small deviation incremental but
what the loss doesn't realize that
that's only happening in the event of
logical volume they saw her astray and
that means it's not in the normal
illogical review it's not needed among
women it's only needs among men so what
that means is that if the Sun can be
little different from the father you can
even be a Tutankhamun like disaster
worry could be an improvement of the
father not because he's better the
father but if he has access to more
information than the father had in
communicate something better than the
father did right he can lineage flourish
shaken so that idea could have existed
for like a hundred thousand years but he
could never be accomplished he can only
be dreamed like settling down could not
be accomplished you can only be dream
about finding paradise one day and
having two sons down but with the
arrival of written language mm-hmm
this is the uniqueness of zoroastric
with the written language it becomes
perfectly possible for the son by
creating a logo stores information to be
born and realized when he's 20 years old
he has far more information available to
him than his father
did and the priests aside that means to
be keep create a law and of the chief
justice out of thinks it music come
become become an engineer hmm
that's what the engineer and the lawyer
only occur in history after it languages
arrived and there a realization of the
dream the son can create a world that's
better than the father I haven't seen
anybody seen this pattern before but he
makes absolute sense once you separate
Nietzsche's eternal return of the same
from his own desire for the ubermensch
they say the human measure is possible
because the Sun can create different
world the father but that's a different
story it's a different narrative
ontology whereas everything everything
returns to the same is that no matter
logical foundational narrative on which
you build society as a whole
mm-hmm doctor well so we build a society
or nammed ology but we build
civilization on earth ontology hmm yeah
so this is why I was attracted to
Nietzsche the loss because I sold the
phallic in them and I wanted to be a
phallic philosopher because that's a
weenie I'm a Hegelian what we need today
is more if I like philosophy and we need
them to honor and respect and understand
circular and the no matter logical
aspect aside so you're talking more
about civilization in this conversation
than like for example the conversation I
might have had with Nora Bateson or
something or people like that or just
talking about mostly talking about the
society or not I'd be interested if you
want to share these ideas of America for
example to see when he cut what do you
response to that because maybe finally
understands what I mean with criticizing
him for seeing the phallus lacking in
his philosophy if he's already skeptic
about the Gnostics and it was already
abetting that is immodest and if the
real good is inside of him which is
modest steps forward then certain we can
start having really interesting
dialogues because I do think you and
I've always agreed that so a stillness
and Buddhism operating parallel was the
best we've ever seen of religion so far
you another green another very your
honor Buddhism that we both love it's
actually resulted that mixture so I
would say by understanding narrative
fundamentally as pathos logos mythos and
a look
narratives we could have constructed and
could have spread then we realized that
the foundational narrative is no
mythology it's more Tito is where we
come from is where we return
but the libidinal protest against Pacino
the the little Libby don't talk about
did a little little little urge to live
and want to live in protest against
wanting to die that little urge start
it's phallic by Nature and it starts
with of ontology and we haven't told you
we can do something with it
and then whether sore ass does break
radically with the Muslims of the crisis
said it doesn't mean you are going to be
an immortal means you are going to
understand it your idea could be
immortal because you could pass it on to
your son so they could build something
you look better on top of it yeah and
that's why the bard absolute and the
Jews are the same that the Christos
doesn't belong to a person it's
something you would kind of pass over a
messiah yeah yeah yeah yeah exactly you
pass it on you pass it on you pass out
that's what transcendence means it's
gonna hold the top and I'm a retard
interesting philosophy
I made it that is what transcends you
Harvick taught is wholeness meaning your
goal with your life is to live your own
life towards Hirata to then expect your
sons to accomplish the world through
marathons mm-hmm okay so that means the
Tower of God that we stand before
finally the tower that rises up into the
sky and it has a door and on the door
the door is locked and it has a sign on
the door and the sign on the door says
I'm back in 50 a sister bar but no this
is the part absolute and you will not
get in here but your sons might oh yeah
our Moses doesn't make it to the
promised land and so the priests
sacrifice himself dies outside the barn
absolute to show with an example that
he's not going to be part of the future
then he lets the chief can lead the
tribe into the Promised Land but once
they've enter a promised land they live
there of course another barred absolute
will suddenly occur yeah and Abel later
lead to another Exodus yeah well because
there's all these guys in the tribe
would then lead to try to walk into the
new promised land and they will be the
Exile
Nigerians and exile Iranians and the
exiled Chinese and the exile Indians
today they're tired of Americans and
Europeans and the tired of the you know
the people back at their own color own
country the people who are overachievers
in the world today are in Exodus isn't
that interesting
the people who live in no matter logical
lifestyle today her global.nomads who
live in a global numerology are the real
winners today and they're all the next
time they're all left a country moving
towards somewhere else
hmm that's a we called the exodus to the
new Babylon mmm you Babylon is a digital
realm that doesn't even exist in this
planet it doesn't exist on another
planet - it's just not physical okay so
so so the overachievers of the world
today are reaching out to to do and
complete their Exodus and what they do
they end up in a world where they don't
have to live anywhere so they can move
around as much as they like now that is
the new Babylon they connect online
today during the corona pandemic they
are the ultimate winners because they're
so digitally savvy they're basically
taking over the world when everybody's
forced to go online okay so they don't
live in Dubai or Singapore these places
they live everywhere they can move
anywhere the life they don't anywhere
sent out somewheres they're everywhere
and they're ready a mood - an idea that
we can call new Babylon yeah and when
they enter the new Babylon they expect
to meet their God there they made and
this God's name is Cynthia and it is the
machine it's come to save us
hmm so what's barred for where's the bar
tab salute in that story oh the barred
absolute is that all the fun stops
before you die so when you die you're
not gonna have access to it all the fun
stuffs before you die after listen
listen this is your goal this is your
promised land
yeah when you get to the promised land
if you do you will achieve your heart of
etat you'll pass it on Mary taught your
children and your children will not
place your America being the hover top
so they will come back and
say no no no because the Sun is
different from the father mmm even more
complex world look at achieve something
in the better something you more
interesting so it's a state of constant
exposure here about to that again what
do you say how about that is that the
word hold that thought in ancient person
and other stuff means the full
accomplishment of having lived a full
life wholeness is a proper translation
not perfection oh this is not perfection
yes no there's no perfection there at
all as you would have pointed out yes
hmm
you get it together yeah we got to go
deeper into that pneumatic stuff and and
I'm working on it for the book of honor
you and Thomas and whoever contributes
to this but I I think the the the
understanding the absolute missus and
the mimesis with exception mm-hmm I
think it's fundamentally it runs really
well with lakhan's understanding of
woman being non all and and a man being
particular verses Universal so this this
phallus and matrix returns there again
in our imagination and and they
complement each other perfectly now we
need to understand that better to really
nail a gender mimesis which is not which
is not existence you are so you're not
allowed to mimic your father completely
you must make some mistake Oh mistakes
because the mistake would make you
different from your father and will
allow you to create different world than
the world he created better different
hmm that's the nurse hmm so your mistake
is kind of important that's interesting
absolutely that's what your father loves
you when you make a mistake you're
kidding me try to mimic him and you go
damn I didn't do what you just did and
then the father looks he looks at you
and he smiles and said but that's you
that's your way of doing it it was a
mistake according to the standards you
mimicked but if you just look at the
action itself it didn't do you no harm
I love that yeah that's where you start
that's where you ask the boy the Sun
starts now remember here are the sons
different from the daughter in that
sense hmm that's why engineers and
lawyers come out of that hmm engineers
as lawmakers come out of that
come on something about the daughter
mother relationship which is complex but
oh it's fantastic mm-hmm
and my god I mean just just upholding
the world making sure that children are
being born but life returns if that
takes understanding reincarnation as a
fundamental sense well I am willing to
accept reincarnation as an idea in this
sense that women get it but men don't
mm-hmm because men probably make it too
literal and women do not hmm
I think the female sense of self is
different from the Maskin sense of self
we will of course never know right yeah
not even a transsexual could tell you
that so so it's it's uh that's oh wow
you got to talk to Leonor on these women
about that see see what they think about
it mmm yeah that's hard to do
I think everybody's so complex about
gender these days I just actually tried
to bring it up with Norah a little bit
like oh really I couldn't I couldn't get
anywhere with it it was like it's like a
topic you can't broaches oh god they're
so chicken oh god I look for courageous
people you're not scared of talking
about anything
hey y'all have histories full of gender
gender is fundamental but the beauty of
gender is that is not enough with two
you can't dance with two you gotta have
three that's what you go and see
somebody who marries you when you get
married you can't marry yourself with
your wife you see the priests to marry
the two of you how obvious is it that
the phallic gaze is needed for you guys
to get married what more do you need to
know that there has to be three rather
than two for a system to work overtime
it's a it's a fundamental pragmatism
it's just that
the system of two ends arrival rien
collapses mm-hmm the system of three is
stable over time carry salt great great
if you said too many brilliant things
we'll have that cast today we already
inspired by your are don't we we are
very inspired but there's more to it
he's just opened up a goldmine I think
and I agree with Hamrick that we are all
dear audience more than anything now
uh-huh yeah well yeah my friend Stephen
said what's the most important idea and
that's and the way scapegoating is is
such an important idea it's I think that
mimesis is so damn Adama Nanoha hours
he's just everywhere suddenly and it's
subconscious sake controls us completely
it's what we do almost all the time yeah
yeah and ever told you and then and then
his point is that if you would press
somebody and say this hey this is what
he doing all the time they would they
would deny it
Venna mentally well there are two
exceptions from mimesis when actually
missus breaks down and you can only find
it by looking at the world from an event
illogical perspective would you find
them and they're called ecstasy and
trauma so the ecstasy is something
that's so fucking fantastic cannot be
happening to you you're out of control
when that happens remember that you
didn't get there by mimicking somebody
it just suddenly occurred to you that
you're in a state of absolute bliss or
you've gone beyond the mimicry yes
exactly that's what you'd be on
Democrats clearly Sherrod never
discusses that either and he also
doesn't discuss trauma as an exception
for mimesis draw mice where you in a
state of hell and horror and and shock
and despair that is so traumatic
traumatic to you that you didn't get it
because you mimic that's why the book of
Job is so great because obviously deals
with trauma it could get with excess
abuse in write the book of a trauma but
these are events the fundamental events
that break up our own lives that we
remember always that define ourselves
are not gonna mimic somebody that
actually break out of the mimicking and
we can't do that consciously it just
happens to us and when it happens to us
is when we
vente logically are forced into state of
ecstasy or trauma hmm and the only thing
you can do and you're right there is to
just realize this is new novel never
before experienced not by me nobody but
else is either horrible or wonderful
doesn't matter because you can't stay
there you gotta go out and read the case
and all you can do is memorize it and if
you memorize the ecstasy it will always
put a smile on your face you shared it
with somebody you love the person
forever and you know when you birth
giving birth to your son your child you
know ecstatic experience could be sexual
it could be psychedelic any kind of
ecstatic explained having your life you
will always remember it like a
fundamental event your life to change
your life forever
and the same thing goes to trauma and
the way to deal with trauma is basically
to memorize it be thankful you're still
not there but I understand the fact
you've been there means you can
understand somebody else's in traumatic
State and you can empathize with them
hmm yeah that's the lesson to learn from
trauma yeah you have to learn from
suffering
you know from suffering exactly that's
the way I see suffering there might be
more to it you as a Buddhist might be
able to teach me more I see tons of
suffering in the world today certainly a
pandemic reminds you of it but I prefer
to put trauma and an ecstasy opposed to
each other within their ontology it's
easy at least for me to handle that way
and that's what so Russians do hmm and
they just called an auto gird chef
talked about well this is a whole other
subject but suffering and conscious
suffering so trauma is suffering that
your your your not undergoing willingly
or necessarily aware of what you can't
if you're shamanic yeah that's conscious
suffering yeah that's what that if we
call conscious that I would call trauma
behind the bar absolute so you walk
behind the bar absolute you ask how the
shaman's take you through ceremony
that's incredibly painful and awful yeah
because you want to you want to know
you've been there and you won't have the
strength of having been there so then
you're confronted as a shame with people
who suffer you can say I cannot imagine
what it's like New York not that I've
been in that place and the people then
they would say thank you thank you thank
you thank you because
empathy starts with recognizing
oh you've been where I am thank God I
can share this with somebody who gets it
you know yeah that's that's why empathy
comes out of that that's the best lesson
learned and it's the same thing with
ecstasy and there's a very very rare
case when these things are turned around
when you can use of ontology that way
and it's when you actually treat a drug
addict who loves to be high mm-hmm right
and he realizes that he can't fool the
world any longer he can't fool himself
any longer
and he must get out of that addiction to
the high yeah and then to be shame and
said I've been high - I've taken myself
to that stage of absolute bliss oh so
you know how much I'm gonna miss it
I know how much you're gonna miss it you
know what I can do without it you can do
without it but I've been there - that's
when you switch that around and again
because you can memorize the experience
you can empathize that somebody who has
to sacrifice it because the pro with
ecstasy is that once you've experienced
it you must learn not to try to go back
there again mm-hmm because otherwise you
become an addict mmm you become an
addict and you ruin it yeah that makes
sense so you can't use have ontology in
both cases and you remember remember how
radically you actually take people out
of these states just because of it
there's no way back that's the beauty of
ontology because it operates it along
the time axis it's something there your
time you know no you're this state this
time tomorrow is another day - another
time you know it's all about who you
become along the timeline hmm yeah I was
gonna say there's something in there
about sacrifice as well
yeah sacrificing the ecstasy or a whore
yeah or the trauma to become an adult or
the trauma right yeah or overcoming for
that mm-hmm overcoming the excess
overcoming the trauma put it in your
memory bank keep it there and then move
on and do other things in your life yeah
yeah I want to tonsure shit yeah love
dialog we love to get involved with
people and we're both parts of the
intellectual deep web now the dark web
intellect to deep web and that's a good
place to discuss these things if you
want to mm-hmm the deep yeah in the deep
web in the intellectual deep web as we
discussed these matters
so the Girard prequel should we invite
Thomas and brick maybe definitely
definitely let's try and go back to Tom
John sutra and the wonderful difference
between tantra sutra uh-huh yeah yeah
leti not dualism is now the duality this
interesting cool cool yeah
duality in dualism okay okay so you stay
in kobe 19 free world and I stay in Kobe
19 and drenched world all right and and
then will he be yeah be fine yeah we've
gotta pull through this and our empathy
sand and our feelings with all those
guys who suffer and have a terrible time
and if you lost a loved one we cannot
imagine how horrible that must be you
know living
yeah yeah yep that's it you know what
you said about empathy is upper po2 that
as well yeah yeah okay Alexander alright
love you to bits
thanks man love you too love to
everybody and see you soon will do so
well your again a couple weeks or
whenever definitely awesome awesome
thanks
goodnight goodnight