[Music]
Ronen you just put out a film about
Jordan Peterson contrasting him with
Russell Brand and seeing what the left
can learn from Jordan Peterson it's
become more important to display loyalty
to our political tribe than it is to
understand a person or an issue in all
of its complexity I'm Lauren hayatun and
I'm exploring the new politics this on
the other side of this culture and I see
Jordan Peterson as a test case for
getting there it's one of a few things
I've seen from people on the Left who
seem to be kind of asking that question
but also I think there's a sense with
some people on the left that they still
don't want to have that conversation did
you feel nervous about doing it and what
were your conclusions from doing the
project yeah I mean I was pretty sick
with anxiety in like the weeks leading
up to it because I am from probably like
a traditional left activist circle where
there's a real allergy to Peterson if
you want to just put it softly
and what we wanted to do was maybe ask
for as a yes and to Peterson like what
as an approach that honors his strengths
and really kind of recognizes the
contribution that he's made but also
from our perspective point to the gaps
in his thinking but even a tacit
acknowledgement of those strengths there
was the fear that that would be seen as
on some level a betrayal and that did
play out in some of the comments to the
video we had a broadly positive response
we had people say like thank God a
refreshing critique from a left
perspective that isn't just dismissing
outright that there was some attempt to
engage but it was really nice the way
you framed it like we're we're ten
especially in social media we're tempted
to say to make an either/or judgement
all the time yeah well this is a in a
way the video was about Jordan
Peterson's thinking but on a more meta
level it was a commentary on a political
culture so we face this enormous
pressure to either love or hate either
public figures or issues or to endorse
them and to reject him and be very
public in that
but people and issues are really complex
and with someone like Jordan Peterson I
can see lots of as I said in the video
profound contributions and strengths and
also areas for I feel like as thinking
is really off and how can you hold that
complexity in a tribal polarized culture
where you're kind of shut down for
holding it and I think that that maybe
is the new political space that's
opening up there's more and more people
willing to go like no I'm not going to
just fall into a binary I'm gonna try
and stay open and hold the complexity
mmm yeah it's something that we've
talked about before on our podcast is
that hold that the kind of the test of
sort of maturity in a way is holding
many truths at the same time and not
necessarily sort of saying this is true
but this is also true and it seems that
we're at a place this is also sort of
the intellectual dark web for me as kind
of like is it possible to think in
public and thinking in public is very
different from kind of reacting to
things and I hope I think I think you're
probably right that now a space is
starting to open up for that kind of
dialogue whereas maybe it wasn't or
hasn't been because also the sense that
the mainstream media doesn't necessarily
allow that to happen if everything has
to be fitted into a five-minute
soundbite or whatever there's not really
a lot of time to unpack ideas and
develop conversations and it feels that
there is a space opening up for the
possibility of genuine thinking in
public which I guess is really an
interesting place to be yeah and if you
can try and create a space that isn't
from the get-go pushing people's buttons
and triggers that puts them into this
defensive mode if you really try and
honor and and and and it's it's the
basis of a procedure of inquiry it's the
basis of therapy it's that you don't
start with attacking someone you start
with really honoring them and giving
them a space to be seen and then from
that place it's like okay I'm I'm more
open and that's what we found in the
comments is that with that
acknowledgement of Peterson which is I
think what Peterson fans are looking for
it I don't think that they mind
critiques per se it's more there's also
an acknowledgement of him and not just
an outright rejection yeah
and so that was I think what's often
interesting is it obviously is in this
space it's not just the video the video
is the stimulus
and actually what was interesting to
notice was did the tone or the or the
calm the conversation changed it become
more generative and I think that that's
probably where we should be trying to
get to yeah that's a really interesting
point as well about firstly about that
we can only start to inquire from a
place of safety which is absolutely true
and actually if you like Peterson talks
about this and even McGilchrist
talks about this we have two systems we
have one system and this is polyvagal
theory if you wanna kind of look at that
what's going on underneath we're either
in a defensive mode and we're not able
to grow or we're in an inquiring
explorative mode and then we can grow
and actually you're right political
discussions have to respect that as well
and I think you're also right when you
say that what turns off Peter I'd count
myself a peace and peace and admirer
certainly admire of his work I don't
like the word fan I think that's that's
a really dangerous energy to bring to
anything because I've also we've also
put out some podcast sort of critiquing
what we see as some of his blind spots
but I think what turns me off and what
turns off a lot of other people who
admire his work is the energy that comes
through in a lot of the criticisms like
you read things from from reporters that
just say charlatans fraud or and you
read it and you just think okay there
may be things that he's not he's not
seeing or he's got blind spots as
everyone does but the energy and much of
the criticism is just so off that I
think it really makes a lot of people
who've become extremely for familiar
this is the other thing people have
become deeply familiar with his work
over a long time usually at their own in
their own time so when they see this
coming out and the media they just think
okay there's something off about about
the way that he's being critiqued well
what's interesting is that that also
needs to be met with the same energy of
that person being seen and understood
that that product principle goes all the
way down so in this case the people who
respond and say he's a charlatan he's a
misogynist he's a fascist it's like
what's going on there
like what aspect of of them feeling
unsafe that would lead to a very
reactive response instead of open
curiosity and I think that behind that
is a whole set of emotional needs and so
I think that at a
best it's pointing to a form of
political engagement that basically
doesn't immediately dismiss that
actually inquires into what's the thing
behind the thing yes people might not be
open to that but I still think there's
an opportunity to model that as a
general principle even if someone is
unwilling to engage with it because I
think that if you take let's say writers
and feminist circles they have red lines
around if there is a feeling that there
is sexism there is misogyny there's an
undermining of let's say black rights
movements and and and whether or not
Peterson is transgressing them is
another thing but that if there is the
feeling of that clearly that activates
our very strong no and I think that I've
been thinking a lot about this in terms
of you know the left's relationship with
identity politics and there's a lot of
talk about you know it needs to get its
house in order it needs to reject it and
and move into a space that more people
can get on board with it but the
question is is the politics that we need
nowadays a kind of a reject or is it a
can we try and integrate can we can
include can we listen to the the the
genuine feelings that are there that
lead people to believe that the world
can be primarily understood as an
oppressive system where there is an
oppressor class and there is an oppress
and even if that analysis is wrong there
are clearly personal experiences there
are clearly emotions there that have to
be dealt with because they don't go away
it's like you you know it's you're just
rejecting it back into the shadows in a
way and I so I and maybe I'm curious
like how do we do that how how do we
bring what is a therapeutic approach to
political conversation and and is it
possible I don't know I don't know I
mean it's interesting because one of our
criticisms of or critiques of Jordan
Peterson was that he is too reactive
that he is subject to a lot of these
kind of relentless attacks from the
media but the he our point was if he
starts getting into reactivity in
response then a lot of people are not
going to hear his mess
they're just gonna see angry white man
and when we put that critique out there
were quite a few people commenting and
saying you're just blaming the victim
because he's just reacting he's being
attacked relentlessly and you're saying
and effectively we were saying we were
asking for an almost superhuman level of
transcendence from him and that almost
nobody would have been able to maintain
under the under the weight of so many of
the mischaracterizations and stuff that
we see from the media so it's like if
we're asking for I I I think you're
right like I bought this for a while
that you we do need to introduce some
form of political therapy into the
discourse it's like okay so what's
really going on what what are the the
experiences little led you to because
our political views are almost always a
reflection of a deeper psychological
reality and I think unless we make space
for that psychological reality there's
no hope of of any kind of generative
dialogue or real meeting but we're
asking an awful lot of people to be able
to do that I think personally I think
all all we can do is create a space
where that create a space where that is
the dominant frame that is then that it
you create the space there's a dominant
frame and then other people can come
into it but understanding that not
everyone will be able to do that and
maybe that isn't a frame that is
appropriate for everybody and at some
point if people have like wounds that
mean that they're really not able to
engage in generative dialogue then
accept the inclusivity I only go so far
and this is a big problem on the left I
think is wanting to have a space that's
completely inclusive of absolutely
everything but then if you're including
people who are not able to respect the
the ground rules of what an inclusive
general generative dialogue means then I
think that's where the left gets into
trouble because it's not very good at
policing boundaries around around the
ground rules of its own generative
dialogue and then it gets hijacked very
very quickly like left spaces are
notorious for being hijacked by people
with the with the most kind of keenly
felt agendas and they're often the most
pathological agendas although what or
they're the ones that come from the
deepest honor
sense of wounding it's like how do you
make space for that allow it to be
processed but if it can't be processed
then maybe it's not appropriate for them
to be in that space I don't know but I
think that's part of the the narrative
or the dynamic that comes in in a lot of
these spaces because Peterson talks
about this it's like the left doesn't
like boundaries hates boundaries hates
hierarchies hates boundaries but it's we
need some boundaries to be able to have
generative dialogues yeah I mean I agree
and I think you've described broadly the
parameters of what that looks like I
just don't know how you can do that
online on Facebook when the like button
is determining most people's behavior I
do think we should have expected of
Jordan Peterson I think that if you rise
to such a level of influence there is
this transition that you make from
becoming the kind of the backbench
politician to the statesman and like
statesmen power from Trump behave
differently when they're on the world
stage and you know I've the thing that
maybe I've been more Sivaji to is just
the degree to which there's such a
rejection of young student activists who
might be kind of in the throes of a
particular ideology that they might be
able to see but there are also young
students and they do mean well and they
do see a very up world and want
to change it and rather than and
particularly as a clinical psychologist
rather than taking what I might assume
the like I kind of a fatherly a
grandfatherly approach of really like
seeing them and honoring them and then
from that place of openness bringing
them to a greater place of individuation
a better relationship with ideology it's
just like you are the curse of the world
and it's like well well like it god it's
no wonder the left hands a difficulty
going to board a Petersen there they're
being shouted at and so it's interesting
that you know the person that I see
modeling this often the least is
Peterson even though in other forums he
I can see him very open to learning and
in this dialogue but when it comes to
the left just like oh I think I agree
with you about all of those points I
think there's the the issue for me is
because he says this also it's like he
says people don't have ideas ideas have
people so if that's true then where is
the compassion for people who are under
the sway of a pernicious idea and I
I think part of that is that his
trajectory so far has been in combat
with the left I mean this was his like
his job was at risk and then he was also
I think quite quickly because of the
times we were in pulled into one side of
the culture wall and that worked for him
for quite a while and I agree I do think
that especially now I kind of hoped that
there could be some more openness to to
dialogue with the left because I
actually don't think he is he like he's
characterized as being on the right I
genuinely don't think he is I think he
he is more of a centrist and I think is
his natural sort of place of if he
hadn't been sort of pushed so far by by
a lot of the kind of the media
interactions that he's had I think his
natural place would have been midway
between the two but I think the the
optics and the way that he's sort of
gotten success by pushing the kind of
anti s JW student politics thing has
probably locked him into a little bit of
a reactivity towards it and maybe
there's some kind of aftermath of the
experience that he went in went through
in Toronto as well that comes out in the
way that because the way that he talks
about the left is different from where
he talks about the right yeah so I would
say that there probably is some
political PTSD going on with his
experience in Toronto and I think that
in a knee dynamic it's not just him
being assailed and being reactive he's
also co-creating that dynamic and I do
think that he has ridden the wave of
anti identity politics anti regressive
left sentiment to get to this point and
I think that what all of us are calling
for is can there be a transcendence of
that like in true developmental fashion
can you know can Jordan Peterson
reinvent and remake himself in order to
unify more people and but but maybe the
from what I see is that I don't see him
being in a relationship to the left like
the things that I would want to see from
him is less skepticism about climate
change more like explicit critique of
Trump like that there are certain like
you know I don't want to describe it as
a
a box-ticking exercise but there are
things that we would need to here on the
left in order to feel like our this
person speaks for us and I know that yes
my my
my thing is I still don't think the left
is at any point ready to meet him that's
my my prop because I I even see like
people so obviously we're deeply
interested in sort of integral thinking
this idea of yes and and I don't see
even when I see kind of integral
thinkers talking about being yes and
with Peterson the energy of it for me is
not yes and it's still rejecting or it's
still saying no you're wrong about this
I'm not sure the left is yeah I think
it's starting to have that conversation
that might be able to kind of integrate
what he's saying but I don't see it
happening yet and I don't I think
there's still there's still work that
needs to be done on both sides to be
able to get there yes definitely I but I
may be and this is an idea that came
from Jonathan Ryan's essay critique is
that it is a yes and or it is of both
end and it's an either/or you can have a
fully rounded position on Peterson's
virtues as weaknesses and then come down
on the side of ultimately I don't think
you're a positive force in the world
ultimately I'm critical that you don't
talk enough about structural problems
and systemic issues this is the theme of
the video that released was like I would
love to see Peterson talk about systems
change what needs to change in a
structural level I think in the
interview that you've done with him
you've talked about the structural
conditions for psychological growth like
that's the territory I would love to see
him move into and also in terms of his
like he's very male centric and I think
that it's it's great that there was a
public figure that is standing up for
men but it also ideally it would take a
progression towards being integrative
and that women would also feel like he
speaks for them because currently it's
very easy just to see that he doesn't
we connected over a project called alter
ego which is which is now your media
channel and a couple of gatherings over
the last couple of years you want to
sort of describe what the I what the
framing of alter ego is what what's
what's the aim with alter ego
I think there
framing of it now I began as this idea
of the progressive politics is in crisis
it is a crisis of ideas and that's
controversial yeah and that spirituality
is the place to look for answers that
we're missing that there's just a kind
of a limit to what we can do materialism
and that there is a kind of a
transcendent possibility with
spirituality that can renew progressive
politics and like seeing movements on
the right who are well equipped with
mystical language and kind of more
visceral embodied narrative what it's
turned into though is more of a project
that's been inspired by integral
thinking or developmental thinking so I
think in one sense is trying to promote
a developmental shift both in society
recognising the importance of
psychological growth but also that the
psychological elements actually start to
be integrated into political discussion
that we make the personal political that
we understand the ways in which our
psychology our shadow our biases frame
how we see the world and that by
actually you know growing in that domain
we can actually outgrow those our
problems or expand our way of seeing
things so that's the first shift to
developmental shift and the other is a
dialectical shift it's kind of realizing
the limits of if only the left were more
organized communicated better did better
grassroots organizing that we would win
and it's a recognition that hold on a
second like there's a whole other half
of the population that has just a
different mixture of Moral Sentiments
and like how do we actually integrate
them how do we bring them into a
dialectic and find the synthesis so it's
an attempt to both bring your
developmental shift in a dialectical
shift and we've been doing that through
gatherings and bring people together to
have those discussions for better or
worse and now the media channel is an
attempt to model that kind of thinking
in in the public space and so the
Russell Brand Jordan Peterson video was
an attempt to go look here are two big
public figures they're grounded in like
real spiritual psychological ethos and
yet they're on different points of the
spectrum and they're in some kind of
convivial dialogue let's let's use that
as a starting point and make sense of
where where they are and even though we
did reach a conclusion on Peterson
from our perspective he doesn't go far
enough we need more the idea more is
just to give people a more expanded idea
of the space and for them to form their
own opinion mmm because I guess I mean
we've worked together on one of the
alter ego gatherings and this this sort
of general idea that we need to bring in
a deeper level of political discussion
we need to reintegrate what I would have
said back then the spiritual I think
since since really diving deeply into
Jordan Peterson's thought I'd now kind
of recognize also the value of religion
as well which I haven't done quite so
much before I think I really kind of
understand the value of these kind of
deep encoded stories and mythologies of
spirituality rather than just the sort
of the transition spirits to the
transcendent experience so that's been
an interesting journey for me and I also
had a really real felt sense from the
beginning of the project that there's a
there's a tension between and this is
also where in the UK the the British
Labour Party as well came out of both
marks and Methodism that there's a
there's a sense of and there's a sense
of what are your initial axioms because
if you if you've come from a position of
kind of like the Marxist idea that we're
mainly talking about material conditions
or you come from a conditioning 'full
life a life that yeah it's it's a it's
more of a spiritual or religious origin
it's like those two things I think any
conversation around this issue in
progressive circles is going to have a
slight awkward tension between those two
things can I add another axiom that I
think is really important in this is
that the Marxist materialist frame also
has a power dynamic at its center it's
about capital versus labor it's an
oppressor class versus depressed which
like I believe that analysis holds out
but with a spiritual perspective or a
psychological perspective there also is
that realization that every person in
that dynamic is suffering on some level
all of us are wounded all of us are
playing out dynamics from her childhood
and it adds in a just more spaciousness
around that and a possibility of some
kind of resolution rather than the
dominant frame in Marxism which
is counter hegemony and again I'd also
do believe there is a place for counter
hegemony and there are powerful
individuals and systems in place that
are damaging and they need to be
contested but I also think that one of
the the brilliant aspects of the
spiritual is this greater compassion for
the individual no matter where position
they occupy in the hierarchy and I think
this is this is something that Jordan
Peterson talks about and I really
recognize as being a fundamental
difference is I think a lot of people
implicitly accept a set of axioms about
necessarily knowing that they do and
that for me is the issue with the
identity politics left is that they
implicitly accept the axioms of
collectivism they implicitly accept the
axioms of kind of privat that the
language around sort of white privilege
and your your that your group identity
is more important than your individual
identity and that's happens at a very
sort of subtle level whereas actually
what Peterson for me is bringing back as
a sense of no we have two primary accent
axiom has to be the divinity of the
individual and that's something that
we've evolved over millennia and we're
in danger of throwing that out with the
bathwater because we have this very
well-meaning idea that a prep the
dominant narrative should be oppression
which should be seeing therefore we're
seeing people through their group
identity rather than their individual
identity so I I would slightly disagree
or at least maybe offer another
perspective so you have like Toulouse
and Qatari who were like kind of famous
post modernist theorists who would say
that the individual is dead and it's the
dividual it's the transpersonal
individual that lives in relational
context and the idea of this binary
between the individual and the group and
the and Peterson kind of really bringing
the individual back I think that it's a
it's a false dichotomy and I think that
we need to I'm basically just
introducing that as a more as a concept
for us to hold rather than seeing the
two things in tension but it's like for
me it's like it's a both and it's very
clear that if the group becomes
all-important that can lead to all kinds
of tyrannies and and kind of the
collective ethos sweeping over like 20
century is like to some degree that
story and there is a need for individual
agency within that but there also within
that that feels like it can become just
very I and Randy and I suppose has this
sense that it's the individual on there
kind of Nietzsche and journey of
manifestation if it feels very masculine
male centric and maybe less feminine and
relational and and I don't have a
conclusion on that I'm more just
introducing more frames well for me it's
like it's an incomplete story the
individualism story is for me correct
but it's incomplete
but my sense and this is from personal
growth and my sort of spiritual journey
is that by going really really deeply
into my own process like really
identifying my own sort of limiting
beliefs on my own kind of conditioning
on my own wounds or whatever kind of and
as I have fixed those more and more I
feel in increasingly firstly that I feel
more in a position of of contact with
other people like I think that's the
catch-22 I think that's the paradox that
we start to kind of decide well either
it's individual or it's our collective
and we the left prioritizes the group
and the right prioritize the individual
for me the resolution is no it's only by
really individuating really going deeply
into ourselves and really kind of
becoming ourselves giving birth to
ourselves as jung talked about then we
have the potential for genuine contact
and genuine collaboration and if we jump
to that space of no we're all we're all
part of the tribe we can collaborate
together often what comes out is real
shadow stuff and like it's that that for
me is like the catch-22 we go deeply
deeply deep into our own process and
then we find we're all the same person
looking out through different eyes and
it's a direct embodied feeling of
connection rather than trying to kind of
create this disconnection which maybe
hasn't manifested naturally yeah so I
totally agree with all of that and I
think that if we look at this from an
evolutionary perspective like why has
Jordan Peterson come on the scene right
now
why is his message resonated so it's
I like reject that it's purely because
of fragile masculinity and you know this
you know the he's the intellectual we
deserve that's kind of the the the the
sentiment on the left i I do think that
in from an integral perspective it's a
correction of a lower tier that the
individual does have to individuate
because if it just leaps straight to
post-modernism Universal collectivism
its lost and so I do think that Peterson
is a really necessary stage on the
journey but we need to move fast and we
need to start in reintegrating that with
greater and greater I suppose ultimately
the wholeness both on an individual
level but also on a collective and maybe
the danger is that yes we all have to go
through our individual journey of
self-actualization but because that
takes place within a broadly speaking
individualistic culture it it's the
classic critique of spirituality it just
ends up as narcissism and and again this
is a point that Jonathan Rosen raised in
his paper is that you know the true self
actualization is often born out in
service to community in service to the
greater whole that you're a part of and
as well as the question is does does
Peterson's narrative orientations
towards that way do we see it resolving
the systemic crisis that we face in the
world and that's maybe where I feel like
potentially doesn't go far enough I
think he would argue that if enough
people got themselves together then
those systemic crises would would be a
lot easier to solve which I mean I I
agree with that I also think that there
is probably a place beyond him pointing
to yeah but I but I really feel like we
can't jump there and I think most yeah I
think most of what we're saying at the
moment is it kind of jumping beyond not
not doing the work not doing the the
kind of the deep work of self
responsibility of really kind of
identifying he send a couple of really
interesting thing as me
with me how do you know that you're not
avoiding your personal responsibility
and people on the left go now I'm not
avoiding my personal responsibility said
how do you know pay really close
attention don't just dismiss it how do
you know because personal responsibility
is an incredibly difficult thing to take
like full personal responsibility for
everything that you've done in your life
really and it was a kind of really
interesting moment it's like yeah how
that's a lifelong process it is a
lifelong process and and also I think
that it's I think that the idea that we
need to like fully mature and get to
that place of self-actualization before
we get to collective issues is a it just
given where we are in this moment in
history I think that that's not a good
option I think that we do radically need
to do that inner work and it needs to
express itself in really tackling global
problems that we face and I also think
that like some credit needs to be given
that like it's easy to characterize the
left as a bunch of materialist who
haven't an inner work but like if you
look at people in all circles there's
lots of people who are doing lots of
inner work and they are involved in
broadly left-wing causes and they do can
recognize when a group dynamic is
getting toxic and I do think that there
is a growing constituency that are doing
both and yeah maybe that there is more
of an emphasis on the the systems change
thinking and less on individual work and
they haven't done a proper self
examination of their shadow but like you
know you also have to work with what you
have and I think that again I do think
that a in the in the kind of the
evolution that the individual does and
some level need to be recalibrated but
then it's like right and then let's go
or we will have a pretty shitty context
for the individual to operate in 50
years
yeah which is an interesting in one of
the interviews we did with Jamie wheel
he made this comment about but
specifically identity politics because
he has been involved in these kind of in
these social change or really big
projects and what he found was that they
got taken down why he was he describes
it as he was very he assumed that
everyone basic
outside the old right was kind of an
okay guy or an okay person until they he
basically said he was kneecaps from the
left which he never expected and it was
because the problem with identity
politics is it stops you from even
moving forward because if you're act him
say well we can't move forward until
we've got a hundred percent
representation we can't move forward
until we've got we've made sure that
every single voice is being heard we
can't move forward until the the the
list is endless because the number of
people that would need to be involved in
this particular conversation would be
would be astronomical before you can
even move forward and I think that is
the issue for me on the left is that we
have this very toxic worldview when it's
taken to an extreme that actually is
pretty much kneecapping a lot of the the
police or tential positive social
movements so again I agree with you like
it's deconstructing by nature its art is
in pointing out the flaws it's it kind
of inimicable to going out there
initiating there was a really good
example of the Swedish initiative which
was a new political party that is
inspired by meta modern thinking The New
Yorker did a piece on them and they had
just so much promise so many tons of
people and then it just took a couple of
voices to throw out like somewhat
unsubstantiated accusations of sexist
misogynist behavior and the whole
project was just like torpedoed it's
just so easy to do that so I do
recognize that and also that they're you
know identity politics is a spectrum and
there is like really extreme versions
that are like that and there's also
mature and thoughtful versions and I
think that like we have plenty of people
who are really involved in
intersectional activism and identity
politics in our circles and like it is
fascinating to to talk to them about
like what is a mature thoughtful
identity politics look like you know
even just a simple like shift in
thinking from calling out to calling in
so there has been a big culture of
calling out you know white male
privilege which essentially has been
shaming and you know really negative
towards a new culture of in a very
sensitive way highlighting
a person's experience of maybe being
marginalized in a group setting someone
taking up too much space and calling it
in so like this I think also it's so
easy to have this particular extreme
caricature of identity politics and also
not to forget that it's it serves the
interest from my perspective for someone
on the left it serves the interests of
people who are on the far-right and
fascists for more and more and more of
us to have this extreme caricature of
identity politics and therefore to
dismiss it inside line it and I think we
have to be very careful about when we're
talking about an identity politics just
to arts as at least to honor that there
is a spectrum so yeah I thought you're
gonna make a different point there which
is the identity politics serves the far
right and because I think it does is
this is a problem what I mean basically
the left is creating a situation where
they're making your group identity the
most important thing about you and what
is going to happen is the far the far
right are gonna say well okay then we'll
play identity politics and we'll win
because there's more of us this is
terrifying yeah so I agree that that it
does fuel the right and the right plays
on that by highlighting the caricature
that more and more kind of mainstream
soft left liberal groups are now
identifying with like I think that there
was a real culture a moment when
Jonathan PI did his four-minute
brilliant comedy piece on identity
politics and you know there was that
collective yes we can finally rip the
 out of this you know but also you
know underneath it is like decades of
genuine analysis about the ways in which
people experience advantage and
disadvantage and we shouldn't be
throwing the baby out with the bathwater
you're really considering that very
carefully because it's very easy to wade
in with very little understanding take
this kind of caricature and then go when
you know the left needs to get his house
in order and I think that that is yeah
but I I mean I think of sort of Eric and
Brett Weinstein because they're they're
both Bernie Sanders supporters very kind
of interesting thoughts about the left
first thing I'd sort of reframe it and I
think if Pete if Peterson talked about
it like this
I think people would understand his kind
of critiques of identity politics a
little bit better it's like it's okay to
like equality fairness is a good value
if you make it your primary axiom it
leads to madness which is what Eric
Weinstein said it's like you cannot
build a cosmology out of a theory of
oppression it leads to insanity which is
which is I think a good way of pulling
it apart like know these values that you
hold they are good they are valuable
they need to be part of the conversation
if you make them your primary axioms
we've seen what happens in history it
generally turns into turns into hell on
earth but the other point like I would
say the left does need to get its house
in order like I said I think what we are
seeing at the moment is a kind of civil
war within the left where we had this
kind of oppression narrative taking over
until it's the only dialogue in town so
I do actually think that the left does
need to put its house in order and I
think that's the healing that needs to
happen like it really does need to be
which is why I think what you're doing
as well with the with kind of making
films about Jordan Peters and saying how
something useful to offer the left is a
really valuable conversation to have
yeah so I agree the left doesn't need to
get its house in order and maybe again
bring in the principle of the frame you
brought in at the beginning which is how
do we include and transcend rather than
rejecting and I do think it does involve
doing the work of really listening to
that experience and and and and honoring
not just the caricature but actually the
real genuine analysis and genuine
sentiment that's there while also
recognizing it is hostile to like a
genuine empirically driven intellectual
inquiry it is a divisive narrative that
had to pits
everyone as oppressors and oppressed it
is an individualizing narrative that
balkanized as political groups like all
of those things are deeply problematic
if we want to bring people on board a
vision of transition we share a kind of
focus on sort of spiritual development
as sort of politics through sort of
spiritual lens and through a personal
growth personal development lens and
I've often thought that kind of and and
I guess we both share a kind of
skepticism towards
realism like I have a real skepticism
towards materialism I think it's I think
it's a really sort of it saps the soul
out of the world and I think it's that
ultimately I think is what we're part of
the crisis we're seeing at the moment is
a crisis of materialism it's a crisis of
all of these kind of things falling
apart at the same time and implicit for
me and what Peterson is saying is an
acknowledgment of that and it's a kind
of like a lot of the Krait the most
intractable social crises that we're
seeing say I use the example of the
opioid crisis in America where you have
an incredible number of people like self
numbing because they can't for me it's
like it's the MOT it's the spiritual
emptiness of late-stage capitalism
that's making a lot of our social crises
worse and I think implicit in a lot of
what Peterson is saying is an
acknowledgment of that and I think if he
was to make that explicit and say yeah a
lot of the crises we're seeing our
spiritual crises not Material crises
material the material realm is actually
a subset of the the realm of the soul
and the realm of the being and he does
believe that because I asked him and he
said yes but he doesn't say that and I
think if he was to say that if he was to
frame his message in that way I think a
lot of people on the progressive left
would suddenly say he he is saying the
same thing that we're saying because I
think he is but I think he's got so
caught into this reactivity against
identity politics that a lot of things
he could be saying that would allow more
people to see him as now lying I
swallowed up and a way that you know do
you resonate with that do you think
that's that would you if he said that
would that be something you'd agree with
yeah I would absolutely resonate with it
like well this is one of the reasons why
we compared him and contrasted with
Russell Brand this is essentially the
message of Russell Brand has been
bringing Russell Brand when he gave that
famous interview with Jeremy Paxman was
saying I'm not voting because actually
what we need is a spiritual revolution
and he talks again and again about how
our society makes us addicted makes us
mentally and well and keeps us from
flourishing like that is the fundamental
political diagnosis for me but I do
think that to rectify that there is a
certain amount of material conditions
that need to be there that does require
what might be deemed as
progressive adjustments to policy to
things like equality and I think that's
potentially where let's say more people
on the left or me and Peterson would
diverge and and and maybe we can watch
this and then we can analyze that
afterwards and the sticking point that I
hear a lot from my sort of more
progressive friends is you all sort of
primary focus is on the individual
yeah well that's that's too bad for them
because the primary focus should be on
you know I can agree with that but what
I the the paradox that they would say
it's like okay focus on the individual
but you have to accept that there are
some situations that are much more
conducive to an individual thriving than
other situations and so their focus is
on structural inequality your focus is
on the individual is there not some
interplay between oh definitely well
obviously because people do have group
identities the question is whether
whether the group or the individual
identity should be paramount and the
left distanc the radical leftist answer
is well there is the look it's not me
that's failing to take into account
those two levels of analysis it's the
bloody radical leftist because for them
it's the collective and that's that and
so it's obvious as far as I'm concerned
that people have their individuality and
then behind that they have there they
have their group by multiple group
identities which is also a big problem
but all separately or any of these
situations that make it much more
difficult for people to self actualize
well what I think they'd argue is they
don't hear you talk about that very much
well it isn't first of all it's not
self-evident like I'm not I don't accept
Maslow's hierarchy of needs I don't
think it's necessarily more difficult
for people who are poor to
self-actualize sorry I don't buy that
you because what that would mean think
about what that would mean that would
mean that the rich are morally superior
that's what that means because they have
all the opportunities to self actualize
so obviously if the material conditions
are the prerequisite for
self-actualization then the rich are
morally superior to the poor is that
really an argument we want to make and
in fact I don't think that that's even
even vaguely reasonable because one of
the things that does help build
character is privation now obvious
starving to death is an an excess of
privation
so there are limit conditions but the
it's a leftist trope that the provision
of additional material resources will
produce ethically superior human beings
sorry
not true and in fact sometimes quite the
contrary
so-so so I don't I don't I don't buy
that argument in the least I also think
that under most circumstances accepting
those of exceptional privation and even
perhaps under those conditions in most
is in most cases your best bet to move
people forward is to concentrate on the
development of their individual
character and their individual their
individual moral character fund because
moral character is actually your moral
character is actually the set of tools
that you have to operate effectively in
the world because otherwise morality
would be of no utility and morality is
in some sense precisely that way which
is of maximal utility and so and and the
other objection that I would throw it at
the radical left is how do you know that
your Oh your emphasis on collective
existence isn't just an abdication of
your personal responsibility well of
course it's not it's like no no no
seriously here it's not that easy to
adopt personal responsibility maximal
personal responsibility what makes you
think you're not running away from it
you have every reason to you really have
that stellar moral character really
that's that's your self analysis it's
like sorry I don't buy it and I
especially don't buy it when I look at
the consequences of leftist revolutions
because all these people of stellar
moral character when they undertake
their collectivist revolution nothing
comes out of that but absolute bloody
catastrophe so so all the well-meaning
aims aside I found this really
interesting because implicit I think
even and it really landed for me when
Peterson made this comparison with
Maslow's hierarchy of needs which is
kind of the simplified way of saying
okay once you've got your material needs
set then you can move up to your social
needs and then the top is like
self-actualization so we're sort of
saying you need to have many of the
other things put together before you can
move to self-actualization and Peterson
was challenging that and saying no
because then what you're basically
saying is self-actualization like moral
virtue more all kind of yeah moral
virtue is only available to people at
the top of society which I'd never heard
before and actually kind of floored me
when I heard it what did you make of it
well I think that he is right that it
it's not that we give everyone we make
society more material equally equal and
then all of a sudden everyone is self
actualizing that's that's simply not
true very wealthy sectors of society
constant development as much as very
poor area of society because they have
cultures in a way that are inimical to
to growth so I would say that it's not
an either/or it's about it's about
understanding the optimal level of
support and of challenge both of those
things are really important so people
who are in potentially more deprived
settings might have adversity that is
hugely character-building
but if it's too much adversity if
literally there isn't just an
overwhelming set of constraints and the
individual it far from inducing growth
it can be suboptimal for any kind of
development I think that there's a basic
with a spiritual progressive political
critique of this is the idea that we do
need more material conditions for really
spiritually and psychologically growing
a lot of them are just around having the
time and the space and the freedom to
reflect on ourselves even just to be
able to do courses like I think about
like some of the core things that have
made a difference to my development
doing of a pasta that's a 10-day
meditation that is a luxury if you are
working on a minimum wage in two jobs to
take ten days off if you've got two
children that is a complete privilege
and luxury of time and space and in an
ayahuasca ceremony in Peru that is a
complete luxury of having enough money
to fly to the other side
the world for ayahuasca is legal and do
it there so I think that like there are
if we think about in our spiritual
progressive culture it is a very
privileged space it's a very it's does
all of these workshops that you can do
from shadow work to Tantra all of which
cost an arm and leg to most people and
that is a that is a purely material
material barrier to entry to higher
levels of development and growth and so
for me that's where that's where it
comes from is that if you if you know
yes 12 out what you want to prioritize
in your life as well yeah there is there
is individual agency and that and if you
really really do want to grow you could
be in any place and you could get to a
better place and I think Peterson does
talk about how we use our social context
our culture our societies as an excuse
to actually like get your
together like do it but at the same time
if we're thinking about a society how do
we like to run society we would like
like for us an alter ego we our vision
is a deliberately developmental Society
all institutions from family community
health service legal justice system the
economy itself is geared towards the
development of the self does that mean
that we radically redistribute everyone
so ever it has the same well no if the
empirical research proved for peterson
is saying which is that that isn't the
correct conditions but not a materialist
you're then imposing a materialist frame
on that i'm saying that there if you're
if you're talking about distributing
material goods it is a degree that i
think that there does need to be a
certain material threshold to give
people literally call my universal baker
bingham but basic income or something
like that yeah that that might be an
example like it's it's used as an
example of how it helps with job
matching in the economy where people
just have more time and space to go hmm
what's the next best move do i go for
this job or do i take some education
whereas currently there is literally no
time and space you just get the next job
if you're in a lower rung of society so
you know progressive employment law the
amount of hours that you have to work
the
you're paid all these things like I see
it as do you have cognitive bandwidth to
engage in deeper levels of inquiry to
engage in your own development it's so
so and it's a it's a hopefully a yes and
or a both and it's saying for me
spiritual and psychological growth as a
priority there is a material dimension
that requires a progressive politics to
really challenge particularly vested
interests that are hoarding lots of
money and that needs to be distributed
I guess my perspective would be but what
came up when I was hearing you talk was
just a sort of sense that I think that
the blocks there's what what I was
hearing was a certain kind of sense of
if we just gave people enough space they
would make better decisions I have a
sense that the kind of the psychological
traps that we create for ourselves are
often much deeper than that and so for
me I guess the sort of going beyond like
like I think Peterson's focus on the
individual is absolutely necessary like
it's a it's the right place to start and
if you're going to have a set of axioms
empowering the individual and starting
from a place of like radical personal
responsibility or radical kind of self
self-awareness and there's a kind of
humility as well I really like about
Peterson as well if there's a real
humility in accepting you don't know
that what you don't know is as important
as what you do in a real sense of kind
of respect for that which I think it's
really valuable compared to like for
example the sam Harris's or the
materialists which is sort of like no we
know everything oh we can work
everything out so I think there's a
there's a sort of starting point I think
it's I think it's the right place to
start I think what's really helped me is
like personal growth didn't get quite so
much Maya Wesker but but definitely
there are there are things that I got a
lot a lot from in terms of personal
growth and therapeutic interventions and
I think giving people that is really
important I know for example my I'll
digress slightly my mother and my father
had very I was I was brought up in a
very left-wing house my father was very
sort of straight down the line Guardium
Reid they both read The Guardian they're
both sort of Guardian Reid
see nd marching people my mum went
through a process of real difficulty she
started working in a in a poor school in
Southampton and what she found really
difficult so she had a lot more
interactions with the actual like they
both wanted to help the downtrodden the
the poor what in my dad in a very sort
of abstract way my mum in our very real
kind of working in one of the most
deprived areas and schools in
Southampton she had something of a of a
real awakening because what she realized
was that a lot of the parents didn't
necessarily want their kids to succeed
or not on a subconscious level not not
outwardly but she would be kind of
seeing something in this child like wow
you could really clear at the University
and the parents would come in and like
no the system's biased no my child none
of us have been to university and and
really found this kind of like either
either either conscious or subconscious
like because if their child succeeded it
would challenge them set their Center
themselves the fact that the system was
biased against them the fact that the
world didn't work for people like them
all this stuff and it happens it's such
a subconscious level and this is what I
see is the real difficulty with like the
real value of psychological growth and
real sort of psychological intervention
is that it can potentially shift some of
those paradigms but the real difficulty
and the real problem with the left is
that it equates poverty or oppression
with moral virtue and that's a real
issue because if you do that what you
don't realize and that the paradox that
most people on the left is that they
love the poor in the abstract but they
hate them in the particular and they
hate everything they believe they hate
before than they think they hate the
nationalism they hate all of the things
they actually think so it's like for me
for me I think we all have our shadows
and I think the shadow of like what
we're seeing at the moment with brexit
and Trump is the shadow of liberalism is
like the shadow of yeah we're really
inclusive apart from all these people we
hate so for me the psychological growth
work needs to happen everywhere I don't
I don't see I I think we all have our
psychological traps in in every area of
society
the Liberals have their psychological
traps in it's now coming to bite them in
the ass with with with brexit and Trump
and and there are yeah so I see it as a
more complex thing and I think that
message of personal responsibility that
really really identify your resentments
really do the work of really looking at
where you're where you're holding back
or where you're judging people or where
and we all have this I think that's the
right place to start for me
I still think Peterson is the right
place to start because if you don't then
your shadows are gonna be sort of
manifest in everything that you're doing
yeah and I think that maybe what I hear
in that what you're saying is that you
and Peterson is saying as well you can't
just throw money at a culture of you
know underachievement or lacking and
taking personal responsibility it'll
just continue you and I can and how do
you actually intervene at any level
whether it's like a culture of
underachievement
in poorer parts of society if it's like
a culture of moral superiority in
liberal circles but I do think that
maybe the future isn't is a combination
of both so I'll just give you a just a
practical example in the RSA wrote a
report on basic income and it wasn't
just getting like the actual numbers
right about how much to distribute it
was also putting together a conditional
response mechanism where people would
voluntarily contribute in the community
in society in exchange for the money so
it wasn't it wasn't like you're not
going to get the money until you do it
but there was a certain set of
interventions that would create the
conditions for people to more likely to
experience a kind of a more service
orientated citizenship led identity in
the absence of work in the future where
there's full automation so I do think
that maybe there is a sort of generosity
and boundaries at the same time which is
a the issue that we often now
yeah and and and and again but I do
think you can have a you know let's say
for example a welfare state that really
emphasizes psychological growth work
that isn't just about healing but it is
about get your together but there
is resources to do it which is generally
speaking more likely to come from the
left and from progressives who believe
in actually investing in public services
so again it's how do we marry this
really important message
individual responsibility to break
through these very entrenched cultures
and how do we actually galvanize broadly
speaking left-wing and progressive
sources to actually fund it and to make
it happen and that's for me I think the
the opening that I see with Peterson I
think in this and other conversations
we've had we've clearly got sort of
different like we we have different
priorities in terms of kind of our
perspectives like personal
responsibility or social change but I
think we ultimately come from the same
place in that we like I definitely
believe in the value of structure I
believe in the value of government I
believe that a political project based
around personal growth has a real chance
of succeeding like I really do think
that that's something that's worth worth
having and then holding the tension of
but it comes down to the individual
responsibility at the same time and this
kind of realization of okay we need to
give people the opportunities but
ultimately we can't encourage people to
take them yeah and just an overcoming of
the developmental blindness of policy
like what a bankrupt idea to think if we
just threw more money into the welfare
state understands that that we'll be
able to tackle a cultural issue like
it's a joke it's more that we need
serious psychological support and
psychological intervention to equip
people to support themselves on their
own journey of becoming so it is again
it is is it's something that is enabled
by a collective decision to really pool
resources in a certain area but with an
emphasis on actually where it is likely
to be effective which is that the
individual psychological and even
spiritual level if we can manage to get
there right thank you very much thank
you