[Music]
you
[Music]
welcome back to awakening from the
meaning crisis so last time we were
taking a look at group of people as I
said before the Gnostic shouldn't be
understood as forming like their own
community or group although there might
have been some Gnostic churches we
should think of them more like we think
of existentialism or fundamentalism you
can be a fundamentalist Christian or
Muslim or Jew etc it's more about a
style a way of being a way of
understanding and interpreting and that
it was pervasive during the same period
as early Christianity and the two are
interacting with each other in fact as
will see many Gnostics thought of
themselves as Christians so we were
taking a look at how to go about
interpreting Gnosticism why are we doing
this we're doing this because I'm
presenting the Gnostic movement as the
axial revolution within the axial
revolution it's taking the revolution to
its culmination in many important ways
that I think have direct relevance for
us today in order to do that I'm
presenting to you something like the
cognitive science of what gnosis
actually is and in order to do that
we've been making use of some important
work by Harry Frankfurt in LA Paul the
basic idea is that we can talk about
people being existentially trapped and
that that is a result of them being
exits and existentially stuck there
I have inertia they do not know how to
engage the anti Gog a in order to make a
worldview viable to them and they are
existentially indecisive
they are existentially stupefied because
they're facing deep transformative
experience and they don't know how to
reason their way through it they don't
know if they should do it and that
existential entrapment
can be very very damaging it can
fragment your world and tear apart your
agency and so people can suffer from
this in a profound way
which means Gnosticism as Hans Jonas and
other people have seen is directly
relevant to a lot of the modern
confrontation with meaninglessness and
nihilism because in the meeting crisis
people also similarly feel deeply
existentially trapped so what is needed
what is needed argued is a recovery of
serious play through the engagement in
ritual behavior this ritual play and now
allows one us affords an individual to
engage in inactive analogy so that they
can get into that liminal state in which
they can in a perspectival and
participatory manner bridge in a very
apt way between the world and the self
that they are now and the world and the
self they want to viably become that
enacted ritual should also afford and
agog a it should afford the trans
framing the reciprocal an anarchic
process by which self and world are
transformed such that we can go through
the sensibility transcendence which will
make a worldview viable to us that
combination that ritual combination of
enacted analogy and inactive Ana Gaga is
empowered by the cognitive flexibility
brought on by an altered state of
consciousness
hopefully a higher state of
consciousness that gives us a sense of
the in the increased realness the more
realness of the world that we are trying
to move into so that higher state of
consciousness as we've talked about
before motivates us to go through this
radical transformative experience now of
course there are dangers associated with
all of this when we are engaging in this
kinds of radical transformation of our
salience landscape when we are putting
ourselves and our world at risk when we
are inducing altered states of
consciousness there is a significant
chance that we will fall prey to
parasitic processing to bullshitting
ourselves to deceiving ourselves and
therefore it is very important and this
is also part of what was going on with
Gnosticism to build up a community
shared mythology a shared set of tight
psycho technological practices a shared
social network of distributed cognition
to provide Sapienza feedback guidance
correction and encouragement for people
when they are endeavoring to go through
the kind of transformation that will
release them from this existential
entrapment so you have some higher state
of consciousness hopefully that has some
aspects of being a higher state of
consciousness and that is going to be
set within a ritual framing that I've
been talking about and then you want
that in turn set within an important
central and supportive community that is
teaching you all kinds of the relevant
skills by which one can bring wisdom the
ability to overcome self-deceptive
self-destructive behavior to bear upon
this transformation when all of that is
the case this is what gnosis is it's
this kind of deeply transformative deep
respectable participatory knowing that
is ritually and framed and embedded with
a sappy ntral and supportive community
so
our community so what do we have going
on here
is a project that was addressing the
dama side that it was still in existence
persisting from the Hellenistic dama
side that we were spoken about so also
as I mentioned one of the reasons why
Christianity took root because while the
Roman Empire offered a socio-political
solution to some of the problems of the
ancient world it didn't have a viable
answer on its own to the meaning crisis
the dama side of the Hellenistic period
things like stoicism had been generated
but Christianity is a significant
response and at the same time this
movement this Gnostic movement arises
now these Gnostics many of them not all
of them saw themselves as Christians
they interpreted Jesus as somebody who
had brought them gnosis and for them the
important thing was not to believe in
Jesus but as much as possible to become
like Jesus to go through that's the kind
of radical transformation to be at one
with God the way Jesus was now whether
or not we believe in that particular
mythology two things we need to note for
our purposes in this course we need to
know that
Gnosticism and Christianity are deeply
talking to each other and informing each
other even though in many ways they'll
have an oppositional relationship we're
going to see that both Gnosticism and
Christianity are also in a very
important dance and inter measurement
with neoplatonism now many people when I
put it out with the examples of jeep
form and therapy
martial arts right many people are
seeking gnosis today because gnosis is
the kind of thing you need in order to
bring about a release from the
existential entrapment that we're
finding in the meaning crisis now what's
interesting about the Gnostics is they
create a mythology for all of this and I
think the best book because if you just
read their stuff it's like man it's like
if you were strung out on an incredible
acid trip and everybody was speaking in
Reverse it is so hard their stuff is so
bizarre and weird and strange but I
think if you pay attention to some of
the main themes of the mythology you can
see how it is a mythological scaffolding
for bringing about gnosis a book I would
recommend to you is April the conex book
the Gnostic new-age in that she does
some good work at bringing out some of
the central themes of this movement and
she also points out how much Gnosticism
is prevalent in our culture today
mythologically and you may say what do
you mean by that well many movies and
she chose this in the book actually have
a Gnostic theme the the mythology of the
movie and movies are where we go to play
with a lot of our mythology actually are
a are pretty clear versions of this
gnostic mythology so what is this myth
this mythology so the Gnostics have an
idea and you can see and part of it
comes from Plato there's an influence
from Plato so if you remember Plato has
this idea about the everyday world right
is there the everyday world is a world
like the shadows and the echoes these
things are not fully real this table
this wall is pen they're in a profound
sense images right they participate in
the forms
remember those powder
of intelligibility and realness so Plato
had a problem which is the forums are
basically eternal so if you think of
something like you know equals
mc-squared
right that's not an event it's sort of
timeless and spaceless and then how does
this it turn how do these eternal forms
how do they express themselves in the
temporal things the things that are
changing here so basically how do time
and eternity intersect and so Plato
proposed a mythological answer he closed
that there was a figure he called the
figure the craftsman the demiurges the
Demiurge and what the Demiurge is is he
can sort of become aware of these
because he's rational agent and then
what he does is he shapes things in
space and time in order to make the
world of the coming have some reality to
it and so it has some important
similarities to the eternal world and
that means that by pay attention to
temporal events we can become aware of
these eternal principles sort of what
science does right now
now whether all of that is true I think
in an important sense it's not true
there's a mythological point here Plato
is trying to understand mythologically
the relationship he's trying to give us
a way in imagery and story of
understanding the relationship between
eternity and time now the Gnostics were
influenced by this but they took this
notion and they did something very
interesting to it
because they said the temporal world the
everyday world were in is a world of
very significant suffering so remember
they're there after the Hellenistic
garments
there during a period both where the
Ellen istic dhamma site is still in
existence and the roman empire has
caused massive pain and suffering
throughout the world so they're looking
at the everyday world and they're seeing
all this suffering they're feeling
deeply trapped within it
existentially trapped and the way we've
been talking about so for them that was
very clear evidence that whoever had
created this world was either stupid or
evil or both
they were looking around the world and
saying look at how much we suffer look
at how much pain we're in look at how
much we're trapped and therefore what is
what whatever is creating the structures
that we're living in is both stupid and
evil so they in Plato the Demiurge is
basically a beneficent being but in here
the Demiurge very often becomes
something like an evil overlord now
what's going on here well what they're
trying to do is articulate again the
sense of being trapped and that the
socio-economic socio cultural political
economic structures that they find
themselves in are actually thwarting
them and now when I say it that way it's
like oh maybe that's a mythological way
of talking about something that you
might be experiencing you're
experiencing existential entrapment and
then when you look out at the patterns
of your culture the patterns right are
the market patterns the political
patterns you don't feel like they are
shaping a world that is going to help
alleviate your trap meant instead you
feel that they are stupid and evil and I
know from a lot of the research we did
for the book on zombies with the
work I did with Chris and Philip more
and more people view their their myths
their deep leave repeated cultural
political socio-economic patterns not as
helping them but as 14 their efforts to
be free from their existential
entrapment adding to their fragmentation
and their suffering so whether or not we
believe in and in the gnostics super
naturalistic way of talking about this
which I don't we can nevertheless
understand what they are articulating we
have this existential entrapment and we
have socio political socio cultural
patterns that are designed to further
that entrapment further our
self-deception further our
self-destruction keep us a mashed in
modal confusion or keep us a washed in
parasitic processing keeping us trapped
stuck and stupefied so for the Gnostics
right they needed to try and link this
to existing mythologies and here's what
they did something that is radical they
identified all the existing gods whether
it's the god of the the Jews or the god
of the Romans instead of seeing these
gods as divine beings they saw these
gods as basically the guards of our
prison so they see everything else that
people had thought of as previously
sacred all the gods as actually things
imprisoning us even Paul was talking
about this in the Bible where he talks
about powers and principalities that
keep us imprisoned
now I want you to stop and pause because
this is a radical idea this is an idea
that there has been something common to
all of these gods that must now be
challenged so up until now right the
relationship between us and them was one
of servitude often bordering on notions
of slavery we were the slaves or the
servants of the gods
the Gnostics want to invert that they
want to tell you that instead of
worshiping these gods instead of
idolizing these gods instead of giving
in to these powers and principalities
these patterns that are pervasive and
profound in the way they entrap us
instead of thinking how we should serve
and fit into them think of this again
remember the actual revolution don't try
to fit in to the everyday world you want
to transcend it instead of serving and
fitting in we have to transcend them all
they are not divine they are our prison
guards they may be powerful but instead
what we need to realize is that there is
something in us they thought of it as a
divine spark that will actually carry us
above to the God beyond all gods which
sounds like a contradiction because of
course that's what they're trying to get
at the idea here can be expressed using
some of the Christian mythology that
they were quite willing to well it
depends who you're talking to if you're
Orthodox Christian you see the Gnostics
as perverting your mythology if you're
not excused see yourself as disclosed
by transformation what's actually
available in the mythology so from the
Gnostics this God is the God of the Old
Testament evil jealous vindictive right
who threatens and and bullies people his
authorises genocide shows favoritism for
no moral reason is just in and I mean
think about think about he you know he
says the god of the old tell em of
jealous God you don't you dare or
worship anybody other than me right and
if you do I'll kill you and I'll kill
your kids and I'll kill your kids kids
and all this horrific stuff and then
that God is compared to the god of the
New Testament the God of Agape the God
of light and love and the idea is that
God was the God beyond all gods does not
want our worship wants us to reunite
with him he wants us or she wants us to
fully participate and I have to say he
and she specifically for the Gnostics is
one of the things they also challenged
was the difference between the genders
in the ancient world they're famous for
that of thinking women are as equally
capable of a spiritual life as men so we
are radically not at home because this
this our capacity for a gapek love means
we have a gnostic potential we have the
power the potential to remember to know
that we belong here we can sense that we
don't belong here we can sense that we
belong somewhere else we know there's
something fundamentally wrong here and
then the idea is this this God beyond
all gods this absolute fullness of being
sends individuals down into the world of
suffering to bring us the gnosis to
bring us this kind of transformative
knowledge that will set us free and what
the Gnostic Christians did is they said
Jesus was this individual so the
Gnostics don't put a huge emphasis on
the person of Jesus and his crucifixion
instead that teachings of Jesus are much
more important to them because what the
what is going to happen here is Jesus is
going to bring us the way of knowing
gnosis of agape so that we can free
ourselves from this so then the Gnostics
therefore don't don't see the purpose of
Christianity as doctrine or Dogma the
purpose of it is to give us a mythology
that will free us from our existential
suffering and allow us to experience
this transcendence of the gods now this
this inversion right this radical
inversion it's like this what I mean
it's the calm and age it's the axial
revolution that it's finally applied to
even to the whole mythological framework
of the ancient world and what it means
is the the Gnostics have a very and this
is one of the things that they're
critics often leveled against them the
Gnostics keep churning out new Gospels
and new stories and new myth because for
them it's not about having a final
Orthodox story a final Orthodox set of
principles it's about having engaged in
participated in the process of creating
the inactive analogies the enacted and
agog a that's what matters that's what
actually matters
now this idea that spirituality is
ultimately about transcending the gods
rather than serving the gods is very
it's very both pertinent to us today and
very radical for its time because you
have basically the challenging of a not
even a belief it was just an
unquestioned presupposition that our
relationship to the gods was one of
servitude and slavery getting
transformed into no no descent the core
of spirituality is not worship the core
of spirituality is self transcendence
healing and freeing people from
existential entrapment and their
suffering and that our mythology and our
practices should always be in service of
us reuniting to who and what we are and
we we we love this story notice how
first of all it still got all the
platonic elements here are the people
trapped in the cave they're bound they
get the secret knowledge right that
frees them so that they can return to
and see the light right but of course
for Plato you come back down into the
cave the cave for the Gnostics you try
to spread the message to as many people
as you can so it has the Platonism it of
course has a way of connecting that
platonism to christianity by
reinterpreting jesus as the embodiment
of gnosis rather than as a sacrifice in
whom we should have faith
Jesus is a teacher who provides us with
something like what the shaman did and
what our therapist does provides us with
the keys to unlocking right unlocking
all the ways in which these patterns
these socio-cultural political-economic
patterns ways of thinking and being are
just permeated into layers of our psyche
and ways of being in the world that they
just exacerbate our suffering our
existential entrapment and the way it is
fragmenting our world and ripping apart
our agency so we long for that now this
was Hans Jonas great insight we long for
that now so we go to movies that show
this right so the conic goes through
several movies that are basically modern
portrayals of this gnostic mythology of
course famously and it brings bow it
brings all of these elements in the
Christian the then the platonic and the
Gnostic of course is the matrix right
because the matrix is this you're
entrapped in a world of illusion there
are evil overlords who are trying to
keep you entrapped so you don't ever
discover who you truly are
right but you know remember there's a
scene in the movie you said you'd like
you know like a splinter in your mind
that there is something wrong and you
don't belong right that's the matrix or
you can see a movie starring Jim Carrey
the Truman story notice of course the
play on words there right true man
Truman discovering who you really are
and he grows up in a world right with an
overlord that has manufactured it to
keep him from ever actually getting his
true agency finding true love etc and
what he has to do is get the knowledge
in order to get beyond this God we keep
telling this story because it's a myth
because it keeps pointing us to patterns
that are pervasive and profound and
powerful and we can't quite articulate
them and we can't quite know them but
the myth at least gives us a moment of
right at least narrative in symbolic
recognition of our suffering so the
Gnostics are offering a radical form of
the actual revolution now it carries
with it a dark side they keep showing
you with all of this stuff that's the
light side and the dark side of
Christianity right and you probably
could see how there's a Gnostic element
also with in Star Wars you've trapped
within the Empire with the evil overlord
the Emperor and you have to get free and
you need to have the knowledge of the
force that will set you free and blah
blah blah blah like we love this and we
keep wanting to do it that's great
what's the dark side of the Gnostic
vision the doc's the dark side of the
Gnostic vision is it can it doesn't have
to and many of them many of the original
Gnostic writers that I've read it it's
not the case but it can do this this is
ultimately a conspiracy theory this is a
grand conspiracy theory that behind look
one of the reasons why this is
comforting is behind all the apparent
chaos and suffering there actually is
some evil overlord I mean one of the
things that would make evil so much more
tractable for us as if it was ensconced
within an individual but this is the
ultimate conspiracy theory
there's a whole system that is keeping
you from realizing the truth and who you
truly are the true man that you are and
how you belong elsewhere and living
another way and now you say oh well
conspiracy well stop and think look what
are the Gnostics saying this evil
overlord
some of them say not all of them it's
the same as the god of the Old Testament
who are the people that worship the God
of the Old Testament the Jews here's an
idea that's now being sewn into Western
culture the Jews are part of a
conspiracy to keep us from realizing our
true heritage that is going to turn out
to be an extraordinarily dangerous and
bloodthirsty idea Nazism is a twisted
and other people have pointed this out
Nazi Nazism is not primarily a political
or even a socio-economic movement Nazism
is a twisted Gnostic response of the
meaning crisis that was being magnified
in the Weimar Republic of Germany so the
there is a dark side to Gnosticism so we
should have an ambivalent attitude
towards it in order to understand it we
must think of how we can extricate Nasus
from Gnosticism how can we salvage
gnosis from narcissism just like how can
we salvage agape from Christianity how
can we salvage wisdom from the ancient
neurological order
so on one side right you can see the
dangers why did this happen it's a long
complicated story but part of the
problem part of the reason is the
emerging fourth Oh doc Church it wasn't
even an Orthodox Church at that time it
called itself the Apostolic Church the
church that thought Jesus was absolutely
unique right and the point was to
worship Him and that faith is what was
crucial faith in the sense of believing
in him as a sacrifice persecuted and I
mean that literally persecuted the
Gnostic form of Christianity and drove
it underground and as underground it
became a meshed with any type of group
that was trying to challenge the
established order and that's how it
tends to surface again and Nazism will
see there are more things that feed into
Nazism but that's all we need for right
now Gnosticism of course is also deeply
influential in some very important
people so here are three people we're
going to start talking about more and
more you've already heard me talk about
Tillich Tillich is one of the great
theologians Tillich talks about the
meaning crisis in a classic book that I
highly recommend to you called the
courage to be and he talks about that
the response to that is a way of
discovering and it's clear because of
how he talks about symbols and he talks
about transformation although he does
not use the term but he's talking about
gnosis he's talking about that the
response to the meaning crisis is the
gnosis of the God beyond the god of
theism that what we need to do is
discover the God who of course is not a
God because what's the God beyond the
God of theism as the meaning crisis
destroys
mythology of right the theistic
mythology of God can we discover
rediscover sacredness in a way that
liberate sus from our existential
suffering this is the core now Tillich
thought that Christianity could play a
significant role in that and one of my
friends and colleagues Jonathan pazzo
thinks that Christianity will in fact go
through this kind of self transformation
so that it can move beyond the meaning
crisis I'm not convinced of this but I
do respect these points many of you have
heard me already mentioned jung jung
basically was deeply Jung is to
Gnosticism what you know cognitive
behavioral therapy is to stoicism Jung
is basically a transformation into
psychotherapeutic context the gnostic
mythology and you should understand why
that is not a coincidence the gnostic
mythology is a way right of giving us a
scaffolding for inactive analogy in
active and agog a which of course are so
central to therapeutic processes the
person you haven't heard me mention and
I'll talk about more later is korben
korben was very much about trying to
recover this kind of knowing because his
great concern was that we had lost this
kind of knowing and therefore we had
lost our capacity for the transformation
and the liberation that it can bring
about and we can get trapped in these
historical patterns that fragment our
world and tear apart our agency so
because they represent the
radicalization of the actual revolution
there is much to learn from Gnosticism
I do not I am not advocating an attempt
to resurrect it or bring it back what we
need to do is understand and that's what
these individuals represent and notice
that at least one of them was one of the
most courageous opponents of the Nazis
telic was the first non Jewish academic
to be fired from the Nazis because from
the very beginning and consistently he
identified them and resisted them so
keep this whole framework in mind can we
salvage from narcissism gnosis and some
of its radical message about how we can
reconfigure how we can have a
non-theistic non-supernatural istic
understanding of sacredness can we do
that and avoid the conspiratorial way of
thinking they can be so damaging and has
been see one of the things week that
narcissism can quickly elide into right
is that those utopian they're so
enticing right those utopian ideologies
that give you the great conspiracy
theory and tell you that you belong to
the chosen few the chosen race or the
chosen class right and that what and
violence is acceptable because the
system is evil and must be destroyed
I point you to the work of Chris Hedges
because he's criticized both sides right
he wrote a book American fascists about
fundamentalist Christianity and it's
pervasive right portrayal of a grand
conspiracy but he also wrote a book on
the the new atheist and how they also
represent a utopic perfectionism that
sanctions violence and if you don't
believe me take a look at Hitchens and
Harris and the proposals for nuclear
first strikes against the Islamic world
etc so I'm suggesting to you and I'm
trying to give you an argument for it
how we should have an ambivalent
attitude towards Gnosticism let's put it
back in the historical picture because I
told you about the the three that are
crucial and how their inter messed with
each other we have the emerging
Christianity we've seen this by taking a
look at right Jesus and John and Paul
and we've seen how it's interacting with
Gnosticism we have already seen how
Gnosticism is influenced and influencing
platonism and in particular I want to
look at Neoplatonism because it is also
deeply enmeshed with Christianity this
triangle is going to be necessary for
understanding the final elements of the
orders of meaning the grammar of you as
I've put it before of meaning we've got
the normal logical order
what is Neoplatonism by the way
Neoplatonism is also why the main
character and the matrix is called neo
for neoplatonism and he's often referred
to as the one because the one is the
central thing within neoplatonism again
there's a reason why all of these
mythological patterns keep being so
attractive to us so platanus let me give
you an analogy I think this is a helpful
analogy scientists right now are trying
to integrate quantum mechanics and
relativity the two great theories and if
they if they come up with it they'll
have the grand unified theory Einstein
tried and failed many people think
they've had to answer and then it
collapses by analogy platanus is the
grand unified field theory of ancient
spirituality cuz what does he do well he
takes plato spirituality he takes the
whole idea of an agog a right from Plato
he takes Aristotle's theory the whole
Aristotle worldview the theory of
knowing right the theory of the
structure of the world we've talked
about that and he takes from the Stoics
that whole therapeutic project right
overcoming modal confusion and what he
does is he integrates them together he
integrates them together in powerful way
how does he do that well he talks about
first of all he says well let's the
thing well you can start anywhere you
can start in any one of these places in
Platanos as writing and then get to the
other two it's it is such a powerfully
integrated system and when you're
reading Platonists it's not like when
you're it's you're not just reading an
argument you're also undergoing a
spiritual exercise that is trying to
transform your state of consciousness in
your cognition so what's the main theory
here let's start here so if you remember
you have Aristotle's conformity theory
we know something right remember this by
conforming to it by sharing the same
structural functional organization with
it right and then Platina says a wait a
sec Aristotle also has sort of levels of
being and we talked about this we talked
about at the lowest level right there's
pure potentiality and at the highest
level there's pure actuality and we
don't need to get into the metaphysics
but here's the idea there are levels of
reality levels of realness as we know
and this doesn't mean intellectual as we
like this is participatory this is very
much like gnosis and he's in discussion
with gnosis we know that Platonists have
has Gnostic students
he's also critical of them but right but
this is not just intellectual knowing
this is deeply participatory knowing as
we may
these and think listen to my language as
we make these levels of reality viable
to us as they become livable to us right
we conform to them and we change and
this is Eric pearls brilliant idea right
he all of his stuff is so good right
as we conform and make this level of
reality real to us
we're conforming to it and we're also
moving to a higher level of the self as
we conform
we're also altering and this is the
antig oggi of Plato right we're altering
what level the self is at and of course
as we alter the level that the self is
at we're more capable of living in that
higher level of reality what this does
for us is it helps us deeply remember
the being mode who we really are
let me try and do put this all together
you with an example what is it that
makes something real think about this
think about Socrates here right Socrates
like what do you mean by real we we care
about whether or not things are real
with like it really matters to us look
at the word really it really matters to
us and yet what is it that makes
something real how much time have you
put into that because if you are driven
by a pursuit of realness and you don't
understand what it is if you if it's
something you're pursuing and you don't
understand remember what that is that's
the gap of okay so what makes
something real
well and and notice for Latinas and
again Eric pearl make especially in his
book thinking being just a fantastically
brilliant book can't recommend it enough
right but it's not what makes something
real is how do we also sense it as real
so it's both what structurally
functionally organizes it to be real two
sides of the worldview and what makes
how do we sense it how does it make us
be able to sense it as real and here's
the answer and it and it's some sense
it's basic but another sense it's it's
it's profound what makes something real
is how one it is how integrated it is
how much it is structurally functionally
organized so we treat the object as more
real than the shadows because it's more
structurally functionally organized
that's talking about the object when is
what is it to understand something well
here's a bunch of separate things and
when I understand them I find how
they're all one how they can all be
integrated together
when I understand something I understand
how all of its parts are integrated
together and then what we do is okay
these things have been integrated here
and then oh and I can integrate these
here and I can and this is more real
what's one behind all of these variants
thing and then I can course find what's
underneath all of this and what's
underneath this and once underneath this
things become more real to us as we
integrate them together and they're more
real as things as they are integrated
together so as we try and find the
deeper underlying principles that
integrate things together we become more
integrative together and we become more
real
we are realized it's it's it's we are
the object we're getting to what's more
real and we as we become more integrated
more actualized are becoming more real
I'm becoming more integrated and you can
see this at Plato's in agog a write the
inner conflict within me is being
reduced I'm becoming more real as I'm
becoming more integrated and that is
allowing me to make viable and real
these more integrated deeper levels of
reality and then the whole thing spins
anagogical II and what I have is I move
from where things are only potential
they don't have much form like an
Aristotle all the way up to as having
the greatest structural functional
organization they can and all of this
isn't just it's not just a theory it's a
change in my existential mode I am
becoming more real that's why I use the
word realization its simultaneously I'm
making more real of the world and me and
becoming more aware of what's more real
but what what is it what's down here or
up depending on which way you want to
draw these lines
what's then what's here well it's got to
be like it's got to be right the
principle that makes everything else
real that integrates everything together
it can't in any way be multiple soap
latinas calls this the one he doesn't
mean the single
this is that by which reality is
realized and our mind realizes reality
so tanis's uses the metaphor of light
just like light is itself invisible and
makes everything seeable the one is not
anything we can ever know you can't know
the one because it is that by which
everything is known it is that by which
everything is so how do you ever reunite
with it if you can't know it if it is
beyond all possible thought because
thought breaks things apart if it's
beyond all possible how do you know it
you can't know it you can't have it you
can't have it even in fog you can't have
it even in the most beautiful Theory you
can't have it the stuff you can only be
it you can only have gnosis of the one
by being one so at the pit at the height
of latinas system is it is a higher
state of consciousness and awakening
experience but notice it's completely
integrated with the best science and the
best scientific psychotherapy of the
time there is no deep division in
platanus between spirituality science
and therapy they are all beautifully
mutually supporting interwoven and
meshed together it's the culmination of
everything from the Greek Axial Age next
time I want to talk about how all of
these currents Christianity Gnosticism
and Neoplatonism are going to be taken
up by Augustine thank you very much for
your time and attention
[Music]
you
[Music]
you
you