[Music]
welcome back to awakening from the
meaning crisis so last time I was making
a proposal to you of how we could
address the perennial problems and I
gave you a systematic set of things too
that could be cultivated in an
integrated fashion for addressing
pronoun problems and then we saw how
that is interacts with our attempts to
ameliorate and alleviate the perennial
problems interact with the historical
forces and that we get the fundamental
undermining of meaning in life and that
problem set by Woolf and then I propose
to you that there was a response to that
in terms of the notion of Agape and then
I moved into the direct addressing of
the historical forces looking about for
recovery of something like what the
three orders did for us and then I
proposed to you that if we took a look
at for ecology of science
third generation cogs I and in
particular some of the insights have
afforded from that by sorry insights
afforded by 4e cognitive science third
generation cogs I and that were pointed
out by Varela in his article we can see
a ways in which we can get a worldview
that strongly situates our meaning
making processes within it legitimates
it we talked about how we can recover
something like the Noma logical order
and at the normative order and how
perhaps we can move to something post
narrative an open-ended optimization
is seeking for a depth of realization
rather than a historical combination and
I proposed to you bringing with it the
the notion that good and upbringing with
that whole project of responding to the
historical forces and trying to bring
with it a new notion from a good-enough
swirl
transcendence into rather than
transcendence above or beyond and how
that is resonant and consonant with the
picture that we've been working on
together a couple things remain that are
central one of course is to give an
account
cognitive scientific account of wisdom
because of the wisdom framing that is
needed for both the cultivation of the
responses to the meaning crisis and the
use of interpretation of grasping the
significance of the cognitive scientific
framework so we need to develop an
account of wisdom together and I also
said we need to talk about this notion
of getting something that's a religion
that's not a religion and what might
that look like so I want to address the
second point first because I have less
to say about it not because it's not
important
I've left to say about it because it's
very tentative and well I want to try
and talk about it and ultimately a
suggestive fashion I'm not trying to
found a movement or anything ridiculous
or pretentious like that there are many
people though who are writing books
about this idea
I recommend you John Kahrs his book the
religious case against belief which I've
already recommended there's Unger's book
on future religion there's books like
religion for atheists and which people
are I think and I mean this in a serious
sense but they're trying to play with
what does what would it but this might
look like a religion that's not a
religion and how can it help us to
address it even people like Richard
Dawkins are trying to propose you know
that we should get cultivate an ability
ultimately poetic ability to in Dender
Wonder and awe that is consonant with
the scientific worldview so a lot of
people are trying to get some conceptual
vocabulary and theoretical grammar going
for this I so I do not see myself as
offering anything definitive or
authoritative but on the basis of what
we have done together I'd like to try
and offer some suggestions of what this
would look like so remember why are we
setting this problem well we for many of
us right and the the the group that our
self identify as the nuns having no
religion nevertheless a large majority
of those people are still spiritually
hungry in important ways returning to
organized religion is not a viable
option and part of that has to do with a
lot of the history that we've traced out
and pursuing pseudo religious political
ideologies in utopic visions is also not
viable precisely because of the trauma
of the 20th century and parts of the
21st century in the clash of the pseudo
religious ideologies in the way they
drenched the world with blood and
torture and horror and so I proposed to
you that nevertheless we need to do
something like what religion used to do
we need a
a comprehensive set of psycho
technologies that are set within
communities of practices that allow for
the comprehensive transformations of
consciousness cognition character and
culture
in a way that is analogous to religion
with that is what we're looking for
something they can do all of that
because that is what we need that kind
of transformation is needed today to
address what Thomas Bjorkman calls the
meta-crisis of all the various crises
that we are facing and that are
interacting with each other and what
looks to be an increasingly accelerating
fashion and having an increasingly Dilla
tereus effect on us individually and
collectively so that is part of the
problem and what would it look like with
the religion that is not a religion
again as I said there are many people
who are taking a stab at this or trying
to get a grip on this and so I am just
seeing myself as contributing to
hopefully hopefully to that hopefully
hopefully to that dialogue so part of it
I think is and this is of course what I
try to do is to acknowledge the
centrality of religio and that there is
important there's an important role for
indispensible mythos and the activation
accentuation acceleration appreciation
of religio and so I think there that is
something that should be
acknowledged as what we would be looking
for and and this brings out an important
contrast I want to discuss so not equal
religion religio versus credo let's talk
about this a little bit and try and get
clearer about it because we have this
idea of an open-ended mythos analogous
to the transgressive mythology of of the
Gnostics so credo of course means I
believe and it's it's the word behind
things like the nut the Nicene Creed or
the Apostolic Creed a notion of credo is
a notion of sort of a paradigmatic set
of propositions that who that state what
the the essence of a religion is in
terms of the truth content that is
supposed to be believed and so what has
happened to some degree in various ways
and I tried to show you this is as this
is of course is linked to propositional
knowing and as propositional knowing has
come into a ascendance right and as the
having mode has come into ascendance the
having of propositions that are asserted
right and of course willful assertion
we've seen all of this has come in to
ascension right this has tended to
become dominant
so as I've mentioned we often think
about religions or speak of them as if
they are belief system systems of belief
so right and so you have propositional
knowing you have the having of those
propositions and they're the way you
have them is ultimately to assert them
in in some fashion usually in a willful
fashion where I mean that very broadly
in the way that we've discussed here
where it is not something
that is ultimately derived from reason
but it is something that is being
asserted nevertheless now I think
there's an important role for credo and
so I want to make a distinction between
credo and this creedal right assertion
credo
dominance okay so let's talk talk about
this set of things as creedal dominance
but let's talk about perhaps a way of
understanding the functionality of this
now first of all I'm of course aware of
the postmodern critique and I will have
a final towards the final end of this
series I'll come back and talk about
post-modernism but I'm aware of the
postmodern critique in the the that a
lot of this is and that makes sense
given credo dominate dominance that this
is matched with power with dominance
with control with creating sort of
purity codes where we have boundaries of
identity of the US and the other all of
that I think III think it's a legitimate
form of argument and something I take
seriously but I would put that under
cradle dominance and I would want to try
and take out of what remains what what
what function can we see for people
doing this and how might we understand
it well first of all like I said we can
we can think of people having
paradigmatic statements and pictures
that this might be a function of
indispensability to them right so they
can understand it right we can
understand it as indispensable mythos
again it's highly plausible
there is a mythos for you or for groups
of people that is indispensable given
the contextual sensitivity the dynamic
coupling of religio that that there's a
sets of symbols and stories and
celebrations and shows and souvenirs and
all the things associated with mythos
right that are indispensable for getting
the kind of sacredness out of religio
that people want and need in response to
for example the perennial problems so
again this of course is part of the
philosophical reason not just theirs
also an independent moral reason but
this is part of my philosophical reason
why I try to be deeply respectful to
religious Creed's precisely because even
though I think all of these criticisms
or all the criticisms associated with
this criticisms that I've all added to
in this series I think they're all
legitimate I think this is also a very
legitimate thing now of course the
problem is is to confuse
indispensability with metaphysical
necessity and to confuse need with
authority and we've talked about all of
that what I think we can think well this
is not only in indispensability that's
idiosyncratic to people or the group we
can also talk about an indispensable
functionality that might be more
Universal in nature and this has to do
with a basic idea from all of
information processing from what's
called signal detection theory
so signal detection theory is a theory
that basically argues that we're always
facing perennial problems when and I
mean I mean that to allude to the
perennial problems that I've talked
about here we're fate whenever we're
doing information processing there's
aspects in which the information is
there's there's and this is no
contradiction there's simultaneously too
much information but there's often
inadequate information like you're not
seeing all of my body right now right so
the information is simultaneously
overwhelming and partial the information
is often ambiguous it's it's unclear if
that information is the information you
need or you're there you're being misled
in some way by information that's
similar but not in the relevant way to
the information you're looking for so
all of these things point to an
important point an important general
conclusion now I'm gonna have to use two
terms here I'm gonna use the word signal
and this means information I want
information I want or need and then
noise noise does not mean audible
distortion audible distortion is one
kind of it what this means is this means
information I do not want right it's in
some way distracting right it's in some
way misleading etc so here's the idea
here's the population of events that
constitute signal that you're looking
for and the idea is there's always a
significant overlap with noise again
where noise doesn't mean audible
distortion it means any information that
you don't want that it can be confused
with look it confused with can be
confused with signal so you let's take a
prototypical example right a
prototypical example is this you're
ghazal and you hear a noise in the bush
now that could be important signal it
could it could be information that you
want because it's information telling
you that a leopard is near or the noise
in the bush could be noise in this
technical sense it could just be the
rustling of the leaves caused by the
wind and that is and this is the
important term here that's the
irrelevant to you that's irrelevant to
you that might be signal for somebody
else or something else but for you as
the Gazelle it's irrelevant see being
signal and noise of course is a matter
of relevance realization so you're sort
of caught here right because if you're
the gazelle what you're experiencing is
this this zone right here right the zone
of overlap between the signal and the
noise you don't know what it is now what
you can say is well what I'll do is I'll
get more information and there's a sense
in which that helps but you have to also
understand that there's a diminishing
return here because any new information
that I try to get to resolve this will
also suffer from this problem alright
and this of course goes again towards
you can't ultimately get certainty etc
etc okay also the more I regressed and
try to get signal about my signal about
my signal about my signal the more time
I'm taking and often time is an
important constraint so first of all you
can't ever escape this problem and as
you try to reduce it you have to put in
a lot of time and effort that can
ultimately be too costly for you so the
idea is there's a sense in which every
act even an act of perception is to some
degree risky it's a gamble and this is
part again and we talked about this
Tim little crap Blake Richards and I in
the paper on relevance realization this
is this is part again of the issue of
you know trading off between various
contingencies what's the trade-off here
well that's right the trade-off is I
have to I have to what's called do I
have to set the criterion so the
criterion is basically what I do is I
put a dividing line a decision line
remember decide ultimately means to cut
and I'm gonna include everything right
to the left that signal and exclude
everything to the right now what's
what's the problem with that well the
problem with that is of course I'm now
opening myself up to different kinds of
errors okay so one of the things I can
do here is I kept my criterion too high
for example I will include a lot I will
treat a lot of noise as signal okay if I
set my criteria and way down here I I
don't want to ever be wrong I'm gonna
set my criterion really low right here
all right I'm gonna set my that way I'll
never the problem is if I set my
criterion so I exclude all possible
noise I'm gonna miss a lot of valuable
signal okay
the other issue that comes up so where
do you set the criterion well I mean
there isn't an algorithm for that
because part of the problem is those
different kinds of errors are
differentially relevant to you depending
on the context let's go back to the
gazelle you have two gazelles you have
build a happy gazelle and what Bill
wants to do is basically write once to
avoid
leopards right so bill says well I'm
gonna set my criterion very high because
that way most of the time I'm going to
treat the noise as a leopard in the bush
and that way my chances of missing a
leopard were very small now the problem
with Bill is he's kind of you know he
runs away a lot lot there's every wind
and he runs away and all the other
gazelles laugh at Bill look at Bill he's
running around again and if bill does
this too much of course it's exhausting
right now in contrast to build the
gazelle there is you know let's call it
Tom and Tommy is the you know the really
epistemic ly oriented gazelle tom will
only act on the basis of what tom truly
believes and so tom is gonna be very
skeptical and set their criterion very
low and tom says I'm only going to
believe what I am really confident in
and certain of right and that way you
know this is what's gonna happen so what
what happens for tom is all the
instances where the wind is blowing and
bill runs away Tom laughs Abdullah aha
aha silly bill
the problem is tom is missing signal by
setting his criterion so low and one of
these times there's a noise in the bush
bill runs Tom begins to laugh and as
he's mid laughs there is a leopard on
his back sinking its jaws in a death
grip on his neck because you see in this
in this context not in all contexts not
in all contexts but in this context
missing signal is much worse than
mistaking noise for signal see there's
two kinds of errors I can miss signal
I can mistake noise for signal when I do
this right that's bill everybody laughs
at me that's a cost and I'm using a lot
of energy but if I miss right if I miss
the leopard I'm dead and that's much
much worse so that's why most gazelles
are like Bill rather than like Tom they
set the criteria and way over here
they're willing to make a lot of
mistakes so that they do not make very
many misses now there's other situations
where you write whether to bill reversed
where a mistake is much more costly to
you than a miss and so what you need
right what you need is you need to be
flexibly setting your criterion in a way
that is deeply contextually sensitive
deeply situationally aware this is again
why perspectival knowing is so crucial
perspectival knowing is your situational
awareness and your situational awareness
should be right your primary guide to
what is the context and how do I set the
criterion in this context in fact
there's a neuroscientist cognitive
scientist Lao who argues that one of the
functions of consciousness is exactly to
set the criterion for a for perception
so what you're paying attention to right
is how your situationally aware and so
how you're paying attention how your
situationally aware how you're setting
the the criterion is actually the job of
consciousness now as as you may realize
and myself and Richard wu and anderson
todd argued this again is another
argument that one of the main functions
of consciousness is
to do relevance realization within
perspectival knowing yet another
converging argument now the point about
this is two things and both of them have
to be remembered what does this have to
do with credo well I would argue that
what credo is is criteria is setting the
criterion on religio what it's trying to
do is determine what's what behaviors
what things are putting me really into
contact with religio and then what is
malfunctioning what is mad etc now the
issue is we have to set the criteria
that's in xscape Abul and one way to do
this is to do it in an absolutist way
one way to do this is to say there is a
final way a final place an absolute
place to set the criterion I can think I
think you can see from the argument
given here why that is a perilous thing
to do you can see again why the
open-endedness of relevance realization
undermines these the attempt to
absolutely set the criterion so you have
to set the criterion but it is dangerous
to set the criterion in an absolute
fashion so if we can acknowledge this we
can acknowledge that we will set the
criterion with our mythos but and that's
one half of credo but we should not ever
try to set the criterion in an absolute
or final manner which is what happens in
credo dominance because that is
ultimately to misunderstand the
functionality of setting the criterion
the point is not to set the criterion
conclusively the point is to continually
reset the criterion optimally again
open-ended relevance realization rather
than a final solution so a way of
thinking about that is the religion of
not that's not a religion would always
always have credo in the service of
religio now I'm sure that there are many
religious people would say well that is
that is what we do in practice and you
know we have our Creed's but they're
constantly being historically
interpreted be right and I think that
sort of right in practice but there's
often been a lot of conflict between de
facto and de jure in the history of the
religious discussions around orthodoxy
and Creed etc and I point to you again
to the work of Arthur Lewis and his work
on the way in which the the the West
history of pursuing and persecuting
heretics people who write do not set the
criterion as we do has actually helped
to foreshadow and train the West for
totalitarian regimes and città latarian
ideologies so all I point you again to
his historical argument for how that
came about so for that reason we should
always be thinking of making credo
clearly and comprehensively always in
the service of religio that would be
helped as you can I think see by being
linked to a notion of sacredness as
being grounded in an inexhaustible
open-ended Optima optimization rather
than in some absolute state of
perfection
next I think that the religion that's
not our religion should when it's
crafting its mythos and understanding
that credo is always in the service of
religio it should always understand the
mythos as being beholden to sort of the
three levels that we've been talking
about here so you have the unconscious
level right mm this is the level at
which relevance realization is taking
place right most of the relevance
realization that's going on for me I do
not have introspective access to in any
way and this of course is the grounding
of my participatory knowing of course
you become you can become conscious of
your participation but that's some what
I'm saying here I'm saying that the
processes by which from which I emerge
as an autobiographical ego and the world
emerges as an unfolding arena right or
ultimately below the level of
consciousness and that's where the
participatory knowing is happening and
then of course there is the level of
consciousness and this is the level of
salience
Landscaping
and of course this is the level of
perspectival knowing the prospective
Duyvil knowing is grounded in the
participatory and the prospective will
knowing with the situational awareness
that I've just talked about of course
makes possible the procedural knowing
these are tightly intermeshed as well
this is where I am right consciously
directing my interactions in order to
appropriate affordances given to me at
this level and I'm appropriating those
affordances by cultivating skills so
that my coping turns into skillful
interaction my coping caring becomes
skillful action and apt Sensibility and
then of course this passes into the
cultural level this is the level of
distributed cognition
and this is the level at which we are
trying to write communicate so this is
this is this is level of which
connections are being made this is the
level at which connections are being
sensed and internalized and then this is
the level of which connections are being
shared and so what we have here of
course is the whole machinery of mythos
and of course the machinery of science
and other things such as that but I'm
gonna although that's at the cultural
level and taking it out because what I'm
going to concentrate on here is
addressing this so as I said this will
pick up on our propositional knowing but
of course the mythos also points down
towards right all of these because here
we have credo in the service of religio
and so any mythos is going to understand
itself this way if I put it horizontally
as always in the service of religio
which means it is always going to also
be directed you'll allow me downwards
right to the procedural knowing the
respect travel knowing and the
participatory knowing so it should be a
mythos that is explicitly committed to
both of those in an integrated fashion
that the credo the paradigmatic
propositions the paradigmatic pictures
right are always in the service of
religio and that the mythos therefore is
directed towards accessing activating
accentuating right appreciating the
procedural knowing the prospective
all-knowing without participatory
knowing
and
so
it should be given given the argument
very tentative you what it should be
doing is once you you've got you've got
this programmatic framework in mind then
what it should be doing is cultivating
an ecology of psycho technologies
an ecology that it is designed to be
both top-down it reaches from the
propositional down to the participatory
but also is open to and allows bottom-up
emergence from the participatory up
through the perspectival through the
procedural and into the propositional so
I tried to indicate to you what that
ecology should look like you should be
setting up psycho technologies sets of
practices and cognitive styles that have
complimentary relationships to each
other that have sets of corresponding
checks and balances strengths and
weaknesses so that you have a dynamical
system that is reliably complexified a
reliably self-correcting manner which
means we need to do something very
important and this is an idea that
emerged in a discussion with Jordan Hall
and he put it this way I think which is
a very interesting way of putting it we
need a meta cyclic technology that is
designed to give us move us out of the
intuitive construction of psycho
technologies into the more explicit so
two points here they're more explicit
creation of cyclic technologies and
explicitly the task of trying to
cultivate an ecology of more explicitly
engineered psycho technologies so this
would be the meta psycho technology so
this religion that is not a religion
should give people ways of cultivating
this Metis I call this meta psycho
technology as a way of crafting the
ecology of practices for addressing the
perennial problems in a way that is
always consonant with
and mean coherent with worldview
attunement I think that there are deep
connections between the capacity for
collectively creating the Metis and you
have to do this collectively because
that's how selective technologies are
created right the capacity for creating
this collectively and the individual
virtue meta virtue because that's what
it is the meta virtue of wisdom there's
deep connections for that the more the
people are individually cultivating
because wisdom is basically a way of
cultivating and coordinating the
individual virtues we'll come back to
that so you need individual wisdom the
meta virtue in order to collectively
right pursue the creation and the cult
the ongoing cultivation of them the meta
psycho technology that will allow us to
engineer individual psycho technologies
and to cultivate a ecology of psycho
tech that reaches right comprehensively
down to our participatory knowing and
affords comprehensively the emergence up
from our participatory knowing
so I think those are some very general
structural features some things we might
be wanting to do a more organizational
level is and this is extremely tentative
extremely so what might it be to create
that open-ended credo well we have
something like that already because of
the emergence of the cyber technologies
that are being increasingly integrated
with the psycho technologies and it and
I'm using this just as an analogy but we
have something like Wikipedia and what's
interesting about the Wikipedia is is
the way it's generated the way it's
maintained the way it's revised it's
done in this collective cooperative
fashion and it has both a quite you know
reliable stability but also a quite
reliable evolved evolution and what's
interesting is I've recently expose any
oath created something like this from
one of my courses and in the what we did
there in one of the courses at the
University it's got former students to
grace basically create a wiki of some of
the main ideas main themes main
arguments in the course and and what
happens is people of course get much
more involved in a participatory fashion
with the generation of sort of the credo
for the course and on what they also do
is write is they create something like
the Wikipedia that gives people much
more interactional and evolving content
to work with so you get sort of this
presentation of what's paradigmatic and
pro
typical for the course but in this
collective a dynamic and ongoing fashion
so perhaps we could think about creating
a credo analogous to that where we
create something like a wiki a credo
wiki for example by which groups of
people that are interested in creating
Ecology's of practices and cycler
technologies can communicate with each
other for how to adaptively set the
criterion and how to constantly
re-engineer the creation of the meadows
like the meta psycho technology that
will help to guarantee maybe that too
strong a word help to promote reliably
promote both the bottom-up and top-down
functionality of this ecology of psycho
technology maybe that could be set in
conjunction with a co-op structure of
these various communities where they are
co-opting together to create a shared
curriculum a shared credo in this wiki
manner and which they are also trying to
afford a kind of synoptic integration a
shared vocabulary not imposed as an
ideology but to allow for transformative
and bridging insights and discourse
between the various groups so that they
might be able to afford each other's
development and enhancement now as I've
said all of that is not this I am NOT
presenting a utopic vision
that that's not what's going on what's
going on is people are already doing
this there they are already trying to
create these ecologies of practices
they're trying to create ways of talking
to each other
setting the criterion and they're making
use of social media they're making use
of the Internet they're making use of
cooperative dynamic forms of social
organization I think all of those could
be appropriated and a way to help bring
about this religion that's not a
religion and what I've tried to do is
offer some suggestions on things to keep
in mind and at least some potential
methods for helping to bring this about
whether or not this functions whether or
not any of this takes root again it's
not even up to me I'm not some sort of
linchpin or pivotal figure I'm just
trying but this sounds so so
insufficient I'm just trying to help I'm
really just trying to help I and I want
to give people some way of how to go
about starting to make this work
more and more powerfully and
perspicacious Lee all right so I have
tried to show how in three interrelated
ways we can respond to the meaning
crisis I've tried to show that we can
there are sets of practices that we can
cultivate as an ecology for addressing
the perennial problems we can set that
those perennial problems into a
legitimating worldview via the
theoretical scientific machinery given
to us by third generation cognitive
science 4e cognitive science and that
all of that can be set practically
within the project of trying to bring
about the religion that is not a
religion in terms of like I said some
suggestions about some structural
features of what we're looking for and
some organizational features of how to
try and initiate that and get that going
this is ultimately going to come back to
the dialogue that I'm going to set up
between what I've argued for here and
some of the other prophets of this
religion beyond a religion that's not a
religion like Tillich Jung I would argue
also Corbin and perhaps aspects of
Barfield and the The Godfather of all of
that of course is are people like
Heidegger so that's going to be
something we're going to come back to
but we need to do something else now
that I've constantly been putting aside
because it also is going to be involved
in the process that I have been
proposing to you and we've said it
throughout which is their cultivation of
wisdom and as we've seen the cultivation
of wisdom as a meta virtue is deeply
resonant with right the communitas
cultivation of the meta psychology that
is needed for the ecology of ciclo
technology and of course wisdom is also
needed for the project of i´ve
enlightenment I've already mentioned and
finally wisdom has always been
associated since the axial revolution
with satisfying those deep connectedness
the connectedness to one's self the
connectedness to the world the
connectedness to others that makes for a
meaningful life so I want to start
talking now about the cognitive science
of wisdom and I want to and again this
is this is a very exciting and hot area
in in cognizant there's lots going on
about this right now
and it's becoming very very pervasive
and the discussion of wisdom 'men the
culture at large is coming to the fore
again so I can't I mean I would like to
have a series at some point that's just
on wisdom I can't do that right now what
I want to do is try and give again sort
of a very quick overview of sort of the
key players if you'll allow serious
players
in the cognitive science of wisdom
business and what we can glean from that
and how we can integrate it into the
model and picture we've been building
here so this really took off in the
1990s with an anthology by Robert
Sternberg Sternberg the psychologist
Robert Sternberg has done a tremendous
amount of work to bring back the notion
of wisdom within psychology within
cognitive science in general within and
even within pedagogy and the
understanding of Education and that
anthology really started to bring out
some of the initial work that was being
done the seminal work and also promote a
lot of work that has expanded since on
this I want to talk about work that was
happening at around the same time as
this shortly thereafter
so the Sternberg the first Sternberg
anthology on wisdom there's been another
one since the wisdom handbook was in
1990 and then Minh siddur a really
important article came out in 1999 by
the Ian barber it was important because
it was basically retrospective
reflection on sort of the first decade
of work on wisdom but it was doing
something more than that so it was it
was definitely doing that retrospective
but it was also doing something very
important something that is is so
resonant with what we've been doing here
together because what they wanted to do
was they wanted to try and link two
things together in a very powerful
convergence argument they wanted to look
at all of what they call the a priori
theories of wisdom our way of
understanding that I think is very easy
just by seeing what they looked at they
wanted to look at all the philosophical
theories and we've look
that quite a few of them so we're we
have an understanding of what they're
talking about
we saw the Socratic theory and the
Aristotelian and the stoic right and the
platonic so you have the philosophical
theories of wisdom and of course that's
appropriate because philosophy is the
love of wisdom but they also wanted to
look at right and there then about 15
years because the anthology comes out in
1990 some work had been going on in the
80s and then it starts to really take
off but but you've got the psychological
theories right now these are very
conceptually driven they're very sort of
top-down these of course are much more
empirically driven bottom-up and what
they were trying to do was they're
trying to set up basically a reflective
equilibrium between them they're trying
to find they're trying to find through a
coordinated investigation a convergent
theme both from all of the philosophical
work and all of the psychological works
so looking at all of the philosophical
work what does it converge on same thing
with the psychological work and then can
we draw it all together in a you know in
a reflectively coherent fashion and they
did they make a very powerful argument
they go through and they make an
argument that what all of these theories
converge on is seeing through illusion
that the core of wisdom is the ability
to see through illusion where this means
of course much more broadly they're not
meaning primarily here visual illusion
they're meaning right cognitive and
existential illusion that is caused by
self-deception so seeing through this
and they end and of course because
wisdom is a systemic notion
and this is something they are going to
explicitly argue about this is
systematically right so not just this
elysian or this self-deception but a
systematic seen through of
self-deception and then and something
that Leo and I published in Leo Farrar
on unpublished in 2013 we argued that
this of course has a strong implication
that should be filled out here seeing
through allusion and in to write some
sense of what's reality or at least
what's more real and because you can
only know if you're seeing through
allusion if you come to something that
you regard as being less illusory in
nature so this is directly this
systematic right seeing through illusion
and into reality now notice what this is
this is a this is a very profound
meaning both deep and pervasive meaning
across many different instances of where
you're trying to solve your problems
achieving your goal this is a very
profound kind of insight it's at
systemic insight that we talked about
when we talked about higher states of
consciousness and and we'll see that
McGee and Barbara are using exactly this
idea it's to find across many areas in
which you have been miss framing
problems to see them to realize them as
systematically right related such that
you can come up with an insight that
intervenes not just on this problem but
in all of these problems in a systematic
fashion and thereby you start to see
systematically through illusion and into
what is more real so this is a key idea
as to what you're trying to cultivate
when you cultivate wisdom and what we're
going to do next time is we're going to
continue to look at we're going to
follow this about putting the
psychological theories and the
philosophical theories into dialogue and
to write continue developing what is it
that we're talking about when we're
talking about wisdom and relatedly what
is it we're doing when we're proposing
the cultivation of wisdom thank you very
much for your time and attention
[Music]
you
[Music]
you
you
you