welcome to the stola the stoah is a
digital campfire where we go here and
dialogue about what matters most at the
night's edge what's happening now
goodbye Q&A and like hopefully this kind
of good back and forth discussion
there's certainly a lot of stuff
happening in the world right now
and I don't think I don't think we'll
we'll be starved for events for the next
few months I think what's happening
fundamentally is that most of the
institutions we've grown to rely on are
much more similar to a dry forest in a
summer right at the start of the forest
fire then perhaps we were willing to
admit a year two three four ago I still
stand by my evaluation that the only
thing really that might Lau allow us out
of this mess is to very very quickly
empower live players to rebuild key
institutional key parts of the
institutional framework now we might
have a problem they might not be around
it's actually been quite a while since
we had a society that was really
conducive to yes personal power and
personal ability to do things you know I
think it's often there is a desire for
change without change makers and that
just never works even if we take the
most anarchist approach or the most like
you know it's a communitarian or even
communist approach right as you saw
during the Bolshevik Revolution
there's no revolution without Lenin and
perversely I think this might be one of
the reasons we are stable despite
everything being broken one of the key
reasons we are stable despite being
everything everything being broken is
that there's no coordinating individuals
who are capable of making it up as they
go along rather everyone's participating
in a predetermined script I'm going to
say that the current protests are going
to have a very very limited impact on
society some people might think that's
good
many people think that's quite bad
there's after all an injustice to
address but the crucial thing is
everyone in America that I know no one's
confused about what's happening everyone
knows what the next step is you know
everyone knows how to protest in a
civil-rights fashion and everyone knows
how to participate in
a race riot well neither of those
actually will change the American system
right if they could all the change that
they could achieve has already been
achieved in fact was achieved in the
1960s when the organizers of the
protests were in a way you know both
more violent and more pragmatic right
Dee and her scope of action was open
from you knows let's say Martin Luther
King who himself was somewhat ambiguous
to say all the way to Malcolm X and then
more moderate people on the other side
of King and this approach made that a
significant political faction in the
United States I think that this is the
system was well hardened against any
sort of popular revolt either from the
left or the right I think the system is
quite well hardened against any sort of
civil or spontaneous unrest the only
thing that could possibly change our
circumstances would be if a live player
were to harness this unrest and yes
harness it for more than just an
electoral victory for the Democrats I
don't think even anyone on the Left
believes that you know Joe Biden winning
results in a restructuring of American
Society so it's more just they just see
it as you know closing a gaping wound
and I think for people on the right they
can't really believe the Donald Trump
winning re-election fixes things either
so ignited people on the left or the
right believe this why are they
dedicating all of their energy to such
tiny tiny incremental outcomes that is
importantly non-additive incrementally
outcomes I think it's because they've
been very very thoroughly trained to
only do things that they already know to
only do things that are not confusing to
only do things that follow scripts that
honestly match Hollywood movies if
you've seen some of the city centers
over the last two weeks the seams look
straight out of Hollywood that's not
because Hollywood is super realistic
that's because I think we as citizens
have become super unrealistic we enjoy
acting out these scenes that we've seen
we enjoy viscerally participating in
what's primarily symbolic
action instead of materially grounded
action
we've lost the awareness that if you are
to have organization or impact you in
fact have to have system designers not
just systems and that the system
designers are necessarily themselves
powerful people you know I think today
for example you know let's let's imagine
that you know either it's sort of the
law-and-order style Nixon person right
that's or the figure or the social
change ma you know ma somewhat moderate
Martin Luther King or the very very
radical you know Malcolm X verging on
black nationalism they're all impossible
as individuals all social systems would
have selected against that personality
type long before they ever you know get
to a position to Shepherd institutional
resources the basic thing is all our
institutions have fleed risk as much as
they can as much as they possibly can
they've escaped the appearance of risk
especially financial risk and in doing
so overburdened
and overloaded on actual risk so because
there has not been many good training
environments for people of that type
because most people fear from the
unfamiliar towards the familiar like I
can feel how the pressure dropped when
we went from co-ed which was a natural
disaster outside our power or at least
manifestly outside our power to a civil
conflict that was manifestly or
allegedly in our power we're back on
track no one would be confused in 2001
or 1991 or 1971 if we explained exactly
what happened in the last two weeks no
one everyone would have been very
confused had you tried to explain the
events from February to May so now we're
enjoying a brief reprieve where we can
pretend that the traditional 1960s ways
of fixing things still work or the
clamping down on the 1960 stuff that
that's going to work this is the beloved
fantasy of
than right in America and I think both
of them are existing in this virtual
reality in the symbolic reality so with
that and with as you can see I'm not
trying away from controversy at all
that's why I'm opening this week's
session so directly so on the nose let's
talk what might statesmanship in America
and 2020 look like and I'm opening the
full spectrum from Kissinger to Lenin
here so I just want to hear ideas of
what individuals that acquire power and
use power to transform the system or
repair it might look like to see is
legit third-party or something like some
alternative to the polarized extremes
that are happening right now and I don't
know for sure I mean it's kind of
problematic I'm like a pretty
dyed-in-the-wool Democrat my parents are
both Democrats my communities are all
democratic it's like very clear I also
think that basically any party that
would make excuses for Donald Trump is
like hopelessly morally bankrupt so I
definitely think that one party is worse
than the other but the narrative that
I've kind of been fed my entire life as
a young American is no matter how
frustrated I am with the Democrats or
the left they're the lesser of two evils
for most of this situation like I'm just
feeling really done with that and I'm
really looking for something different
well what I would propose is that the
system is essentially designed so
electoral II it's very difficult to have
a third party and of course you might
ask like so why is the system designed
that way and so on but I think that the
core counterpoint this I would make is
that the next organized
transformation of America will not look
like a political party so I'm willing to
let could go back and forth and this and
listen to it but I note that say the
Democrats or the Republicans look much
less like a political party now in 2020
than they did in the year 2000 in the
year 2000 right or 2001 if we want to
pick 9/11 as the fissure point they look
much less like political parties than
they did in 1991 in 1991 they look at
much less like political parties than
they did in 1940 in what sense am I
using the term political party I'm I'm
using in the sense of this political
organization not yet in power that is in
fact ready and willing to govern right I
think it's this this political machine
first you know maybe pioneered in 19th
century European democracies of the
political party slightly modified into
this revolutionary form by Vladimir
Lenin until you know have the
revolutionary Vanguard party I think
this machine has broken down and I think
it partially broke down because the
system over time like you know it um I
think it was quite firmly locked down
it's not really possible to vote the
bums out like someone might say in this
very popular way it's just not possible
because the bums you can vote out are
just bums and they've not been like near
the control panels in your lifetime
right I think that's just you know there
are some minor exceptions to this I
think the president you know there's a
phrase I heard somewhere the president
is the dictator of the world and the
mayor of America right and there are
issues if you try to invert that if you
try to make them the mayor of the world
and the you know dictator of America
that that probably doesn't work but
these are the the coordination within
the Democratic Party it was visibly
lower than it wasn't the 2000s and the
Republican Party is visibly less
coordinated and competent than it was in
the 2000s right so we're not even
talking here I'm not even talking good
or evil not even talking objectives
I'm just looking at we are seeing a
system that's locked in a two-party
configuration where the political
parties are over time less and less
politically powerful as organizations
what's the democratic party line
what's the Republican party line I don't
know I don't think anyone knows anymore
I think it's this weird miasma of like
any sort of position and there's only
limited ability to get people within a
single political party to work together
which is what the political parties were
at first right there were these
mechanisms for for the creation of a
governing structure so I think that the
next way American statesmen might work
and that private citizens might work
it's going to look not like a political
party but it will be coordinated it will
be public it will solicit public support
and it will enter government and the
question is how does that happen if it's
not it's not political hero propose that
at the very least one should consider
the new conservatives now I think the
new conservatives issued disastrous
foreign policy but no one ever voted the
neoconservatives into power yet they did
speak to the public and they did
inter-government and they did have some
limited support from parts of the public
and what they managed to do in this
really crazy way was you know achieve
complete consensus between Democrats and
Republicans on the very important
question of should we invade Iraq and a
dozen other foreign policy questions
arguably say the Ukraine crisis in the
Obama years and you know the early Trump
years was still basically handled in
line with their preferences so they're
very flawed model but they're a real
model so whatever that is I think we
should study that and perhaps need the
new name and political science very
curious if you have any thoughts because
I hope I was addressing the substance of
your question right it can be very
tricky okay great
anyone wants to go continents to go next
[Music]
you you asked what my statements ship in
America in 2020 looked like and I think
far better question somehow that quest
doesn't make sense to me in light of
what we're looking at there's a
burgeoning global peer-to-peer movement
the Commons a cosmic global Cosmo local
movement that's happening around the
world looking at building up the Commons
as a space not just the market and the
state but the Commons coming into with
you know strong neighborhoods this sort
of thing and so you mentioned systems
designers and I completely agree with
that the question is what kind of
systems designers and so my question is
how can we help these system designers
whatever sorts were talking about how
can we help them because they do exist
to gain this political power well when
we talk about system designers right I
think we're either talking about profits
oligarchs or statesmen and and of the
three I'm like most in favor of
statesmen because here's here's a Batala
glutens problem for example creator of
etherium if a theorem can possibly work
he's gonna have to be an oligarch if
etherium you know if he doesn't want to
be an oligarch I think aetherium won't
work as the next currency there's this
vast reality that any system I think
requires the exercise of power to be
implemented I've not seen any system be
adopted without the exercise of power
and if power is exercised in a
coordinated way and that's the power in
the hands of an individual right or a
small clique of individuals because I've
seen nothing else yeah but I guess comes
to the implementation of full new
systems right now the creation and the
dreaming up of new systems that that can
be done by others right you could have
you could have someone develop very
extensive political theory or social
theory or new ethical movement but then
someone else would have to organize the
basis in that ethical movement and that
person would invariably be powerful
right so when I say profit right you
that can almost you know let me put this
way I think that you know MLK for
example was certainly using spiritual
energy not just political energy and I
think it's a mistake by say
you know modern liberals or
conservatives to ignore this I think
modern conservatives want to ignore his
his ties to communism and modern
liberals won't ignore that how much the
theology of Christianity helped MLK
achieve what he did right so I would
consider him at least 10% profit or or
preacher Reverend or whatever he was but
this this this idea of the
self-organizing system I think is very
important but in the question is who is
designing or building a self-organizing
system I think this is an act of
engineering and ultimately such a system
i transcend an individual designer in
fact it must
and it might transcend a small group of
implementers it must but the the moment
of its creation like that just has to be
done directly like there's this very
interesting you know I know Machiavelli
has a bad reputation and as I think
because his humor doesn't translate that
well from Italian to English like in
English he's playful and almost her
Kastigar sorry in Italian he's playful
sarcastic you know you can tell that he
has moral principles in addition to the
analysis but the most interesting line I
think it's from the discourses right so
it's not from the prints that I ever
read was you know a new political system
be it a principality or Republic is
always the work of a single man I found
that deeply insightful right in a very
important way you know maybe in the
American Revolution we would consider
George Washington to be that person or
you know maybe someone like Hamilton or
whatever but you know they had a choice
point as to what kind of system to
contribute their energies to so in that
moment it was their decision it wasn't
the decision of the American people they
put it we the people but who is this we
the people who is this we the market
whose hand is the invisible hand that
moves the market right and who who is
the person who gets to say we it's not
said by a 300 million people
simultaneously someone is speaking right
so that will kind of be my my push back
I would say yes it's good to mind
Commons but I think the Commons can only
be shepherded administered extended
rebuilt through the work of individuals
and the process of building them if only
for a short time those individuals
become immensely powerful quote perhaps
next question James yeah this one well
hey there's a lot of like like you said
what might what comes next might not
look like a political party which I
think ties into this question because
there's a lot of attention in
discussions like this around national
politics the presidency who's gonna be
the president and what party's in
control of the house control of the
Senate but it seems like a lot of that
like decisions on the ground are being
made in local governance and at the same
time in local governance the political
parties of the individual members
matters much much less than or holds
much less sway than in a lot of national
politics where you have a Council of
five people that are all you know they
all live in this small town and and the
party holds less way there's less toeing
the line there may be so I'm wondering
what your thoughts on our thoughts on
local governance and what nationally
organized local politicians looks like I
think the national organization aspect
right like it's sort of like you know
it's um I think there's a I think that
the local politics aspect would matter
immensely if people tracked local
material reality and people still were
invested in their local social community
rather than existing as much as they do
on the symbolic level so perhaps the
first thing to consider is that a return
to the local reality that's under their
control that might be very interesting
and then what might this
like I think it would have to be through
a fragmentation of media I just can't
see them I just can't see people ever
unglue in their eyes from the screen
right stopping to read newspapers
ceasing to consume mass-produced
entertainment so I think they're stuck
consuming entertainment and I think the
entertainment shakes them and I think
they on a subconscious level act
primarily on the entertainment rather
than the reality and then the
entertainment is always get kept one way
or another so free free fragmentation of
media followed by essentially this
strong focus on at least local symbolic
action that builds up power centers
because the key thing is that you know
the key trick that I think is often
played is we are against power so we're
removing all visible power and if you
remove our all visible power then the
only power that exists in the system is
the invisible or hyper centralized power
right so you actually get a super
centralized society that nominally you
know everyone is equal
but Augustus is first citizen right or
Napoleon is first citizen everyone is
equal but comrade Stalin's like a little
bit more equal than everyone else and
you can't really remove Comrade Stalin
by calling out your other comrades is
problematic in fact if you're calling
out your other comrades is problematic
you're definitely helping Stalin right
like he's definitely acting a-list so
this is like a very totalitarian
metaphor but we see a non totalitarian
societal equivalent of this is kind of
like beige gray consensus of new
liberalism that is now you know it's
it's basically defeated right like and
I'm not sure what happens next but the
next thing is by default still going to
be super scaled in the media landscape
so okay without scaling back the media
landscape to smaller projects and
smaller packages of consumption and less
bundled media consumers I just can't see
people caring about local action even
though it in theory should influence
them so much maybe a follow-up question
James does that feel like it touches on
on the topic uh yeah I think you touched
on the topic it seems very much related
to kind of the you know you know back
back back to the back to the land
movement that we're that we're seeing
from a lot of hearing from a lot of
different sides of folks this kind of
hyperlocal you know let's step out of
this broken system and build a little
pocket of you know patchwork utopia is
it's it seems quite related because
that's another that's a form of local
governance and that's an extreme of
breaking that media landscape as you
said let's cut off let's you know really
separate ourselves not from the
electrical grid but from the social grid
and and really look right where we are
and that seems like you said that
centralizes power because you know
you're you're effectively cutting off
any voices that go off into their pocket
from from the state that must still
exist as controlling whatever land your
pocket lives on that sort of thing so
I'd be interested to hear media
fragmentation trends and or efforts that
you've seen or that have excited you
about the you know if it media
fragmentation is what you think brings
local politics back into a meaningful
place like is that happening you think
you see it happening any hope of that
not by default I'm not seeing you know I
think it's the nature it's the nature of
these networked spaces that you never
exit them right no one wants to leave a
corner of the media space that they you
know that they feel is impaired to them
to go somewhere else
what they primarily want to do is stay
and talk to the other people even if
they consider them
enemies right so humans are like super
agglomerative the closest I've seen is
this almost subcultural differentiation
where you might see corners of Twitter
or corner corners of YouTube they're
just completely mutually unintelligible
right so the sort of sequestration
through obscurity through subcultural
idiom through tiny boutique writers or
thinkers you know various kind of groups
with a cult following if you thought if
you said if you think about it like
these these cult followings that are
honestly like very much countercultural
they don't want the Normie to come they
don't want the normal person to come in
they actually want to keep it small and
exclusive and I think they prefer it
that way so some of those groups will
remain stable though I wonder you know I
think pseudonymity is is losing very
badly right the internet was basically
pseudonymous by default in 2005 possibly
as late as 2010 but by 2012 definitely
you know the normal respectable thing
was to speak on the internet with your
own name and your own face and the
subcultures can still develop in
interesting ways as you might see on
various Twitter accounts but I think at
this point we're almost suspicious of
the of the you know unnamed masked user
we want their name perhaps perhaps yeah
you know strong idiosyncratic
subcultures with like reputation systems
baked into rooted to identity seems
required for like real like long term
building as a group yeah this is this is
certainly true but note this also makes
them legible and susceptible to economic
pressure right yeah if I can jump in for
a sec just a very quick observation I've
actually done a bunch of research on the
Internet and there's no evidence that
sorry the Sun here is weird there's no
evidence that requiring real name usage
improves politeness of conversation or
like any of the other stuff that people
that's very important many of the
backers of those policies are companies
like Facebook which benefit in some ways
from people being required to use real
names for whatever reason um I can draw
up an article that I wrote about this in
the chat but I just think it's the
exhuming of the third point is usually
not acknowledged in these conversations
yeah I think it's really interesting in
my quality of conversation kind of what
you're talking about right like
politeness and and like civil civility
of conversation I wonder how it affects
the ability to affect material change as
I could organize group of people though
that's that's yeah I wonder that as
opposed to just like conversational
quality I think the the creation of
black lists for hiring is super
important and an unremarked upon future
of American life or once it was worthy
of a scandal right like the blacklisting
of the you know people with would say
Marxist tendencies in 1950s Hollywood
now we just expect of everyone a clean
record of social media behavior well the
only way you can possibly have a clean
record of social media behaviors to head
of either have no social media behavior
you know over a period of 20 to 30 years
of changing norms where presumably
started using it as a teenager with
raging hormones and little life
experience possibly getting trapped and
getting involved in different
subcultures it's like you know if we
continue to cling to that standard of
requiring like clean behavior online in
pseudonymous contexts you know I think
this is going to be very very oppressive
and stifling I think we're actually
gonna see very little cultural
innovation and in that case we might be
stuck repeating the 20th century forever
even as it works less and less well
since the material circumstances diverge
from those that created these mean
fluxes can we go to Peter's comment yes
just riffing off of your comment on
local politics so if I understand
correctly what you're saying is that
there is
still a lot of interesting work a lot of
interesting moves that could be made at
the local level but people get
distracted by the shiny things not quite
not quite I said a symbolic symbolic
space seems more important to them than
actual concrete physical space let me
explain um the difference is you can
have some of this extremely intellectual
that is like you know really focuses
very heavily does a lot of thinking does
a lot of research but what they choose
to think about a research right and
later what they choose to manage what
they choose to give money into is
something that exists in this shared
symbolic reality rather than something
that's like local and concrete I think
for many people it is distraction but
I'm not positing distraction as such I'm
positing like this orientation to a
causal action almost right so a
different frame I could put on it and
then I'll let you finish your question
if it still applies is imagine extremely
severe brain drain where the smartest
local organizer in every village
they don't necessarily all go to New
York but they all mentally direct their
energy to what's happening in New York
right there virtually brain drained if
that makes sense sure yeah I think the
question still applies which is that if
there's real power to be had on a local
level that seems to imply that any small
number of people and a group that can
coordinate to work on local politics
maybe create a narrative in which local
politics is symbolically meaningful to
them that might be a necessary
groundwork then you know I emphasize
again what does the machinery of local
politics look like it you know to be
fair running for mayor maybe isn't
terrible but it's like you know maybe
the the most powerful person in central
disco isn't the mayor of San Francisco
right sure but if you're positing that
there's brain drain to national politics
where there's very little leverage and
then people are ignoring politics on the
local level which perhaps they have more
leverage and that seems to imply that
there's you know ten million hundred
million dollar bills lying on the
sidewalk for anybody who can do that
sort of local entrepreneurship I very
much think there
now for most towns it's not going to be
hungry million right but definitely
there are honestly trillion dollar bills
lying on the floor of Seattle San
Francisco LA possibly even New York yeah
well yeah curious if you had any
thoughts on what the sort of machinery
for the alternate hypothesis of course
is that most power has been drained to
the center and so people are rationally
ignoring local politics but I take it
that's not your view well I think that
the the periphery still remains far more
illegible than the center then the
center would like to claim it is I think
most people have no idea how things are
done in Chicago or how things are done
in New Orleans and I think most of the
federal government doesn't I think the
federal government has a very fragmented
awareness of reality I think that yes
there is an aspect of like you know of
autocracy where everyone can say no the
center is not managing anything but can
say no to anything being done so
thinking that way power has perhaps been
drained but on the other one I think
it's far more the case that were
radically more risk-averse than we once
were no one's going to convince me that
the risk reward profile was more
favorable for say force a Bolshevik
revolutionaries i unders arist Russia
than it is for American citizens trying
to get ahead in life in 2020 I really
don't believe that I just think that
there's something happening where their
ability or desire to engage with power
has atrophied so here's an interesting
possibility
what have we have in fact achieve the
stabilization of the world through a
severe deformation of the human spirit
what if the true problem was not wanting
things I think I know this is like again
a little bit controversial in in a stoic
context right I certainly just I want to
consider something there right I want to
consider whether it is possible that the
people who are following national
politics fundamentally just want to
observe and don't actually want to
change that they're quite irrational in
a different way
they don't wish to participate they're
just mildly nihilistic but they want to
be seen as as virtuous and is
participating and is active so it's
easier to participate in a virtualized
variant of national politics than it is
to you know maintain local local stuff
self domestication maybe yeah yes / self
domestication I mean Ted Kaczynski would
call it what was it over socialization
yeah yeah oh thanks Emma
yep thank you for asking good question
Rachel would you like to ask your
question Oh Rachel your microphones off
um yes so when we were talking about um
alternative governments before I know
some of us who read the diamond age and
we kind of have these ideas about like
I'm technology and what we can do with
them alternative government systems um
where do you see that going if people
are basically like creating their own
government systems I'm with software
what what is what what what could happen
like it's not like just such an untapped
borough then where where do you see
yourself in that yeah I think I'm still
disappointed that the cypherpunk dream
never came to be and I think that the
key thing that's happening is that the
creators of software for some reason
again the fear or don't want personal
power like if they did the creators of
software could be far more powerful in
the world than they are let's remember
you know the original 1999 Matrix movie
was promising people that they can fight
their corporate job and the government
by being hackers like that's basically
the the terrible life neo is broken out
of is the cubicle right like that's the
greatest suit and I think today that
greenness and that suit look like a
hoodie and it's not a cubicle but it's
an open office floor layout and they're
nerf guns
and you know they deliver you avvocato
toast but fundamentally you're paid very
very well to be a you know pet that
doesn't cause trouble ideally you're not
even developing new products you're just
making the old products work and a
startup environment though on the other
hand that potentially could still be a
route to power but I feel that's also
become this very hollowed out thing
where where the startups are becoming
more cookie cutter so the question I
would ask back is it's okay who are the
people who both still want power who are
not interested in participating in the
normal government or corporate game and
have the technical talent because I
think we're really atrophying in our
understanding of computers I think
people who are right now 20 years old
like they probably have to learn how to
properly use a keyboard right first
maybe figure out what a filesystem is
before they can start writing software
like I think I think maybe not 20 let's
say 15 year olds someone was creating
hypothetically a piece of alternative
Garamond stop every week it likes to see
mythologically from the current game
Amanda structure right and they have be
possible maybe they were building it and
they're like doing little things to make
it happen but it didn't really like have
a sense of amber ugliness you know what
would you see the possibility for like
advancing and into like different forms
of technology like its way to those
alternative government systems um even
if it's just like people enjoying their
you know like little micro society I'm
like their technology would that be a
viable thing I think I think that's
definitely viable the reason why I think
that's viable is because we see very
tiny weak variants of this with very
niche bespoke online communities where
people basically produce a different
emotional life in a different
intellectual life that's not been
generated by market forces or by
government propaganda right so that
could happen but again I really think
it's and what would that how would that
work I think that you know if you could
somehow cause invisible coordination or
no if you could somehow cause
bureaucratically invisible coordination
I think it actually doesn't take much to
take to take things over at all or to
break away into your freedom I think
that the floor on this however is like
kind of the level of coordination right
so whatever software technology produces
this coordination between the
individuals has to be at least as good
as the new conservative capture of US
foreign policy in the early 2000s or you
know let's let's say Scientology right
with operations know white people who
know that but you know the Church of
Scientology managed to infiltrate
several level levels of the US
government in what they termed
operations no white weather just went
and got hired in government bureaus and
then destroyed government documents on
the Church of Scientology like we're
such an effort successful the federal
government would have effectively
forgotten about the science the Church
of Scientology
now talk about like that that would
possibly make a very good book like an
alternate 2020 where the the deep state
is the Church of Scientology maybe it
has its own Epstein's to possibly next
question
so what's the
question hi sorry it's gonna post again
um you've said that it takes individual
live players to wield power and build
institutions but could this be a norm
but not a rule I wonder if perhaps
what's really required is a living meme
or idea rather than any individual
player part of the thinking here is that
um it's very difficult for a meme to
stay alive like it's almost as soon as
somebody copies it it becomes a bit of a
cargo cult version of the original
living meme right you gets lost in
groupthink it uh it loses a bit of its
life well really depends here what you
mean by living meme you perhaps mean
something that's like this like very
generative true transmission of
knowledge or do you mean something
closer to the concept of an egregore or
it's like a distributed intelligence I I
think I I'm not sure but definition is
well I always think that the sociology
of thinking about super organisms is
tricky right super organisms in the
sense of like these these transhuman
objects that allegedly might already
exist where it's you know groups of
people behaving as if they have an
emergent intelligence beyond beyond that
of you know individual intelligence I
think that since the sociology of that
is tricky I'm like very hesitant to say
let me put this way I can't rule it out
I would not necessarily bet on it
because it seems that there is a huge
difficulty in the transmission of
information between people I think we
have an easy time transmitting shallow
information but a harder time
transmitting complex or deeply
emotionally moving information which I
think makes the transmission of and I'll
be mechanism agnostic here of what you
might term live means very difficult
again you know arguably there might be
an exception with something like
religious fever right that might be like
living memes of a certain type and that
might be hyper adaptive it might be
self-modifying you know autopoietic this
perhaps another term people like to use
but I've seen little evidence of these
things so yes it might be a norm it
might be a norm it's possible there's
some key innovation that would enable
these to proliferate radically changing
how our world works
but I have to ask you know would
engaging in runaway mimetic evolution be
actually good for us humans that's
certainly debatable I I tend to believe
though but you know that's my personal
belief well thank you for the question I
certainly I'm not averse to checking out
other frameworks and debating people and
other frameworks so it's very good night
am i okay so I just read out the
question cuz since I spent a significant
amount of time saying it one thing that
I have noticed and I want to bring to
salience is that there are some I think
upstream factors when it comes to how
effective life players are and one of
them which I found is you know big
locust of the current polarization is
how we socialize people to construe the
self and the demands placed upon the
self in order to coordinate at all like
in the caricature trick version it's
it's always just operation and you know
even the smallest inconvenience is an
intolerable violation in the caricatured
conservative version it's an eternal
virtue if you don't confirm to n submit
to absolutely you're just a terrible
person and there's not much of a
discussion like both of these are locked
in conflict and they seem to be the only
alternatives as opposed to oh yeah there
are trade-offs and
different individuals have different set
points there are costs to having
different set points you know in in both
coordination as well as autonomy terms
and being in the barrier this is very
salient and if you and one thing that I
have noticed is that even the smallest
coordinations which I found very trivial
when I was in India like for people
getting along without strife in a group
house for example or just you know
together for some reason seem to require
monumental management of like most
trivial individual concerns which
normally would really not be a thing so
it's very difficult for life players to
operate in such an environment because
the usual mechanisms for actually
building anything right like the pieces
out of which you will build it the
timber has one might say become a bit
too crooked what's your view on this cuz
I see an institutional application of
this just they seem to have you know
just completely forgotten that part of
their job is to help people get to the
point where they can coordinate in
bigger numbers well yeah again this is
sort of like I think the learning
environment and the selection
environment they're two separate things
though they can coincide has been very
unfavorable to live players right
learning environment being where's your
sandbox right where's your proving
ground where's your you know courses on
orem where mistakes can be made and
mistakes don't necessarily haunt you
twenty or thirty or forty years later
you know if you could disqualify the
julius caesar's of the world or the you
know or the the fineman's of the world
by things that they said to their
friends at twenty five or twenty well
there wouldn't be many of them now would
there right like almost all of them have
these really crazy swings through their
life when they're learning stuff and
they already are causing real
consequences of course like it doesn't
absolve them of that but you're not
supposed to be the teacher's pet and
today i think you are supposed to be the
teacher's pet so there's the learning
aspect is not encouraged because you're
a problematic person
either in a corporate environment at the
boardroom you know it's like descent
isn't rewarded but even making the
conversation awkward isn't rewarded
either in the boardroom or the classroom
so you have to really ask yourself right
like at which point might someone going
through a law career be like firmly
rewarded and I'm gonna say law is
actually better than a lot of other
domains I'm gonna say something rather
perhaps interesting here it's like you
know lawyers have more diverse political
views than say software engineers and I
think that's because they have a higher
comfort with power right and a higher
comfort with power you show your
idiosyncrasies you don't hide them and
so the selection effect on the other end
though is being you know what does the
admission system select for what this
promotion select form so I think that a
lot of these live players at the early
stages we try as hard as we can to
disable them and I think perhaps you
know the obstacle course has just grown
too difficult but the fun fact is this
obstacle course was built by Life
players in the first place and
eventually it'll come crumbling down the
question is only how catastrophic Lee
right and what level of skill and
organization will you have available
around there and I honestly think most
of them don't even realize that they
have a role in in grooming or enabling
the next generation right I think they
take these structures that they lived in
as immutable laws of nature they don't
believe them to be the work of human
hands
much like the medieval start of the
massive building syndrome right very
much so yeah the work of giants right
yeah like you know in um you know early
medieval Europe Roman ruins would often
be attributed to giants much as in
classical Greek Greece my Seon ruins
were attributed to giants because the
idea of like organizing such
construction efforts it's like you know
seems ludicrously wasteful right you
perceive them as a feature of the
natural
scape like mountains so my concern was a
follow on with that as in even if we
assume an environment where life players
are not fully weeded out they still need
humans capable of coordination the
material of which the systems are made
in the such people are in very short
supply right now yeah yeah yeah like but
I do think you can find them I think
it's possible to use online sort of
communities and create communities where
or such people might be found I also
think that there's an underappreciated
thing that's extended America's life
span this is like tripe but it's only
trite because people take a watered-down
version of it this idea that immigration
replenishes America well if you look at
the people who shaped America in the
1940s almost none of them were born in
America except for FDR and the core the
core Democrats like if you look at all
the scientists right or if you look at
the 50 60 s and 70s all the cultural
creatives and organizer types they they
come from these European and East Asian
societies after the societies are
essentially defeated right or crumble
like they either flee chaos or you know
or they try to try to make do after
they're defeated and this this method
means that in fact around the world
there are still places where life
players have an easier time arising
right so I don't think you actually in a
modern context ever see anything like a
barbarian invasion but you might easily
have it be so that you know the elites
of the elites of our remaining the
elites of Armenia are just like actually
trained on power politics and they move
to the US and wielded disproportionate
influence or say Cuban refugees like for
example I think it might be a very good
idea for the u.s. to you know accept 3
million people from Hong Kong because I
expect those 3 million people to produce
individuals who are way better at
running you know way better at
maintaining power than the typical
American is right and they have an
ecosystem it like because it's a mass
migration it's effectively importing an
entire
living ecosan put and put an entire
ruling class right yeah yeah so I think
I think what I'm implicitly saying
here's a little bit controversial is
that you know immigration of the ruling
class prolongs the life of empire like
this is one of the advantages of
byzantium right so again there are these
bypasses right you can do but they are
they are bypasses and they're all rather
awkward and they the conditions of the
superstructure can't persist forever
then the question is well when does it
burn down no surprises yes
that is at the moment one America which
is you know post-war order and if your
hypothesis is taken seriously there's
it's actually possible that a lot of the
a lot of it is I mean I won't go so far
as to say parasitic but the fact that
the third generation migrant cannot do
what their grandparent did like it's a
real loss in some sense well it's kind
of weird right why is it possible for
immigrant communities to come to the US
and set up their own parallel social and
economic base and trade favors
yet it's not possible for people who are
born in America it's really weird right
something's happening here I think that
in an important way though I don't want
to focus on America do all the critiques
I love you to also apply to Europe and
you know it's they apply quite strongly
to Western Europe so I think that
there's no there are some simple changes
again if you could real ouka lies the
media landscape I think you would have
way more people engaging with cultural
production and if people are engaging
with cultural production some of them
graduate to engaging with social
engineering alternatively if there were
opportunities for like you know combat
of some kind that might also produce
such elites but there are few
opportunities like that very difficult
to keep those around cool shall we go to
the next question
my question is you just keep riffing on
that that's really interesting that
importation of the ruling classes are
good people from other countries curious
if you amor to say okay you take people
who have had radically different early
life experiences and radically different
information about the world and we're
allowed to make their mistakes in a
different system of accounting so if you
have a system of accounting where
mistakes are penalized you know let's
let's look at someone like Slava
Dziedzic for example I'm just going to
name him because there's there's been
reading some of his stuff lately in
Yugoslavia right even though he was a
communist he was barred from teaching on
a blacklist right so he graduated he had
post-grad program he went through it and
was utterly unemployable because of his
political views he was advocating the
wrong type of communism this reputation
the sort of negative blacklist that was
a result of him learning thinking and
sometimes saying the wrong thing didn't
weigh him down at all in the Western
world if anything the Western world
perversely like it helped him right
because he had the Patna of being a
dissident I think this learning
environment and escaping the initial
learning environment so you make your
mistakes early into a different
environment allows you kind of just
start with a clean slate that's one
mechanism the other mechanism is you are
exposed and lack you are exposed to
really different life experiences and
you don't share any of the unstated
assumptions of a society number three I
think that also there's this there's
this legitimately different base of
knowledge you might have Henry Kissinger
was steeped in history because he grew
up in a German environment in a way that
no post-war German or America never
could be right and then this this kind
of thoughtfulness
I think changed his view of things right
and then one can say good or negative
things about what he did but I think
again the reality was very much very
much there
so I think there's also of course a
selection effect where to leave a
country that's unstable is it's out only
something you can exercise with quite a
bit of privilege to begin with so it's
uh it's it's usually has some selection
pressures there and I think number five
you know as a for the fifth kind of
factor is well all the people that leave
with you are themselves the network who
suddenly feel hungry again so their
skills might be the skills of someone
who's mid-level in a different system
but they come over as a group and
they're low level they feel that hunger
right and they want to work together to
go further than they went before cool
next question so I'm sorry if you don't
mind me asking a quick follow-up
a mother earning on obvious like if
you're in charge are there any
non-obvious policy changes you think
would come out of your view about
immigration I think the u.s. is pretty
efficient at harnessing the talent of
various countries I think that I would
probably attempt freedom of movement
with allied countries but in only
closely allied countries that might
actually speed things up notably there's
more circulation of elite within the
European Union though they all end up
going to dysfunctional Brussels but it
does happen there's a brain drain from
the small countries like you know my
native Slovenia or the Czech Republic or
Portugal or Denmark where the people who
feel themselves talented or ambitious no
longer aspire to the peaks of national
politics so they don't want to be the
president of Portugal they might
actually want to be a commissioner in
Brussels so if hypothetically imagine
freedom of movement with Europe the
result would be a bunch of random
Europeans who otherwise would have tried
to become the French president or Prime
Minister of Britain suddenly trying
their best to try to be governors of a
particular US state or to become mayors
of New York
this obviously doesn't work because if
you attempted to do something like this
was China the result is the Communist
Party now governs two countries so one
has to be careful as well with
importation of the leads right
that's really interesting thanks I'm
great we're coming up to the top of the
hour but we do have one question here
that's been uploaded by Tyson do you
mind answering it ok what's the question
yeah sure um question is about the
sandbox and there's also open just
hearing what people might pop in a chat
but the show up and like practices like
freestyle and practices and
self-expression and dialogue have been
this new sandbox of sorts for me and so
I'm just curious about other ways that
the sandbox is showing up that maybe I'm
missing or not aware it could be
geographical communities it could be
practices modalities see I'm curious
like where are the best sandbox is for
truly experimenting playing making
mistakes
discovering Twitter anonymity if you can
keep it so but only if you can keep it
right because otherwise you're producing
producing issues for yourself I as a
policy don't don't have any pseudonymous
alts because I just think that it's like
too dangerous if you end up being
observed but in a very deep and
important way I think the internet
allowed some of this the key problem is
it kind of missed directs attention in
the same way I was describing of the
symbolic where you're kind of you're
plugged into the matrix and you forget
your physical surroundings this means
that for the most part it's actually
extremely difficult you know to both
experiment in a way that has access to
economic levers or even to social fabric
that might be useful or strategically
deployable so I would suggest online
meetup groups
so you create you create this discussion
you search for unusual people and then
in an urban center you start up a group
of people who you met online you try
your best to get to know them as people
try to bet for those of bad character
and try to have regular gatherings and
eventually real projects so real
projects
ideally construction if you can't do
construction
some sort of you know cultural activity
or event thrown by this group for people
that they know from everyday life right
so either mint the social capital by
bringing together a bunch of individuals
to organize an event that's not aimed at
the other internet people but is aimed
at local community members or bring
together the internet people and
construct something physical doesn't
matter what it is right in these two I
think are super fruitful generators for
learning things you'll learn slightly
different things but one will definitely
learn things that way and I think the
initial selection has to be sourced
online and to online intellectual
experimentation because the the native
environment is so impoverished for
people who have the excess energy or
will to do this or honestly the mental
health at this point you know people
talk about the mental health crisis you
know perhaps perhaps we're actually just
living in a society or where everyone
has profound issues thank you really
appreciate you for being here in these
last couple sessions really enjoying it
thank you and thank you to everyone for
these great great questions I always
strive to try to be concise I always
fail but at least hopefully the
questions were addressed great so we can
catch you next week at the same time
look forward to it I'm sure there'll be
plenty to talk about then any final
words for a samo before I tell people
about upcoming events right for for a
concluding thought I think
produce an environment where you might
make mistakes and when you can do
something completely different than
what's acceptable in your current so
for circle just try to do it and then if
you can introspect on what this does for
you and also if possible don't avoid
power like try to accept power I think
we've been told that exercising and
having power is bad precisely because
the top doesn't want any competition and
I think we for the sake of everyone
right there has to be competition there
thank you
great and so just a heads up for
tomorrow we have bio emotive framework
and introduction with Doug and that's
going to be at 4:00 p.m. Eastern Time
tomorrow I'm also hosting Socratic
speed-dating so if you really want to
talk with people about what's been going
on um it's going to be an hour of open
discussion and questioning one another
so totally would invite everybody to
come to that and that is at 7:00 p.m.
Eastern Time and we see the snow as a
gift and if you would like to give a
gift of return you can visit us at the
stoah at the gift economy and thank you
all so much for being here
[Music]