okay so I don't know how well I'm gonna
cover this topic since I only have five
minutes but we need to stop ask you in
migration I mean it's not I don't mean
stopping people from moving because
they're moving for reasons like they
have no safety their lack of food their
lack of we need to care about humanity
and our fellow humans but the way we're
currently doing it is very broken like
we can't have the half of the world
moving to the other half of the world
repeatedly as like all this climate
chaos is going to continue to happen as
famines get worse as our policy our
economic policies cause further and
further devastation in countries and
therefore collapse as their economy and
people are desperate it's just not
sustainable to have I don't know what
number is but 10% of the population
moving around constantly and not having
a home and not having a place where they
can set down roots is just not okay we
need to be able to look at the actual
causes of why people are on the move
give them safety in a sustainable way
because right now it's it's not it's not
at all sustainable and the equivalent
the other Soleil
we need math we need math on our sides
like I think no matter how much it cut
almost how much it costs to save a human
life we save a human life like if it
cost 10 million dollars to save a human
life yeah like how much is a human life
worth but if there are millions and
millions of people who all need you to
spend ten million dollars you can't do
that so there's a threshold beyond which
we can't help each other and I would
like to not get there I would like to
not get compassion I mean I already have
a bit of compassion fatigue but like
there's something to be said about
putting your own air mask on first and
if everyone around the world is
struggling because the 99% are all
fighting the 1% for
like tiny piece of the pie of like okay
so on there's less food and more debt
and therefore one of my money goes to
that and rents increasing and all these
things are increasing and you're trying
to take more money for my taxes to pay
for for other people who like I'm Benna
phobic and I'm not okay with that I'm
okay with like help us ourselves first
if there's an underlining truth there
that we need to deal with that is we
need to make sure every human being on
this planet is taken care of which means
we need to be able to take care of
ourselves as well and I I don't know I
don't even know what I'm trying to say
here like I was reading the thoughts and
I don't know it's my own inner struggle
and I'm struggling with it of like how
the Ameri in Canada and America is
taking they're just demolishing all of
trans people's rights which is
ridiculous and all is good like Canada
needs to accept all the refugees I'm
like okay so we're expected to accept
10% if you think 10% of the population
is LGBTQ and it's probably more than
that now that it's more letters
we are not like we are smaller than 10%
of the population we can't have a
hundred percent increase in our
population and that's America like
that's that's not even the rest of the
world that's experiencing war and is
currently being murdered for being LGBTQ
like it's not that I don't want people
to be safe I want and that that's where
I'm like no no no like yeah let's open
our doors let's have a 1 to what like
double our population you know how
amazing our population will be cleared
it up though because of them but like
it's already pretty clear let's like
honestly be half the population that
would be I mean I'm down with that world
but also it's just not sustainable to
have everyone constantly moving because
their governments and especially that
cuz I'm like wait your government's
 over the rest of the world like
maybe stay home and have a change but
also like if your personal safety is at
risk I don't I don't in RIT I'm
struggling all that and it's like the
caravan of people coming up I think
they're coming up to the states through
Mexico from Honduras and how amazing the
Mexican
people are being speeding them and
taking care but it's like wait why are
they going that far like why and then
they're not going to be accepted and
their children be taken away and it's
like can we just do this in a more sane
way instead of everyday people having to
sit back and watch this atrocity but
can't we do something about it like
actually instead of just giving money to
charities that aren't accountable to us
that don't even tell us how their money
is being spent like can we just reduce
that and I have like when there's a need
for a mass human migration can we do it
in a sustainable way can we set up a
refugee city so that it functions that
it's not a horrible place to live
there's schools there's hospitals
there's things to keep people occupy
there's food provided there's you know
like the necessities are met and it
functions well like plumbing happens and
all that and I yeah together we could
absolutely do that I guarantee all of
the solutions are already out there it's
just finding the best of and not
necessarily listening to the top
contractor it's a million dollars per
house wait it's a million dollars per
house here and think like it's
ridiculous
the amount of money we waste helping
where that money goes anyway lots of
random thoughts but we have to come up
with a solution because it is not
sustainable for this amount of people to
be moving constantly and all of the poor
people all around the world having
feeling lonely and rejected by assisted
by like the global society we need to
surround them with love and possibility
and not hatred and like you're not
welcome and at the same time we have to
be realistic that we can't like with
more and more chaos happening on the
planet we need better and better
solutions not the same old same old
they're just going to waste