all right welcome to this week's idea
cafe April 21st today we're just seeing
the second of the five questions with
this question being who are my people
last week please who am i this is who
are so we for an idea cafe we take the
five minutes to answer the question and
then we have an open conversation for
the remainder of the time so whoever
would like to start is welcome I'm
always happy to start if nobody else
wants to jump it all right Erica go and
then I'd everyone else can just mute
themselves I mean assuming nobody else
wants to but I'm quite happy to kick
things off yeah I mean I there's a
couple of things that occurred to me
with this question firstly it really
needs to be seen in the context of the
overall scheme right and I think it's
potentially misleading doing each of
these cafes on a different question I
mean I get it because it gives us time
to explore each question in more depth I
get that but it also is a bit possible
to forget the fact that it's part of a
larger thing right and they can't really
look at any one of them in isolation and
so you know who are my people I think
for some people that could be quite
triggering what do you mean who my
people that sounds you know whatever
racist bigoted exclusive whatever that
kind of thing you know that it could be
exclusionary and it's not in that spirit
at all the who are my people is who are
the kinds of people that I can really
get stuck into stuff with you know what
I mean people that I can really explore
ideas with people that I can rely on
people that I trust people that are
capable in the areas that you know we
need each other to be capable that kind
of thing so you know it's not about I
like these people but I don't like these
people it's not about that at all it's
about who are those special people how
do I go about find them those ones who
are going to enable me to explore the
other questions more fully right and so
you know that who are my people enables
me to find my purpose and when I found
my purpose actually bring my purpose
into being they can help me acquire the
things that I need to fulfill my purpose
they by being another pair of eyes
looking at me other pair of eyes that I
trust I see myself in a way that
cannot see myself through the eyes of my
people you're not I mean and so this is
it's it's it's yeah those are the two
things I really wanted to kick off with
was number one don't look at this
question in isolation it's absolutely an
integral part of the overall scheme and
be that
yeah it should absolutely not be viewed
in any kind of negative way as the
phrasing of the question could elicit in
some people right invite you to answer
the question who are your people like
specific people in my or do you mean in
a sort of general sense what kind of
people do I consider my people anyway
one answer a bit like for yourself
instead of about the question right so
whether in the past where you have felt
you belong present or in the future if
you haven't experienced that where would
you like to find yourself in community
like what does that who are your people
it's the best man to ask it but I got
that it's ya know fair enough that is
what that is the point right is and I
find that a really difficult question to
answer because it's a different answer
in different moments right and so I mean
you guys are my people right this guy I
don't even mean you guys specifically
but the kind of people who are willing
to get involved in conversations and
calls like this right just exploring
ideas for the sake of exploring ideas
because it's interesting and it enriches
your life and and has applications in
your life as well right so I guess
broadly speaking you are my people
thank you when anybody else like to go
next on who are my people Shila alright
I I think for me my people I'm I'm
searching and still searching I feel
like I found a few at least a handful
within you guys so my people I would say
our public visionaries collaborators big
picture thinkers but I'm very inclusive
I'm not I don't want to exclude people
but I'm really into these conversations
about building a new world kind of so I
guess I guess that's a pretty good
answer for me just I'm seeking people
that are into dialoguing about these big
pictures visionary big change that kind
of thing all right thank you Sheila I
noticed about you turned off your camera
so I will go next and if when I'm done
if you turn back on your camera I will
assume you want to share and if not
everyone's always also welcome to pass
and not share that time period so for me
who are my people and I get what Eric
was say in the beginning because this is
a weird question isolation but it's also
a very important question I know for me
my people have surrounded me my whole
life and yet until I was and I'm still
constantly in a state of like I'm in
this on my own it's all on me and then I
look around I'm like no it's not it's
clearly not and you're like you have
nothing but people in your life who keep
showing up and offering themselves and
their ideas and how amazing that is it's
funny because I have my physical
community that I'm part of and I a
little bit feel like I'm holding them
hostage like a copic you have no option
I'm here for dinner and I'm hang you
don't kind of like they do with each
other right like it's like I live here
what are you gonna do and kick me out
like I don't live there but it's like
like even if they want it like I haven't
done anything to get kicked out but
there's a little bit of like would you
if you there was a vote would I be
allowed here and that's my like visited
my social anxiety coming in cuz when I
yes some of them would say yes and some
of them would say no like any community
some of them are amazing
and love me and I love them and some of
them are indifferent and some of them
don't like me and that's okay but my
people coming into game be in the in the
fall I definitely felt like I'd found my
people big world thinkers people who
want to change things people and and
more these people right Eric it's
definitely one of my people we're in a
lot of different communities together
finding shiloh a few weeks ago being
introduced to radish is my people like
it's like yes and quite frankly everyone
is by people and less proven otherwise
there is beauty there is wisdom in every
single human being and the more I'm able
to get out of my own head and my own
social anxiety and be like no one's here
for me the more I'm able to say I'm here
for you right I'm what am I here to give
and everyone is my people and everyone
is here to to give what they're here to
give and so that is my sherry and Matt
you are welcome to unmute and share now
awesome can you hear me okay excellent
well it's good to be here with you all I
think my people are the people that show
up I guess the people you know this this
this idea comes to mind I saw this video
I forget I forgot who the person that
was speaking in it but he was one of the
founders of Burning Man and he talked
about this concept of this principle of
showing up and how that's just so
crucial to the start of anything and
yeah I think the the people that show up
around the topics that you're interested
in people that want to make a difference
change makers influencers I hate that
word influencers yeah people that really
want to do good that's those are my
people
awesome thank you know we can all live
in use and have more of an open and open
conversation I thought that was funny
cuz watching Matt talk like I realized
that this is the first time I'm seeing
Matt but Matt and I have like emailed a
few times and then like it's weird
because you'd normally these
conversations are kind of just game be
people and now it's not right like now I
don't think Matt found me through game B
I think that was just through social
media right through Twitter and YouTube
I don't think he's associated with game
B at least at the moment and Eric I
found through game B and Shiloh also you
found me and then put me in contact with
the radish people like it's I don't know
I'm like the more I put myself myself
out there to the world who is my people
but also then you find people who are
like really your people I could people
who are the ones who want to have the
same conversations and you don't need
any one group or one person to be
everything that you can find like I can
talk about geek culture with some people
and I can talk about you know food and
agriculture with some people this with
other people and then there's people who
are report about the systems and can
talk about anything and I'm just and
what I forgot to mention during my five
minutes where I was like oops who has uh
autistic people on my people when I
figured that out last spring and then in
those communities I'm like oh I'm along
here and people letter that are autistic
belong with me as well and like the
quirks and everything I didn't accept
about myself my whole life I'm like oh
that's part of what makes me me and what
I'm here to do and so does everyone else
and a lot of it is like the quirks that
make you less palatable to the masses
give you your like magic to be your true
self and offer what your purpose more
and it's like the more not talking about
these questions in isolation the more
you're able to find your people or your
purpose you find your people you find
yourself you find what you need and you
know what you have to let go of and that
is why we're doing these five questions
but yes I will not talk about them this
is a conversation not a you had an 8:30
in the morning me preaching for an hour
so something that occurred to me while
Matt was talking is he said at the end
my people at those who
want to do good or something along those
lines anyway and I think this is in a
way what distinguishes your people from
those who are not your people is what
your definition of things which are good
right you know not everybody thinks the
same things are good so yeah and you
know there are people who are not your
people that doesn't mean that you're
against them you know what I mean it
doesn't mean that there's any antipathy
necessary but there's just you know how
it is some people you meet them you just
you just on a wavelength right you don't
need to explain to each other you
just get it you know and and other
people it's not like that and and so you
know there are people who are more your
people than other people but and so yeah
I guess the danger of which is kind of
what I alluded to it to start the danger
of who are my people is in-group
out-group in it right and starting to
assign characteristics to those who you
know unfavorable characteristics to
those who are not my people and you know
my people are special because that kind
of thing and so I think this is the this
is maybe a trap that people fall into I
think it's worth highlighting that
danger maybe I have to say for me when I
think of this question is part of the
question it's kind of a deeper dive not
necessarily excluding people but really
like who are the people that I need to
help fulfill my purpose and the greater
world out there is you know still there
and I'm very inclusive like I say but at
the same time I do need like a Nicolas
of people that I can actually be very
purpose filled or purpose centric I
guess where I can't even with my family
or my other close friends they're really
sick of me talking about saving the
world looks like I need to go to work
and I cannot waste any more time with it
yeah
and that's why you're my people to try
them we need each other so that we can
not like burn our bridges with other
people that we love that we don't want
to stop being around but yeah it can be
very wearing on people and that like I
don't want to part of who are my people
are also
who aren't my people and not in because
clearly my families my people I love my
family but they're not in any way my
people to do this with and once I was
able to realize that not only did my
brother kind of come on board secure
contact which is weird but like oh
you're not here to support my dreams
that's actually not your place in fact
your place is to not believe in me your
place is to like constantly question
everything and it's like how beautiful
that I'm in this family you're my people
cuz you're exactly who I was supposed to
grow up with but I'm also supposed to
let that piece of it go like the for you
to be my people you have to show up and
support me it's like maybe those aren't
my people then like maybe I don't need
that like there are my people in what
they are they're my family but they're
never gonna be the people who who are in
that nucleus to support the purpose that
I'm here to do which is not because I
thought that was my family I thought
that was a given that my family is that
and then how do I find others and it's
like if I can't even convince these
people how do I convince these people
when these are the hardest people to
convince you just have to do it you show
them and then they'll come on board or
they won't it's not even about that it's
about creating it for the other the
other people yeah that's interesting
that your people are different there's
different sets of your people right for
different circumstances and parts of
your life right yeah yeah I mean I've
got it's funny I was just just today I
had a quite a lengthy conversation with
a neighbor of mine and we are I mean
he's not my people at all right we are
completely different in our experience
of life right and in our perspectives on
things however he is my people because
he's my neighbor he lets me use his car
I give him eggs you know what I mean
he's blah blah blah so we do have a
mutually beneficial relationship we are
each other's people on one level it's a
pretty practical level rather than a
sort of personal friendship level but
nevertheless you know we we fulfill a
positive function in each other's lives
so yeah it's on a lot of levels isn't it
who are my people simultaneously of
different people on different levels you
know I'm just gonna say something I've
started with this question who are my
people who's my tribe you know who do I
feel most comfortable with
and then sometimes I find that I find my
people and then that changes and so I
feel like my people are the people that
I'm with at the time that I'm with does
that make sense so like you you you you
just mentioned you know you spoke with
your neighbor I mean like your neighbor
is your people when you're with your
neighbor does that does that make sense
absolutely okay yeah I guess I guess
what I'm saying is it's always changing
it's always changing and and if I'm
meeting somebody new and I'm kind of
checking you know cross-checking these
things in my head
oh do they check all these boxes to
become my people then I don't know that
just doesn't really work and and and and
you know
conversely I've I've met people where
I'm like I haven't I cannot be this
person's friend I'm not vibing with this
person you know like those kinds of
thoughts but then something changes and
it opens up this window and I'm like wow
III didn't know that side of you and so
all of a sudden all of these
preconceived notions that you had
dissolve and they become your people so
I think what we're talking about is a
very slippery thing yeah it is it's very
none of these questions or questions you
can actually answer and then they're
done they're constantly or like you
don't answer who are my people then it's
done it does change it evolves your
family becomes not your people even if
they are your people and new people and
like what you said about that the
changes I have found maybe less so now
that I'm 40 but for a lot of my 20s and
even teen years I had this pattern where
if I would ask people after they met me
for a period of time what they thought
of me I grate on people's nerves in the
beginning and then they really loved me
like I don't know what to do with that
like I cuz it's like once you passed
that point I'm people's favorite but
like you have to get past that point and
it's like I'm not gonna be to be
different in the beginning means you
don't get to get to that anyway like
it's late and this is three autism even
knowing pre like this would be really
trying to fit in and really trying to
like be the person in the moment and
still I'm like yeah I can annoy you and
I am loud and talk a lot and some
people's cup of tea and not others and
it is that no mean that it's okay to
turn people off it's okay for people not
to be your people and that is hard it's
like as a people like when you're people
it's like I want everyone to like me
well then you have to be vanilla right
you have to be more palatable to
everyone and really then no one likes
you it's just you're acceptable to
everyone and boring yeah and something
that matt said where he's like you can't
really be in your mind checking off
these box moves but I do even like now I
find people I meet I've met people they
seem like they're my people like Jubilee
and then I'll have a conversation with
her and then for three days after that
I'll just stressed out that I said all
the wrong stuff I sounded like a fool I
might have like she's like oh I can't
deal with this person so I'm glad to
hear that you also maybe annoy people in
the beginning I hope you guys can get
past that but it is a weird thing and
meet new people and I was like I don't
want to screw this up I might have just
screwed it up didn't scruff anything
literally I don't think anyone does
that's kind of the point of everyone
being my people but when Matt said that
I actually was like oh I absolutely do
that with partners in both ways right
where I'm like you have to check these
boxes because you're the like exclusive
person in my life and I need to check
all of your boxes and it's like well
that's broken in a whole other way but I
don't feel that way with everyone else
because you don't need to be everything
you don't need to be my entertainment
and my source of emotional support like
which one of those things do you want to
be right and that's the only the only
piece and this is part of why I'm single
it's like I got the the understanding
when I went I did I
two years ago and what I got through it
I got very little through it besides
knowing that that was my next step of my
journey was that community is my
relationship it's where I it's like what
people get out of relationship
one-on-one is what I get out of
community it's like oh it's my growth
it's my support it's all of that but I
need it at a community level which means
there's then less pressure on the
individual level anyway if I'm in a
relationship but it was like oh this is
what I'm here to do not this this
doesn't both is scary and doesn't appeal
to me in the same way this does so I
love that you said that when we have
community you're right our other
individual relationships aren't as
important so it just makes it lighter
for everybody to get along the more
community I have very little so I could
really use yeah if I could just moderate
the phrasing on that slightly because I
resonate a lot with what you were saying
before Shiloh because I get that myself
with people that I look up to right
people that I put on some kind of a
pedestal then it's like do they like me
did I say the wrong thing oh my god did
I sound like an idiot doing that that
kind of thing and it's a it's a giving
your power to the other person right not
even to the other person but to your
fantasy creation of the other person
because you don't even know them that
well yeah right and so actually what
you're doing is giving your power to a
fantasy that you've created in your own
mind and yeah as I say I identify
because I do it myself I've got a cousin
who lives in Singapore yeah I've known
him since I was a little kid he's like
five years older than I am something
like that we went to the same school he
was five years above me you know what I
mean and when you're 11 years old and
he's 17 he's in the sixth form you're in
the first year you know he was a god to
me and I've never even as growing up you
know I've never lost that that feeling
you know what I mean that I had for him
when I was a kid this this this you know
enormous admiration and respect or
whatever and so yeah I know I know
exactly what you're talking about but it
is it is a sacrificing it's a
disempowering thing right it's
I try to tell myself but these people
that like your cousin or Jubilee who are
important like there's something about
these people that are important to us so
I guess making mistakes with them is the
best place to make Ramakant fell in
definitely a learning lesson I feel like
I'm growing every time I just don't want
to ruin anything to keep growing and if
they are the kind of person that you
think they are like you've identified
with them as your people if they are
that kind of person then if you do you
say something stupid so what we all say
stupid stuff sometimes right and and you
know that's yeah it's interesting to you
describe your cousin right that he's
like five years older than you looked up
to him that is very much my relationship
with my sister she's two and a half
years older than me and looked up and we
had a falling out a year and a bit ago
because and which was absolutely needed
like I need you not to be on a pedestal
this has to be equal or not at all
because it's costing me something having
you there and saying the wrong thing and
needing to show up in a certain way and
feeling like you don't accept me for who
I am and how I should like all of it and
it's funny because it's absolutely
needed and partly I had to be willing to
let it go a hundred percent like you're
never in my life again in order and
knowing full well that in order to that
was the only way to have her in my life
at any point in the future was to let it
go completely what it was so it could
rebuild what it what it will be in the
future and it's an exclusive
relationship I only have one sister
there is no because that was part of it
it's like when I look up to someone it's
like there's a there's a sense of
urgency right like no one else could be
Jordan Hall so what you know like that
kind of but that's true for everyone
right like no one else can be Shilo no
one else can be Eric and so I've lost
that exclusiveness even with like people
I do look up to and I'm talking to them
cuz I'm like it's actually not exclusive
everyone's intelligent everyone has
something to give and so there's more
than enough out there but there honestly
isn't more than enough sisters out there
like I don't we have one but then all
these other relationships are like
actually I have amazing relationship
the do treat me right but do see me for
me and accept me and therefore once we
get back together I'll be more willing
to it's not that relationship piece of
right you have to check off all the
boxes because you're my one and only
sister and I'm just getting that now
it's funny you can't deal with this
stuff on the propositional level you
know I mean I I know and have known for
many years that exactly what Jubilee
said right you know but you know this
this feeling has been with me a long
time you know I mean you can't it
doesn't it doesn't just it doesn't just
go well I'm not sure you ever really get
rid of it it's it's yeah it's funny soft
you know you what you know and what
still drives you in spite of the fact
that you know about it yeah cuz you
can't you can't just be like well then I
shouldn't hold them on a pedestal I
shouldn't need them to check off all the
boxes and that is the irony I know we've
had this conversation that just went
through the whole story on my Sunday
story but like I asked my sister to be
kind to me because she means so much to
me and I can't handle stress and she did
the exact opposite and sent me this like
really what I mean like it's but like
meaning email I was like I need kindness
and she sent me the opposite and I was
like it was perfect because it's the
only thing that would knock her down
from the pedestal of like oh you don't
see me you're never gonna see me I need
you to accept me for me but I'm not
accepting you for who you are that you
can't accept me for me and like even
knowing that I needed whenever the
participatory right I needed a year to
like feel the anger work through the
hatred of whatever level and now I'm
more back to neutral and there's a
certain morning of like I'm never gonna
be back to that place of pedestal and
that relationship and yeah
you won't that's never gonna happen but
like we can maybe create something that
is more this is not many things that
people can do worse than fails to live
up to your expectations of yeah
and I think that kind of brings us back
to your people because in just my like
description of my people being like the
nucleolus or whatever I guess finding
those people helps you fulfill yourself
more and strengthen your own beliefs or
whatnot so that when you do go back to
those people that you maybe put on a
pedestal or whatever you feel more equal
because you can't work up your own inner
self and therefore it's a different
relationship like you're saying you let
it go so you can have a new one kind of
cool to realize we are all helping each
other get better yeah that's the ideal
right but you've got to be brutal if you
if there's people in your life who are
you know holding you back like almost
deliberately whether they're conscious
eat anybody art but you know of it I
don't know I think there are times to be
brutal and just cut them out right
because you know I mean an extreme
example would be say that you know you
you and your girlfriend used to be
heroin addicts and you get cleaned
together and then she falls back into it
but you watch Jeremy not you you know
you love her but that I'd you know
I've just got out of this you know
what's more important my sobriety or my
love for you and you know that's a
that's a hard call to make but I can
absolutely sympathize with cutting that
 out of your life for your own
long-term you know well-being then you
find new people probably at an a meeting
or whatever gotta get a new group of
people then so that you can pour your
sobriety yeah but just also for me part
of my incentive to create the
infrastructure for people to be able to
easily find their people is that then
they don't have to hold on to their
people as strongly and which means you
also can choose where you're holding on
to your people right like if you know if
you leave your family you have no social
safety net it's harder to come over to
the closet right if you know that
they're gonna disown you it's harder and
whatever closet that is right I'm no
longer a Christian
I'm gay I'm like I'm not gay am I going
to be whatever that closet happens to be
for you and that can happen in any
community right if you are in an AP and
you're like this doesn't really support
me I don't really feel like an addict
anymore I don't want my whole life to be
contingent on this and it's like how do
you find that next group so you have the
permit if you've just jumping from group
to group it's you generally right like
none of these are all horrible it's like
but the more people are able to find
some finds connection and community and
their people the more they're willing to
show up in the communities they're in
because they know they could leave right
and you're I don't want it to be that
you're more likely to kick people out
but you're also more more able to say
you know what this is not your tribe
this is not that you're you are causing
too much havoc here go find somewhere
else that you feel fit without it being
vilify that person right like everyone
needs to cut this person of their life
they're toxic and horrible it's like
they're toxic to us that's just not and
and the beauty to be like actually
sometimes talk sickness is exactly what
you need to go through either in getting
them to really be part of the group and
then your more cohesive or cohesiveness
of you're not you're no longer welcome
right but like having the freedom to be
able to do more of those things because
you know you're not setting them out to
die in the desert you're saying you're
like go find your people here's the
technology to do that with which already
exists we can fly people on Meetup and
Craigslist I found a lot of people on
Craigslist
yeah the freedom for both parties to
walk away the ability to walk away from
any arrangement right whatever it is but
having not being so reliant on the
arrangement that you cannot walk away
because otherwise it's coercive right at
some level rather it's coercive if you
don't have the freedom to walk away
Eric's also when I mentioned the
Craigslist thing I truly have like five
Rita four people in my life that I'm
that are instrumental my life that I met
off of Craigslist and part of that
reason was I would put something out
into the ether and it was like whoever
saw it responded or my people right
they're the ones that I was supposed to
connect with
that happens for me online because I'm
not out in the real world very as much
as other people but it also happens in
the real world right that like the fates
that bringing people into your life and
that's I'm showing up make them your
people right like I think about anyone
who is important it's like oh I think
about you guys right if I hadn't put
myself out into the world on Twitter on
facebook on then I wouldn't have found
game B I wouldn't have found anyone no
one would have found me and it's it's
there just that fake piece like the
right people do come up those that
trigger and those that connect and all
of them all of them are welcome we are
you in your car there Matt yes are you
getting noise
no no no no you're upside down for me
it's a quirk of the software it doesn't
happen for anyone else for me I don't
know why he's closed Firefox so you're
upside yeah no no we're good it's only
for Eric on the video you're fine I'm
pretty sure just turn your computer I
don't get it shiny with jublia fine it's
just you mate so interesting yeah
whatever changes like this is my first
time doing this so I if I have technical
difficulties please excuse there's been
a time there but we've done project
raisins and then have the person who are
doing the project raising for not have
their tech work we're like well just
crowdsource problems for you that you
don't even know exists well you're not
well that's not working yeah a small
ball of Education well your technology
which is also to me like the fates it
just makes life easier if I'm like
everything happens for a reason and go
from that place without giving anyone
that advice cuz it's horrible advice
when you're going through a tragedy but
like technological problems happen for a
reason it's like oh I wasn't supposed to
see that right now like every
conversation we have on Wednesday so we
get cut off I forgot what I was saying
it was probably not that important
yeah it's just how it's supposed to be
let me put a question out there for all
of you let's assume that you're in the
situation that you feel in your life you
know what I mean that the people around
you really are not your people and you
need to find some new people how what
would what would be how would you go
about doing that
right like consciously trying to get
some new different kinds of people into
your life how to go about doing that one
thing that comes to mind is so I work
out at this gym and I I've worked out
there for maybe about a year never
talked to anyone you know and so I I was
asking myself that that question that
you posed and and I'm like I'm just
gonna start talking to people you know
I'm just gonna start talking talk to my
neighbors I've never spoken to my
neighbors before you know I'm just gonna
start talking with people and and I I
it's just I I think you just you just do
it you know you just you just find the
people that are are closest to you and
go from there you know you start doing
that Matt when when did you sort of make
that conscious decision and start doing
it and how has it played out for you
thus far I made that conscious decision
about a month ago and it's played out
wonderfully
I've met again I think we talked about
this like you you build these these
these preconceived notions about people
before you even had a conversation with
them or anything you know
do you know they're dressed a certain
way they have a certain hairstyle you
know you're you're analyzing all these
things and you think you you think
you've got it figured out and then no no
but that no I mean we all just
the problem is when you think that
you've actually got it figured out right
not that you'd make all of those
judgments you can't help that right
that's what our brains can you can't
thank you
disappearance two other similar
appearances and what were they like and
you make this facsimile right you can't
help it but yeah yeah yeah so I started
doing that about a month ago and then
and then I met all these people and and
you know did this this one guy I talked
to was an audiologist and I'm like and
and I've like you'll never have guessed
that never in a million years and we
started to talk about some investment
related things and and it's just one
thing led to another and then he
introduced me to this other guy and and
it was just it's it's what's incredible
to me is this this how one conversation
can lead to another conversation with
another person how how interconnected
people are so so you that the fact that
now you guys are talking to me opens up
the possibility of of letting you access
my own personal social network my
rolodex of of people that I've come in
contact with and so so that leads to to
to deeper relationships you know they'll
say oh you should meet my brother you
should meet my uncle you should meet
this person
and it's just it's it's just this
organic process that that it blossoms
and you're like wow I I'm glad I talked
to you you know what I mean I don't know
if I'm making sense right now but that's
been my experience yeah and I mean we
have access to your rolodex in another
way as well in that and this applies to
all of us
that when we come to this conversation
we have had each of us had lots of
conversation with lots of other people
right and we bring all of that to this
conversation and so that there the
number of levels that whisp at which
these cross-pollination x' go on with
each other is the idea cafe although
it's kind of falling by the wayside with
project crazy and and together tech is
that it was supposed to be its own
platform or you could have answer the
question go to a different table answer
the question the whole point is that
you're bringing the conversation with
you you're changing and you're making
connections and you can make deeper
connections I could say right we
randomly show up and there's a Shilo
matt and eric and i'm like i liked this
conversation i want to hang out with the
barn right so we're more likely to be
connected in the future or downvote
be less likely connected in the future
or it's like i really don't want to talk
to this person ever again long right i
don't want to sit at a table with them
but that like just the power of that you
show up with all of your experience and
all of your connections both your actual
connections like hey I can put you in
touch with my cousin and just I had this
conversation with my cousin and then
bring him out in here and it just
happens times I get I mean I just had
this amazing conversation with this guy
creating this this tool called common
and it's on the Dow snag and I got in
touch with him through Jordan he's like
good whatever that's called a warm
contact he was like oh yeah I did fight
because at the end of our conversation I
was like if I know you're not gonna get
involved in the solution raising but if
you know anyone during her travels he
was like I had no one comes to mind at
the moment and then a few days later he
was like oh this person is doing
downstack and I'm so excited for their
project to come up with me doing because
it's like crowdsourcing it's like
Facebook meets Kickstarter and that you
do own it together and decide on things
together and I'm like yes this is thank
you awesome I played on two there's Todd
we can and then I could I'm like can I
use this for a solution he's putting me
in contact with one of the other people
in the project who's actually putting
people on the Commons for the beta and
it was like I don't know how that's
gonna work but yes I mean contact with
them and you also start to realize
these people have have people free to
connect with in real conversations but
also you have something to give both of
your connections but also just you as a
human being because they are the more
new debt thing so I'm talking to other
human beings the more you realize your
humaneness and your experience is
valuable in and of itself I like that I
it it's so interesting what you were
saying
Jubilee Adam I'm not sure if you you got
my email yet but but I've been following
Dow stock for years now and just kind of
stalking everybody associated with the
project
you know Matan and Jordan and and what
was funny is I didn't even know that
Jordan was an advisor to Dow stack and
then I started saying all this game B
stuff and I'm seeing all of these
streams cross and I'm like wow this is
just this is incredible you know just
seeing seeing these networks start to
grow and cross pollinate live is is
incredible and and and I wrote to you in
in that email I said I said I saw you
and I saw what you were doing and and I
instantly said this is why I doubt stock
was invented it it was invented for
people like you to enable you to change
the world to save the world right and
yeah it's just an incredible thing it's
an incredible time we're living in
mm-hmm it's funny cuz Jordan I didn't
know Jordan until this like September
when I came in contact with game B I
found game B through
Remzi from Twitter of a common planet
and then found Jordan I really like what
he says and her likes personality but
then I notice you know how like timehop
happens on Facebook that my dad had sent
me one of his article he doesn't know
who Jordan Hall is but like sent me this
article like two years ago I was like oh
that's Jordan's article weird and like
those things happen constantly like I
this is not
to do with connections but I have this
little book that I write every day my
daughter's now 7 I've started a second
book because it's like a five-day
journal so every year right on April
21st I'll write today's and I'll see the
last 2 years and if I flipped over from
last year I would see 5 years work right
from her 0 through your 5 and I would 6
& 7 on this one and the number of times
that I won't realize but I will do
something and then look back on the day
and we did like the same thing I'll go
to the same park we go to like twice a
year or we see the same friends that we
see a couple times a year and I'm like
oh that's so weird but you know I would
never see those patterns if I wasn't
doing that right and I'm not trying to
create those patterns they're just
happening and you start to see this
interconnectedness that you never would
have I'm not I don't know what I did
last year on April 21st unless that day
means something to you right and so it's
just really interesting that these
things emerged including connections
that how you know people through people
I would constantly like wait why don't
we have this friend in common on
Facebook right like who how do you know
this person and it's interesting this
brings a story to mind I was out I was
out on a hike in a place I've never
hiked before and I was coming off the
mountain and and I just said oh hello to
this to this lady walking on the other
side and and she's like hey a beautiful
day and and and she mentioned something
about about this particular place I grew
up in in Santa Barbara California and
and she she's from there and and it was
like we had this we must have spoke for
an hour half just right there and it was
like what are the chances what are the
chances of that you know that I would
just meet this random person I don't
know if that's the serendipity is the
word but I think that kind of ties into
to what what you were saying yeah
so I love when those things happen I'm
kind of accent word question just about
how you would go about meeting finding
your people or whatnot
I was really isolated for the last 10
years or so and I work from home as an
artist I have these big picture ideas
and every once in a while try to get
back out in the world or what not so I
would say following what ever feels
right for you in the moment like
sometimes I'll search different things
and then different on a youtube channel
that's how it kind of came across
Jubilee I was following something that
just looked interesting to me or
something and then I see her little
video on the side and I went there and
it's just like pretty amazing that we
have this technology now that we can
kind of follow our own thread whatever
is resonating with us and then come
across people it's really nice to have
these live video chats because you know
they're real people they're not like
some trolls or anything but that's one
thing that I I'm really thankful for and
I'm really thankful that you put it out
there do believe trying to say this is
what I'm working on I'm looking for
people if this resonates with you follow
me or contact me or whatever anyway go
ahead Eric I think you were in favor
yeah but it's fine it doesn't matter it
doesn't fit anymore it doesn't fit in
the moment anymore so it's fine don't
worry about it I to be honest I don't
even remember what it was but it was
admit I do remember it wasn't important
I do remember that I like the following
things down the rabbit hole and like
find be what you're supposed to fight
cuz it does like there's the algorithms
and we can be hard on them all you want
but yeah that like there's an actual
connection right that I wouldn't stylo
also should find a friend to be on
Facebook and she doesn't have a picture
and so I was like no thank you
you don't look like a real person and
then I don't know even emailed me or
something I was like oh that's you or
you comment and I was like okay you're a
real person I will accept you and I'm so
great glad I did I did like a video on
it the next day it was like thank God I
didn't let that prejudice right up like
this isn't a real person savate what's
going on by following down the rabbit
hole because it happens online and it
happens in
life and what I had done how do I find
connections when I was able to be out in
the real world more often it was through
activity right you find an activity you
enjoy people play baseball you find
people who play baseball I've never
really been into sports but through a
makerspaces and through just like
intentional community which is how I
found the cohousing community because I
was rather obsessed with that for a bit
or online communities are really easy
because you can focus it much more you
know like I have so many health
communities on part of the autistic one
the ATD one the acoustic neuromas the
deaf side one year like fibromyalgia all
of it and being able to follow down the
rabbit hole and have some faith that it
actually like just follow your next step
and the right people show up it's
whoever's gonna have that conversation
but I also really want the tools for
people who aren't there yet and I'm not
even all the way there yet right like
just because I have complete faith the
right people show up in the right time
and I also want to show people with like
an actual system look people just
 the right time like we can offer
you the right people who do you need
right now what is your obstacle and how
can we help you move forward what
connection because I don't really have
the activity anymore to focus on but now
it's the conversation that's what the
idea cafe was like oh we can connect
around a topic and that is still
something that social media has yet to
kind of focus on is like video chat it
isn't weird and awkward that like isn't
show up and have small talk which I
don't think anyone likes or like show up
and see if there's some random naked
people
that's always fun I really like that a
space because most people want to have
real conversation yet every conversation
we have in society isn't that real right
it is just like the small talk on the
bus but when you're in it when you
actually let that shut away and you have
a real conversation you find your
connectedness those are some of the best
sometimes I'll like randomly have a
conversation of someone at a bus stop or
on the bus and it's when I'm in the
right space when I'm ready to connect
right when I'm not in with my earphones
and blocking out the world it's like hi
human being I'm ready to connect right
now and they're always an amazing human
being and honoring that but also finding
the tools that
bring us together like Facebook is a
great place to meet people but then it's
owned by Zuckerberg it's not actually
designed to bring you people or it would
be more helpful in finding what groups
would resonate with you and said you
need to Google right you got to find out
the game B exists and find it to find
the group and then they have to we have
to let you in like there's another
process which is like what if you could
just have a conversation with game B
people right like if that was something
people who want to change the world
that's a lot easier to understand than
game B people
I guess I have a question I'm just
curious about this Dow stack I've never
heard of it until I heard that Jubilee
was interviewing somebody that was
involved in that so anybody have
anything summary so Matan gave me an it
runs out the beginning of our interview
or a conversation cuz I was like what's
the difference between holo chain and
Dow stack and if you watch it you might
understand it cuz you're immortal chain
I still don't understand and I'm like I
still don't because like they're so
different I don't even know where to
start because they're so different in my
head they're still confused and one of
the same but I should re-watch it and
see if I can get something more out of
it now but you might also at the
beginning when I asked him that question
he mentions it my mind similar to hollow
chain but yeah if you go to if you go to
Dow stack their website I'm not sure if
it's dot-com or whatever but and you
know you'll be able to find it but
Jordan Hall kind of gives this
introduction video on it and he he could
explain it far better than I think I or
Jubilee could yes
Jordan probably liked my project better
than I do
he's done it before
it's for a conversation now stack DOW
yeah
Dao Dao Dao that kind of day I see the
Dow different kind of day nothing can go
on a major major rabbit hole with that
I'm I'm out I'm a holder in in Dow stack
and it's it's it's it's been my my
passion my passion project but the
people that know me they're like okay
just shut up about shut up about crypto
we've heard it before I thought I would
start working then I was like maybe it's
dot IO so I won't speak of it yeah yeah
there is a donor as well there is the
apples it is I mean they're amazing any
technology that like we can own together
its own centrally or it's not owns and
it's in the comments and it's
decentralized of all 4i
and this could just be my ego like not I
don't feel invited to participate in Dow
stacker veloce like I don't feel like
it's actually Invitational the people
who aren't tech people who are like I
don't know how to code but I can offer
that I can't code and this is useless
because no one's gonna use it right like
like oh then I don't like slack I'm
getting a little more used to slack but
same with discord right you're set
you're like this cord I was like oh no I
really dislike this cord I love my I
love that you are so honest about it
because they're they just haven't
figured out the few things that I needed
to figure out which is a Google or
Facebook sign-on like I'm like I can't
like is there like our new no one's
gonna have an account so every time
someone sends you a link it starts you a
new account and like you're big enough
now you need to figure this the out
like I can't I because I have like five
different game BD accounts five
different co-op accounts like this is
not helpful I can't have too much don't
have it yeah but like the idea of it I'm
like and then it's like well it's not
owned by one of the big the big ones so
you should support it I'm like we don't
own it I can't make it better it's not
the same I died who owns it yeah
technology is I think strangely how we
find our people it's how I found a lot
of my people in this day and age I like
I would love a friend slash community
dating app right like where it's like
actually helps you find those I just
don't know if people would use it people
are already so anti dating app even
though it's the only way to find someone
it's like oh everyone has it when they
first came out it was like who I don't
meet people online I only in real person
now you basically aren't allowed to meet
people in real life really right now but
even before that and then it's like the
way to do it but then it's also everyone
hates it it's like it's just a meat
market I'm like and design one that
isn't but also because we have to
simultaneously admit it's hard to find
friends and
no this thing exists and want to use it
but I'm like right but friends aren't
exclusionary you don't need to make
broken friendships so they come back in
six months like you do with dating apps
like they can just make more friends
keep making them keep fighting of
activities and new connections and like
whether it can be an app sorry a
friendship app or whether it has to be
something to the side that like sneaks
in friendship like a conversation up
sorry Matt you go ahead you know you get
all these you know Silicon Valley
entrepreneurs together to solve these
problems of dating apps and this and
that and then you hear about you hear
about some couple that met playing World
of Warcraft and they're married for
thirty years or something you know so
it's like did we even meet that you know
like I don't know anyway there's no real
market incentive for dating apps or
friendship apps or whatever to be
successful because if they're successful
then you don't come back and use them
again right and your subscription lasts
a month and that's all you ever pay them
so it seems to me there's a strong
market incentive for them to provide
shitty services that don't work so you
keep paying for them for the dating apps
yes absolutely they need enough marriage
is to put the picture on the site and
then enough and most of them need to be
broken so they're just likely and
through but our dating app our
friendship at the point of it is purpose
and not the profit there's absolutely
ways but I had like 20 ideas for dating
apps because I'm suck at dating right so
like a lot of ideas there that are
generated like I'm like like I love I
actually went on a few slow dates I'm
calling them slow dates there was like
this article it was like 32 questions to
fall in love and I was like I want to
try this and so before I knew I was
queer I tried it with men and I have to
say every time I had a car I was like
I'm not in love with you at the end but
I definitely can see your humanity more
and I'm more connected than I am after
any other date and then I did a few with
with women as well when I figured I was
queer and they were less because I was
like I don't know like my whole thing is
weird but like finding the 32 questions
I was like can we have a slow dating app
where instead of like let's rush look
sleek together let's it's like
can we stop and ask real questions and
have a real conversation and get
vulnerable because that's what the 32
questions are it's like what's your
relationship with your mother like like
this is a loaded question and those kind
of things like an embarrassing moment or
like some of them are more of a issue
than others but having five or six
questions and truly answering them and
then going on to a different ones so
it's like speed dating but slow right
where you're going through all these and
then you get to say whether you're a
bachelor on it's just about maybe those
are two different apps one was the slow
dating and one was like you literally go
on as many dates as you can and you can
rate the person and they can rate you
but it's about finding compatibility and
so the more you go on the more you're
able to find compatibility and it's not
it's not like it's not about finding
while you're broken to fix you it's
about finding where you're compatible
right it's so like maybe you don't like
someone or something they can change but
it's not about you getting feedback on
like oh sit up straighter don't talk
about yourself do this it's about even
if you slouch and talk about yourself
all the time this person digs that right
it was a side-to-side track there's ways
that we can create dating apps and then
also friendship apps of course that are
much more focus on dating and friendship
apps about finding your people so it's
not really a side check tool it's
actually pretty much on topic it is true
it's more on topic than Tao stack but
like everything comes back to technology
- tech I've just been looking at one big
difference I think I see I don't I mean
I haven't read everything about dowel
stay but I've just been glancing through
I see no mention of a currency as being
part of down state whereas holo does
have a currency as part of it
so is that right is there no currency
involved in they'll stick a dowel stack
has a token there is a token right okay
okay yeah it's I think it's D D and
Genesis is it which is mined or is it a
token which is gained through being
participating in the network I well you
can buy it and I think it's it's it's
gained by participate
in the network as well okay so not just
by anonymous mining ecologist I have
 running there right okay yeah I
don't I don't think yeah I don't think
it's a minor bull minor bug okay
and and I think I think I'm not to
permit familiar with hollow chain but
but I I believe that more like a
blockchain itself does that make sense
like it's it's it's it's a software
platform as well I mean it is it is a
blockchain but it is also a song yeah
they do seem somewhat analogous I mean I
don't know much about and I don't know a
great deal about holo and I know less
about Dow so I've only just come across
down now so yeah but they do seem at
first glance they do seem somewhat
analogous if they're both the same thing
then this seems to be unnecessary
competition it seems to me that some way
of getting them together merging them
would be a more preceive oddly similar
you know finding out the differences in
becoming one thing seems to me to be I
think they're different enough that they
wouldn't be okay combining like their
difference enough that there might be a
connection and that's where so I was
thinking and we're almost at the end
we're gonna do closing statements but
before that far we actually stay on
topic doing a solution raising on Dow
stack and hollow chain but like I don't
even know what that is right like on
kind of centrally owned without set like
technology like how do we create utilize
technology together
there's Dow stack and there's holo chain
and there's this like other together
tech option that is like coming together
and figuring it out and everyone's
involved and it's transparent and it's
or anything else right so examples which
you've already successfully modeled this
right hmm Wikipedia being the most
obvious yeah but I mean that's like one
it's like how do you they don't but we
don't collectively own it it's just not
for profit with a PDF we do collectively
produce it right we collect liquid and
maintain and curate it right
that that's what Dow stack is for I
believe it's for collectively producing
owning contributing to a project
whatever that might be and I think Dow
stock really solves the the governance
issue so how do you how do you go here
on certain things and vote and and and
yeah again I really don't want to try to
explain it I'm gonna botch it hard to
carry them anywhere past the hour mark
would anyone like to give closing
statements on who are my people wrap it
up
well back you guys are my people I was
glad to be here today okay yeah it's
good to be here with you too all right
yeah this was an enjoyable conversation
it's funny the idea cafe I showed up no
one would see I was like yes run holding
at same with last week but every time
they happen I'm so happy they happens
because they are they are amazing every
conversation I participate in every week
is amazing which is why I want to offer
to the world that maybe not everyone's
looking for a conversation I don't know
but I will next week's idea Cafe will be
doing what it's my purpose and same time
same channel
what just like who are my people right
is it like a one-time it's like what's
your purpose
like what's the biggest thing you can do
today and that doesn't need to be huge
what's like what's the next step what's
the next step
there's a whole stack right because your
purpose exists all start just like who
who am i and who are my people exists on
many levels what my purpose is right now
I've got to do the laundry or
yeah yeah exactly this is why we're
having we're just trying we're trying to
answer the five questions then we can
get deeper into them and maybe make
groups but it's like ah I'm doing the
idea cafe and the solution racing's and
the five questions why not just bring
them all in together
all right like that analogy of the
question each of the questions being I
still like having the burn in the center
as the fifth question but anyway
whatever you know having the the 4/5
zones around in a cycle right you're
going round and round around but you're
not it's not like a sequential going
round around so the image of each of
those chambers being filled with a
different color of paint right and then
you run your finger around around around
the circle and the colors all kind of
swirl together into a sort of random
mess even though it is still
predominantly red in that sector but
there's also a fair bit of yellow white
and blue whatever mixed it do you know
what I mean and so that's that's where
you are at any given time you already
it's it's a complex mess but it's going
somewhere right that's that's yeah yeah
I think visually that that that does
work alright let's go say come out of
your - why you - oh I thought we already
had sorry that was my office okay