welcome to the stola the stoah is a
digital campfire where we go here and
dialogue about what matters most at the
night's edge what's happening now
[Music]
all right everybody welcome to another
session of the dark stoah these are a
weekly series where we actually practice
our stoicism by contending with some of
the scariest ideas that are gonna affect
humanity we've covered things like
CRISPR as art last week was on the robot
war and the week before was on how deep
fakes will inflate the blackmail economy
and this week actually don't know
exactly what we have in store but right
before the call Pat was saying that as
the pieces come together in this
presentation there will be a bit of a
mindfuck moment at the end the last
slide is a bit of a mindfuck so prepare
for that let's hope all those years of
reading marcus aurelius will pay off so
the structure for the evening in a
moment I'm just gonna hand it over to
Pat and he's gonna give us a
presentation and at the end of that
we'll open it up for questions so
throughout the presentation I encourage
everybody to pay close attention get get
yourself proposition lis ready for the
mindfuck moment but also make note of
the parts where you disagree or you feel
confused and bring those questions to
the Q&A and we'll have a wonderful
dialogue and without further ado I bring
you Pat Ryan howdy folks welcome back to
another scenario of wow this is probably
not going to end well this particular
one is called Auto cults as again I tend
to use words that are already well
loaded and then I fight you and say that
create one more definition so this has
been the ongoing series about the post
black black male inflation economy last
week we observed what game a is most
likely to do that centralized power
sociopath thing where it will most
likely tip over into robotic nationalism
game B which is coined by Jordan Green
Hall he is trying to as best as I
understand this
probably gonna get this wrong and it's
always open for negotiation but what I
think he's trying to do is find
epistemic vaccines or epistemic
antibiotics where you have this
explosion of different belief systems
that just intrinsically do not Co here
and he's either trying to find a path
through it or he's trying to give you
the tools and the means to carve your
own paths through it so that's
incredibly useful in the upcoming crazy
that's upon us but there might be an
unintended consequence to that and so
auto cults is going to explore what that
unintended consequence might be and at
the very minimum at least to put a shape
around it so I'm now going to share my
screen and let us begin okay get my
laser okay you know here's binary Jesus
so game B Auto cults here we go so again
we looked at what happened in the black
male economy black male inflation
scenario we've explored the really bad
things that we really don't want and
then we're starting to explore the
things that might be the best thing we
can hope for in the sense that at least
it's manageable you might not agree with
a robot war but I explained how you can
at least turn it into something
manageable and when it comes to
epistemic conflict I'm now going to
proceed to explore what it means to make
that manageable so we're going to go
into a fully automated cult creation I'm
gonna ask you to suspend your definition
of what you think a cult is because I'm
going to give a really specific
definition of it later on okay so as I
always do I like to start at the
beginning so this is this is Democritus
the laughing philosopher and he was the
person who came up with the idea of
atomic feet
let me sorry there we go so
much better so he came up with the idea
of atoms and the void being the only
constituents of reality or maybe he
didn't come up with it but he certainly
expounded upon it in great detail
stating that all that exists is the atom
and the void and everything else is a is
a convention of those constituents and
that's roughly where we're at with the
scientific methodology so go Democritus
not a bad not a bad idea you got there
so start with an atomic unit one of
these indivisible concepts that's one
atom means in Greek I believe you had
this atomic indivisible it's an
occurrence state it's made up of certain
properties at a certain time we then
transmute it with an action to a
different state so we modify some of the
properties then we get a different state
and we've already explored infinitesimal
and time symmetry and that sort of thing
so you can you know you can merge those
two things together so he said this
fundamental action is the driver of the
entire universe and he's not too far off
it's not bad for you know Bronze Age but
then then there's a change of things guy
named Epicurus comes along and he does
the stoic wheel and what that means is
when you take there when you take the
the consequences of Democritus and you
say well it's only fate it's only atoms
and transmutations and what you're
talking about is its fate you're talking
fatalism you're talking a mechanical
precision of the universe rolling out in
exactly the sequence that's replayable
under every possible can no matter what
the conditions are so this you know if I
if I throw this thing over here you know
you know there are forces that made that
happen as I threw that right into my
water there were forces that made that
happen
and I couldn't stop it so the initial
action is a cause which then causes an
effect and there's no interpretation no
other possible outcome that could have
been and that was the natural takeaway
of democritus's interpretation of the
universe but then Epicurus comes along
and says well there might be more going
on behind the scenes than that and he
breaks it apart into like three
high-level umbrella concepts
happing by necessity which is what
Democritus was talking about and others
by chance which is randomness
effectively the idea that maybe the
atoms aren't going in the maybe there's
like some quantum wiggle going on and
then through our own agency which is
where this birth of freewill gets its
start it's right here that through our
own agency so we have the machine we
have the weird and then we have
ourselves and this is where a lot of
philosophical dispute really originates
from so same concept we have our atomic
unit he caught it swerve by the way like
like a rapper I don't know but like like
a swervy transmutation action and you
know you'll end up with a potential
state so he's laying the groundwork for
an early concept of quantum physics
effectively and so these two people kind
of Duke it out in the freewill argument
throughout I don't know probably the
next two thousand years
it's either mechanical or maybe there's
some other things that we can't see or
an invisible hand or we come up with
these really rough heuristics throughout
the history of philosophy and and and
these guys really double down on
Democritus so they're part of the free
will is stupid Club so Democritus was
he's basically saying oh you know
everything's a machine and everything's
ticking correctly Hobbes comes along and
just hates people he comes up with a
concept of avaya thin and says you need
a strong central leader to control this
this mechanical machine so that
everything does happen in a fatalistic
disposition pavlov comes along and
changes the game entirely and he says
not only is free will doesn't exist but
i can program it and he does it with
dogs in terms of you know just making
him ring the bell and they slobber all
over the place and he gotta clean it up
and it's a mess but he was able to say
well free will is now programmable so is
it even free to begin with this is where
things go off the rails so these these
old philosophical discussions about you
know free will or fatalism this guy
comes along and blows all that out the
water because now we have a new player
in the game and that is our own
ecology and that is beyond our own
reasoning skills and that sounds very
strange to say that our brain is beyond
our reasoning skills because our
reasoning comes from our brain but I
simply channel a quote by a person I
don't remember but the quote is if our
brain was so simple we could understand
it we would be so simple we couldn't and
so Pavlov comes along and really throws
that on his head and said then this guy
comes along Delgado and he's not unless
you're really into psycho technology
space in the history of it you probably
never heard of this guy Delgado takes
Pavlov and puts it on crack Pavlov
relies on repetition a lot of repetition
in order to get the the behavior you're
looking for though gatos straight-up
electrocuted the brain to get the
behavior look that you're looking for so
he would isolate a specific neuron
cluster and go zap and then you would
act now you've probably seen a lot of
that stuff from like the 1950s like
electroshock therapy for example yeah
this guy is like the king of that whole
realm of psychological analysis and on
the inverse of this side because people
did see and to back up Hobbes right here
people saw the the terrifying conclusion
of what he was saying what the divide
with but he was later derided as the
Leviathan
minase ntral force then who plays the
Godhead and that's always an
uncomfortable conversation it's gonna be
used gotta be me I always think of
another quote where it's like if we have
data we shall follow the data if all we
have our opinions we shall follow me and
that's and that's what kind of what
Hobbes was was effectively promoting so
this would naturally spawn that hey a
free will stupid you won't do what
you tell me free will exist and I'm
gonna prove it by being as badass rebels
I can come up with so this is Locke and
he basically writes pretty good research
and why rulers are not an authority that
sounds like a bit of an oxymoron but he
has some good ideas but the thing you
got to remember about Locke is that he
is born from the 30 Years War which
keep referencing in all these other
talks that I'm doing from the 30 Years
War II he saw the abuse of Hobbs system
he saw the the papal Authority as the
pinnacle of what Hobbes was promoting
and because of the destructiveness of
the 30 Years War he would later go on
and embrace a concept called tabula rasa
the blank slate the idea where you are
not born with all the properties you
have and you're just going through the
Machine fate of your life you are a
blank slate that can be reprogrammed or
you're a blank slate that can choose
your own outcomes or you can do that
Epicurus swervy stuff for your own life
and he runs with this primarily as an
argument against papal authorities
saying Divine Will doesn't dictate
everything that's happening to us here
we have some agency on our own lives you
know and this was this is a refreshing
argument after 30 years of religious
conflict
so he gets embraced and again he was the
founding fathers founding father so
almost all of America's legal doctrine
and spirit behind it comes from this guy
and the basis is rulers not an authority
and you see that in the American
Constitution which is built entirely to
constrain federal government that was
the purpose of the Constitution so then
we move on to this guy now as far as I'm
concerned Arthur Ashe opened
Schopenhauer Schopenhauer is and if I'm
if I'm mangling that just make fun of me
Schopenhauer should have been the end of
philosophy in my opinion I don't like
putting opinions out there without
backing it but I'm gonna do that because
I think he should have been the end of
philosophy this conclusion is what he
alludes to that human cognition is not
an authority well that's like a whore on
wait wait I have a brain and it's
sensing the world so how can I not be an
authority of my own world that I'm
sensing Descartes said I think therefore
I am and he's turning around and saying
well no not really you can't trust human
cognition and he he goes he explained
is reasoning in a construct that I will
reveal a little later time Wigan steam
I think this wooden steam this guy wants
to deconstruct all of all of philosophy
effectively after World War two the
Europeans had butchered each other so
horribly between what were won in World
War two that disillusion of all things
European said in no kidding and this guy
was out there saying history is not
Authority philosophy is not Authority
everything we've been doing up to this
point cannot be cited or referenced at
all we have royally screwed everything
up
and so history is not in authority and
then he get Pollock who is an artist who
was funded by the CIA and he says Art's
not an authority and watch this I'm just
gonna spray paint everywhere
so all this aesthetics and beauty that
you're trying to use the justify history
that you're then trying to use the
justified rulers guess what that's not
an authority either and then Derrida
comes along and says language is an
authority so the very tool you're using
to communicate also is in authority so
we're getting more and more atomic in
our ability to rebel and it's becoming
more and more nonsensical set up to the
point where it's you can't even if
nothing's in authority and then I'm not
an authority do I even exist like it
it's almost like this inversion of free
will to the point that the only way you
can defend free will is to pretend you
you're not even existing like this weird
paradox where I'm an agent but I'm not
an agent so I tend to lump all this
stuff together as classes to fuckery
this is all just a bunch of overeducated
I'm gonna be as writing as possible here
these a bunch of over educated people
would be probably the exception of this
guy probably and this guy was willing to
do the hard work I'll give him that he
did the hard work but in the end it's
still classes fuckery it still hears
power here's our ability to rebel
against power and it's just showing
itself at different periods of time at
different cultures so I just lump it all
together his classes to fuckery this guy
oh gee useful insights absolutely oh gee
useful because human cognition is not an
authority is the actual legit argument
through this whole thing it's
independent of class
independent of context and history it's
outside of human cognition that's
literally everything he was saying there
and what did he define this as oh no he
comes in and says is it I gotta I gotta
let some of him
is it possible to demonstrate human free
will from self-consciousness that's a
great question because that's what these
guys are if you think of it if you think
of these these anti-authority as a
scatterplot like they're they're they're
they're circling this concept about
freewill and self-consciousness for a
long time it's very it's very native to
assume these two things are inseparable
but he comes along and says nah now wait
a second there might be this thing
called nama not so he basically says the
world of representation doesn't always
overlap with the world as will those are
terminologies from his time the world as
representation is the Democritus idea
where atoms exist and everything is
derivative of those atoms so things are
being represented from those
fundamentals and then a world as will as
in our cognition of that representation
which isn't the representation so he's
making a clear distinction between the
two and he's saying that if we make this
distinction there is going to be stuff
that is outside of both and I think that
is so overlooked when it comes to
talking about free will and when you
merge this concept of things that are
outside of human cognition with what we
just explored about the brain the brain
being outside of human cognition he
might have been talking about psycho
technology and didn't even know it so
let's see if we can bind this together
this kind of weird insight that I'm
trying to drive home let me move my my
screen a screen so I had mentioned
Delgado in the past and this is what
made him famous and I think 63 it's a
fighting bull in Spain and they're
pretty agitated you might have seen them
at some point in your life and pretty
pretty aggressive animals they're
trained to be aggressive
design their whole lives they're abused
their whole lives are treated like
so they can enhance the aggressive
capabilities but this guy did is he
installed a electro it's called a
Systema c4 he called it where you
installed this electrode control on the
brain and it was powered by a remote
knob so you would amplify the
electricity that would then target this
part of the brain and upon doing so this
bull charged him he turned on the radio
control and the bull just whoop went
around the other way just like Luke just
381 360 degrees just bounced right so
you see like these like I'm a bull I'm
charging you oh my god wait no I changed
my mind
I'd say he just you know he you see him
pressed a button pretty furiously here
as he's himself and so this is
this rocked the world and it's funny
that this stuff is not taught in common
education because this was I mean maybe
we bake it in a sci-fi so much that you
just don't teach it that way anymore but
this was this was this altered
everything because now we were no longer
talking about philosophy we were talking
about the the mechanization of the brain
itself so instead of having free will
you could program the brain of other
people yeah I could use my free will to
remove yours with button pressing and
not just not just for pulls you would
also do what the people so he was able
to induce like fear rage lust hilarity I
don't even know what that is other
reactions all kinds of stuff just by
electro poking the brain and here one
example usually when you do open brain
surgery on someone it's it's good for
them to do something that's cognitively
important so if you make a incorrect cut
and they and they up then you've no
you up because otherwise you how
could you possibly know so in this case
she was playing a guitar and he shocked
a specific part of the brain and she
just went nuts just smashed her guitar
and she would later describe it as I
don't know why I did that but why the
 like it's like I just why did I do
that there's almost he was completely
robbed of will
and that's a complicated action I mean
run through the Cascade of that
electroshock brain oh I'm going to stop
playing music I'm going to furrow my
face I'm going to move my right arm
around this thing I'm gonna swing this
over my head I'm going to smash it
that's like ten thousand different
complex behaviors in one sequence and
that was invoked by a single shock so
clearly we've stepped into a totally
different way of understanding human
psychology which in turn has huge
ramifications on how we should approach
philosophy and again Delgado was a rock
star at this time all the way up to 1970
even the headline New York Times what
kind of humans would be like to
construct let me just think about that
right construct a human we're gonna take
Pavlov we're gonna take Hobbes and we're
going to construct a human by
controlling what electronic stimulation
is happening in their brain to teach
them or otherwise control them or
otherwise program them as as we use an
you know brainwashing as we call today
and just to demonstrate even more how
precise he was getting it wasn't just
like shock I know that's kind of funny
he was getting precise who do monkeys
for example in this case he would shock
the monkey which is a hilarious 1980
song and the
result was that you would get the monkey
to climb a pole jump down growl frettin
attack another monkey then change
attitude and approach the rest of the
group in a friendly way so I just feel
like I'm jumping up there I'm down here
 you hey everybody you'd like like
shot one shot you get that complicated
chain of behavior and no matter how many
times you shock that brain it would
repeat that complicated chain of
behavior 20,000 times in a row is there
free will under those conditions can you
even begin to argue free will anymore
it's complicated it's tough because you
see this that's a wildly difficult
that's a wildly complicated chain of
events and it's repeatable like a
machine press button monkey does thing
so what's going on here how did this how
did he get here right cuz you could
shock a brain and like a behavior
happens alright yeah okay mad scientist
 but how do you get refined control
how do you get higher resolution and
better more predictability out of this
process I'm hitting you with an electric
charge and if I'm monitoring your brain
with like I don't know some type of
proto EEG at that time it's gonna look
like this your brain is constantly just
lots of signal lots of electrochemical
interaction going on all the time it's
gonna look like this so if I add this
tiny little sine wave to this mess I'm
just gonna get more mess I'm gonna have
no idea what I'm actually doing here I
have to be able to tease this thing the
result of this thing from this noise and
by default and you just can't do that
it's it's too too much crazy going on
it's almost like I don't know
like think of a lottery ball machine and
you throw your own ball in there and
you're trying to figure out how is that
going to affect all the interaction of
all the other balls it's too much noise
so let's play with some technology here
so this is called it's called the Wiener
Chinchin plankton theorem this is a way
to perform a Fourier transformation to
turn this mess into something more
manageable and then this particular
machine is called a homeostatic from
1948 the British a British person whose
name escapes me but he was able to take
four bomb fins that would autocorrect
and they're in the pre bombing days
usually they just like drop bombs and
you know hope for the best but they
would find ways to stabilize the fin as
it went down to increase the accuracy of
the bomb and that auto stabilization
system when you when you wired it up the
four of themselves what they would do is
they would naturally achieve an
equilibrium no matter what complicated
noise you throw into it so no matter
what electric signal you threw into this
thing it would then be able to say okay
we can find equilibrium between all the
all the peaks of troughs and
distributions and we can now reflect a
signal that would counter this signal
this was touted as an artificial brain
in the night to end by 1948 because it
was naturally finding equilibrium in
these complex noises so when you merge
these things together this theorem in
this machine what you're able to do is
you're able to tease out the effects of
your input from the noise
but this with this process so if I put
in this bolt it's gonna go through this
noise and I no longer have to look at
the behavior so now I can start doing
micro behavior that doesn't even
present to you I could start affecting
your thoughts things that wouldn't
actually demonstrate as you know
physical behavior like I'm doing now I
hit here I hit here I'm able to tease
out the result of my input and then find
the output of it in this mess and I
don't even need to see your behavior
anymore I can now get down to the
individual transformation of the math
itself
you're just a meat puppet at this point
I don't care if you're behaving I can
actually find the result of my
experimentation so this rapidly expanded
this psycho technological exploration
considerably this was a very
revolutionary thing and this led to the
concept of the auto correlator which is
the combination of that theorem and the
homeostatic and this was also led to we
got here right so let's zoom in on this
part here right so the auto correlator
was able to do exactly that thing where
you're teasing out the input and you're
able to correlate the input and the
output through noise which is
revolutionary and again so in this case
finding no correlation in the random
noise component at the longer at longer
delay time so it's not just like instant
right not just like I shocked here and
then I instantly see the result here
sometimes the brain takes time 200
milliseconds maybe five seconds who
knows in this case for longer delay
times you could use an auto correlator
to then say the input was here the
output was here and we can get an
extreme faithfulness of that correlation
so now we can do long-term behavior as
well not just the instant stuff not just
so you can almost get pebble a blobby in
here excuse me
and this has a technique over narrow
band filters so you typically you take
when you have that noise you apply a
very narrow band filter which is going
to be a high pass a low pass a Q Pass
the the means of of filtering out all
the other frequencies just so you can
focus on this one little tiny narrowband
but that's only so useful because the
the brain is constantly doing these
correlations and you need to do it you
need to find correlations in that
natural complexity you can't just like
look at this like you can't peek into
this little you need that you need to
see the whole thing and so this machine
was able to do that
so now let's correlate this stuff to the
complicated behavior because we have the
technology I just walk you through the
technology that can do this so we take
our input put it in the brain pick up
out of the brain whatever take our auto
correlators and then poof now we have
signal driven reproducible behavior just
like the monkeys
now we can fine-tune your behavior by
the way from these signals these input
signals we can set up complicated chains
of Pavlovian training from this input
so how do you do all that well we take
stimuli and not just anywhere it's not
just stimuli on the brain wherever parts
of the brain matter if I'm affecting you
know your your olfactory glands if I'm
affecting your sense of balance your
ability to detect emotion for example
all of these are stimuli
any type of energetic input can count
the stimuli so even if I if I leave my
brain out of it I'm sorry I felt leave
my electrode out of my brain I'm just
talking about a human body I have plenty
of stimulus energy sources constantly
hitting my body at all hours of the day
every second and what it does is it kind
of creates this behavioral tree so if a
stimuli of a foul-smelling pile of trash
comes across my way my behavior tree
which is going to show all of my up my
most likely options according to that
stimuli scenario maybe it goes here and
says oh trash there's a high probability
I'm going to walk away from it so if I
if I map all of these actions together
and and go down the tree a stimuli can
be mapped in a behavior tree with with
probabilistic distribution and all that
stuff I'm not talking in terms of like
mathematical exacts here it's like 60
percent chance or whatever now how do I
modify that behavior tree that
complicated possible chain of outcomes
that you a human are going to engage in
based upon the stimuli you're
experiencing well I can use repetition
that's what Pavlov did and you might
have noticed something disappeared up
here and down here so what I've done is
I've narrowed the behavior tree so now
your range of actions have been produced
what if add drugs
in a psychopharmacology for example oh I
got a whole new branch of action over
here that wasn't even possible before
then what if I make it feedback what if
my behavior tree modification feeds back
determines the stimulus I receive which
then modifies my behavior tree further
oh now we got a problem now what we have
is a situation where you get repetition
discipline or straight-up mind control
where I have narrowed your option tree
down so tightly that you will do this
behavior over and over again as if I
shocked you just like that monkey at
that specific neuron and I don't need
installations in your head to achieve
this outcome I don't need that oh and by
the way these behavior trees their
course equivalents to neural pathways oh
my god hello Elon Musk woody oh you're
here because a neuro-link that's so
weird alright yeah I mean it is
expensive you got to install it you got
to cut open the scalp or maybe you gotta
put a thing here and you can you can
modify these pathways and then turn
modify the behavior tree but man that's
expensive
last I checked neural link it they had
problems with the body rejecting a long
term installed solution here so he's
trying to control the behavior tree of
people and this is this is a diffusion
tensor image of these brain pathways
but this is expensive as we said the the
neuro-link
and these Delgado's solutions and all
these stuff that we want to do to modify
the brain that's like surgery
that's medical bills that's a mess I
mean that's a big big overhead so what
if there's another way to do all this
what if you don't need surgery to do all
this stuff that would be easier that'll
be much cheaper in fact and you could
roll it out at scale so you wouldn't
just be modifying behavior tree of your
current patient you can modify the
behavior tree of a million people at the
same time using all of these tricks that
I'm talking about but how do you do that
without surgery that's the missing piece
right well it was missing until the 70s
semiotic s-- don't know if you guys
understand semiotic s-- its semiotics is
the study of language as a signal it's
probably the easiest way to describe it
so typically when we think language were
like song and tone in the foments and
the voices know you know all the stuff
that we use to convey meaning we're
conveying meaningful single the symbols
with our organic language that we've
derived but that's not the only thing
that language has language can be
reduced to mere semiotic signal which
has no meaning whatsoever they could be
utter noise could be bebop it could be
anything
it's sonic energy at the end of the day
it's all it is so if I'm if I'm saying
something it's because my throat is
vibrating 2,000 times a second and it's
modifying the air on its way out of my
lungs my tongue and then my mouth is
also shaping it further and then it's
coming out of my mouth and then it's
entering your ear in which you have this
this this very complicated pin a which
is filtering off your high-frequency
audio goes into the I forget the name of
it but it reduces it automatically by 10
decibels then it hits your 10 Patek
membrane which then vibrates these 10
sacks in your ear which have neural
hairs in them right so I've just
described the neural process of language
I've removed the symbols of the words
themselves and I've reduced them to
semiotic signals to enter to sonic
energy as if it was an electrode hitting
your brain now why target language in
particular that's neurolinguistics
language Broca's area is the magic sauce
because I can hit you with a symbol with
a word and your entire body's gonna
vibrate if I do it right so it's as if I
hit you with an electric shock same
stuff I can say I could say a handful of
words right here right now and you're
gonna fly off the handle I could drop I
don't know racial slurs or something and
most y'all would quit right now right
well that's the power of language I can
make you do complicated things as if I
shocked your brain so semiotic became
this huge part of trying to do the
psychological the psycho technological
research which is surprisingly all this
stuff suddenly becomes classified once
that realizations made how strange
oh and look we have a scientific basis
for Jacques Derrida the destruction of
language there is nothing beyond the
text so we have a philosopher who's
looking at all this stuff and saying
yeah I can use this science for my basis
that's easy enough we can destroy the
meaning behind the symbols and look at
this the sonic energy exclusively behind
it to get the same exact behavior and we
don't need to teach you complicated
words or anything like that we can hit
you with like I don't know like random
noise and we can roughly get the same
solution so now let's go back to our
chart instead of looking at like this
this stimuli let's look at symbolic
conveyance going to the brain going to
the auto cord layer Auto correlator
which is now still technically single
driven reproducible behavior but I don't
need an electrode in your head anymore
I can do it with just words and that's
just the more than words to who's
symbolic and it's symbolic conveyance so
you know advertising exploits this all
the time
voice acting cutaways and movies for
example genre fication of music was a
huge part of semiotic research because
people would intentionally sell filter
for certain sonic preferences that they
basically self selected to be
manipulated by hip-hop in particular was
no tour
for linguistic preference rock music was
notorious for just you know shake your
soul type stuff
everybody filtered along the genres to
condition themselves for a semiotic
research quantize mimetics for example
we've seen that and you know Chan's all
day long and all of this leads to
digitizing identity so what we're doing
is we're taking our semiotic
responsiveness and we're creating
individual units of a personality as so
a computer can now make sense of it
which of course is leading us to the
shitshow that we're in right now
but what if I change my ancient
technology of Auto correlators to neural
networks uh-oh remember that thing I did
about the morality machine a couple
slides back couple of videos back hmm
where am I going with this so I promised
I would give you a different definition
of cults I am of the opinion that cults
are behavioral state machines so a state
machine is a just like a behavior tree
but a state machine will account for all
possible state transitions between each
node so you can you can have a
complicated tree but sometimes those
nodes they don't just go through a tree
what they'll do is they'll sometimes
refer it back to themselves or the
sometimes have a relationship where
they're going back and forth all the
time so that's that's a state machine
and a cult is basically instead of a
behavior tree its behavior state machine
it's you know I'll probably have a lot
of QA questions about how to break that
down so let me just keep going so
remember we have our behavior tree but a
state machine is made up of the
transition between trees so we have a
set of behavior trees here let me say
this is state one for the behavior tree
this is a state two for the behavior
tree and we're moving through these
states just like when we shock that
monkey where it goes through behaviors
tree one then it moves jumps up the hill
or jumps up the pole jumps down the pole
gets angry now it's friendly right so
we're looking at the state machine
transition between behavior and we're
doing this with symbolic conveyance
alone the great orator the great
preacher the person who can command the
audience with the best possible sonic
presence you know that type of stuff
symbolic conveyance doing all of these
things because our brains evolved
Broca's area so we've set ourselves up
for semiotic manipulation for all of
time and just to really drive home
what's a trigger word right well
congratulations you've been semiotic we
programmed
remember the automation with the the
automat ism was repeated in the same
order the same order each time through
20000 Simon's now you might think you
have free will and say well that
wouldn't happen to me
yeah spell the rest of that word out and
tell me how it goes
you've been semiotic lis programmed
so let's run this through we now
understand that a cult is a
transformation of behavioral trees over
time so we have our behavioral tree here
and we have the cult of the smiling Bob
who's just doing this thing now we have
the cult of the Asura son which sounds
way too RPG and what they're doing is
they're competing for the brain space of
entire populations this is basically
advertising now cult of the smiling Bob
these people like it and coltd the azor
son these people like it now to basic
you know mathematical representation
this is easy to reason about but what if
this happens what if they like to
smiling Bob and as your son what if they
don't like each other the point I'm
trying to make here is that these brains
they are the fabric of Kult space-time
which is probably way too complicated of
a way to say this but think of each
brain as a as a vertex on an XY grid and
what you're doing is I'm I'm putting
this symbolic conveyance of Bob on that
XY grid to change this excitation so
it's either going up or it's going down
or whatever right so the brain space
here is the only area that cults
recognize they don't recognize
individuals they recognize how they're
causing excitation on the fabric of
psychology itself
that's an important concept to wrap your
head around no pun intended
the idea is that our social networks are
relationships between one another our
ways to convey a meme to one another or
idea to one another that is a fabric no
different than space itself it's if
there's a time delay to move from one
point to another just like normal space
there's excitation about the ability to
hold that position just like space
there's even quantum fluctuations like
stuff like this where to think lied
together and you don't know how it's
gonna turn out just like space so
space-time as an analog for how
psychology of populations works holds up
pretty well when you treat when you
start treating colt's like behavioral
state machines so this leads us to the
auto cult once we understand that these
cults are fighting for human resources
and the reason they're fighting for
these human resources just say we fight
for land if I'm if I'm claiming land way
out there it's because I want the future
promise of what that land is potentially
worth maybe there's oil under it maybe
there's farms on it maybe I can turn it
into something value occult see humans
the same way they see I got a claim as
many people as I can with my first round
of memes because that human is valuable
later on it's also currently valuable
maybe it's paying me for this or maybe I
need to shape that human into something
else so that competition leads to the
auto cult and how is a nautical born
well we start with a filter bubble where
you're on your machine you're doing your
personalized data there is a brain small
crumb somewhere scattered across
multiple AIS and some corporate
warehouse somewhere datacenter somewhere
that is then making decisions to figure
out what adds it shows you in your
little bubble it could also be memes or
videos or events content doesn't have to
be ads but ads tend to take this form
it's basically here's the data coming
out how can I poke you so that you can
send me more of this how can I poke you
so they can send me more of this look at
that we've created as a behavioral state
machine just like that if I hit you with
this come back oh okay when I do this
then I get this transformation then I
get this transformation just like the
monkey with the shock oh wow look at
that
now if I threw morality machine on top
of it well now I have an article I just
built an article so my morality machine
is the is that construct I was talking
about in the prior video you know for
those who haven't seen it let me briefly
go over it morality machine is where you
are taking that filter bubble and you
are fully automating it and you are
eliminating realities because you fully
automated it so there's only so there's
only so much about reality you're
capable of seeing when you're under the
influence of one of these morality
machines you're not gonna see the whole
of reality at all it's going to
consistently reinforce itself and it's
going to optimize and this is where
things get a little bit different this
sounds like targeted ads but where it
changes is that targeted ads are trying
to maximize for attention morality
machines are trying to maximize for X
and that X could be anything it could be
I'm optimizing for people who like candy
canes I'm optimizing for people who can
do jumping jacks I'm optimizing for for
people who are overweight whatever it is
the morality machine is selecting for
you can start building these autonomous
well this thing is autonomous and it's
driving the behavioral transformation
it's creating a cult and it's
autonomously maintaining it and it's not
just selecting for attention and it's
not just selecting for profit it's
selecting for any goddamn moral thing
you can think of and that is a nautical
and auto coats also compete for cult
space-time so here's the auto cult of
Keck there was a little pep a meme
everywhere look at that gogo Pepe that
in turn is creating at all the cult of
no no Pepe please and so it's hitting
all these things right so you know no
Pepe there that's racist right so then
let's let me back up a bit so this guy
is able to crack all these uncolonized
brains
but the Pepe brains are there and you
got a we got to get you got to get that
Pepe out of there that's just mean so
how do we do it well we can't do it
because these slots are already occupied
so what do we do
well the auto colt itself isn't
sufficient I need to start leveraging
human psychology I need to start using
neurolinguistics oh I can use
neurolinguistics to now erase
what other auto cults have done so now
these auto cults what they're going to
do is that they're going to increasingly
take psychology and make it AI compliant
so that they can compete the best for
this cult space-time fabric now when an
auto cult is no longer able to command
the neural resources of a person and
thus make them do work and thus feed
them profit well the article dies
even Auto Colts naturally select for
each other
so where does this go the problem is
that when these auto Colts are fighting
for human brains you'll never know and
the reason you'll never know is because
their fight for your brain looks like
Epis tat epistemic conflict so when you
say like oh that person's a conspiracy
theory or when you say all that persons
are X or that persons are Y right that
epistemic conflict how do you not know
this right why do you watch fox news
your knowledge is missing you're stupid
you're this you're that right that
epistemic conflict that we're all
embroiled in Auto Colts will masquerade
as that and you will never know because
they're playing the same exact game as
the epistemic conflict game so let me
walk you through an example epistemic is
auto Colt of the smiling Bob it's taken
up this part of a brain and they had a
the green heart taken this one get the
blue triangle Colt taking this one you
have your moon taking that one you have
your Colt of the weird can here it's
like an angry bowl of Lucky Charms of
fighting for your brain and
you will not know these players exist
because what they're doing is that they
are appealing to your psychology so that
you engage in this so that you fight
these other things that you don't know
exist so let me do one more click to tie
it all together you start to think in
terms of these Auto cults without ever
knowing they exist you see all of
reality along the lines of how these
things are interacting with so this is
an abstract I've been giving let's make
it real
if I was turning any one of these brands
into a nautical and they were fighting
for your brain you wouldn't even know
you wouldn't even see it as that you
wouldn't even dawn on you to think that
an AI was fighting for your brain and
other AIS are competing for your brain
wouldn't even dote on you you would
think it at the stomach conflict I'm the
smart one right I know every I know
everything I know everything know I know
everything know I know everything
doesn't even look like all the cults
fighting for your brain and oh by the
way that person is thinking in terms of
reality like this with these little with
these little cult symbols
so here's where things get messy and
here's where game B tries to do the
right thing and I might up so game
B's trying to create these epistemic
vaccines against Auto cults but this
creates what's called a super cult that
sounds like a ludicrous word like
Superman you know jumps in a phone booth
and it comes you know but that's not
what I'm saying
what I'm saying is just like antibiotics
creates superbugs anti mimetics will
create super cults
how can that be remember these Colts are
fighting for your brain you'll never see
him but they're fighting for you and
Colts can kill each other so
congratulations Islam to coca-cola go
Muhammad right and then oh look
Democrats took over this one right
oh look Republicans took that is not
enough to simply destroy look you can't
actually destroy the residual effects of
the auto cult in the living population
you can destroy the machine behind it in
the profit motive behind it but all the
memes are still there they're all still
floating in the wild so all these ideas
you've accumulated by subscribing to
these cults well they're still in your
brain so we're not gonna we're not gonna
forcibly terminate you because of that
no we're gonna hijack all those memes
and we're gonna force it in our Auto
cult pile we're going to enhance our
ability to control more and more people
and then eventually the super cult
appears which controls all memes and
controls all contexts and all of how
reality could possibly be perceived so
if you go wild on the epistemic vaccines
you might end up here you got to be real
careful with that
and game B if they decided to rejigger
the Pareto frontier they might buy time
I'm not so sure I think this is a
natural conclusion when you start
reaching for the epistemic penicillin so
this is all fun theoretical stuff that
I've been talking about in pretty
hilarious extrapolations let's give you
a living example of how to do this we're
going to automate astrology
is there a nice little hippie girl and
she's constantly having behaviors
emitted and it's being collected either
by IOT or phones or anything else and
eventually you start the if you collect
enough that data you can actually kind
of guess how a person's thinking like
maybe when you're sitting down and you
move a certain way your phone
accelerometers betray that and some AI
picks up and says oh that person's
making that move they must be thinking
about if their action is aligned with
the Stars
okay what's wrong with that it's on the
phone
no it's collecting all the metadata the
Santa MIT social network psychometrics
blah blah blah now what we have is the
concept of astrology is an interface for
the astrology morality machine it's an
interface so this is like here's how
humans look at it and they they have a
mystic connection with it or they're
examining it or they're being a part of
this thing and they're using it as a
proxy to understand reality that's just
an interface for this thing this is the
actual machine making the assessments
about what astrology is going to be so
in this case because astrology I pick
astrology first because it's uniquely
time-based in its predictions
it has a heuristic character
categorization so your categorizations
are obviously zodiac signs and your time
based prediction is where are these
things going to be in the future and how
is that going to affect your mood the
whole damn thing is built for AI it's
it's unbelievably compatible with it so
what does this do I know this then says
well we can now ship this out to other
people who are receptive to this idea in
the social network using controlled
timed measured symbolic conveyance and
what is going to do is it's going to
make the network acknowledge that
someone in their network has the divine
with them
how's that look how is that even
possible
damn girl charts are aligned for you
well the a I presented reality to these
guys who then made them in turn
acknowledged that this person the stars
are in their favour so this person is
able to get social proof social
verification that her belief in this is
now true oh my god
I am aligned you're biasing the behavior
tree towards specific branches now I
pick on astrology first because it's it
just happens to work so well with a I do
it the Christianity do it the Islam
what if the world just couldn't stop
producing these auto cults what if you
have weird cult swear I'm gonna worship
this lemon on Tuesday because when I do
that that's when the Amazon drone
delivers the banana i won there's
nothing stopping that
and you have to use VPNs as a vaccine
against these things though so that's it
that's the article thank you for for
listening to this wild wacky journey
alright thank you so much for that Pat
at this point everybody just prepared
questions if you're confused about
anything I know I'm confused about some
of what went on there feel free to ask
questions for clarification I'm gonna
start by asking Pat some of my questions
while everybody can throw some in the
chat and then I'll start to read them or
I can ask you to unmute yourself and you
can read them yourself all right so I
guess like the first obvious question
was how do you like I'm sure you thought
of this but how how do you how do you
frame your framing of this whole auto
cult phenomena within the story of the
article like how how are you not just a
product of this at just some higher meta
level that's like talking about articles
I see you as somewhat embattled person
who's who's engaging with a series of
different debates on all these different
sides and perhaps throughout that
process you've developed this emergent
perspective of Auto cults and how how
are you exempt from that or are you not
no I'm not exempt not at all just just
cuz I know it's there it doesn't mean
I'm it's not a vaccine knowing about all
the cults is not a defense against Auto
codes it's it's almost like saying I
know about violence and so bullets can't
hurt me that you can't take that
position so I'm not exempt at all
is there any set of behaviors or I guess
is there any lifestyles that would
further inoculate somebody from engaging
in Auto cults we've seen what happens if
you over inoculate you'll create a super
cult so it's gonna be a fine balance the
Stoics are interesting they are trying
to tease the auto cult the shape of the
auto code out in the hopes to then
understand its motives
can a single stoic do that for 10,000
auto coats can it do it for a hundred
thousand all you have to do is expand
beyond the Dunbar limit so there's going
to have to be some collaborative
research element the individual itself
is completely prone to to predatory auto
cults there's no defense at the
individual level you would have to work
as a collective to tease this stuff out
and be effectively a permanent
researcher just for your own defense
you can also leverage some auto codes
like for example it's feasible to steer
auto cults to attack other auto cults
that's going to be marketing in the
future so there will be a need for
Stoics to detect behavior of auto cults
for those marketing advantages what do
you think game be broadly gets right and
what do you think it broadly gets wrong
it understands the epistemic collapse
scenario the problem of understanding it
is that you know have to navigate it and
at some point you need for us to do that
navigation and I don't know well I can't
say I don't know because there is a
model you had Aristotle he understood
roughly this stuff as well and his
solution to that was the Train Alexander
that's how he navigated these problems
so game B is either going to train an
Alexander or it's going to die to the
auto cults so one of the things that
came up in the middle of your talk was
that in my mind the topic of
psychedelics because there's been this
increased appetite and funding for
psychedelic research and some people
believe that we might be able to create
synthetic derivations of psilocybin for
example to act as further chemical
levers to modulate the brain do you have
any thoughts on this and how this fits
into your whole auto cult framing yeah
I've made reference to the LSD
experiments way back in the 60s when
this psycho research was at its prime
and it was part of military spending
formally
a lot of the drug culture was military
funded that's that's a sad truth you can
look that one up but it was trying to
further this this psycho technological
research so I get if we're back there
again that's usually a red flag for me
yeah why do you need to control the
behavior trees so tightly have you just
formed such a fragile system that you
need to control behavior down to that
level I mean that's a that's a giant red
flag in and of itself but you will get
modifications in the behavior tree
that's that's a well known well studied
thing so I suppose the question then
might be what behavior trees are being
selected from this research which ones
will flourish and which ones will die in
the most optimistic scenario what sort
of positive black swans do you hope for
orchids next week that's next week
that's uh that's next week where last
week it did game a this week is game B
next week is game over which is going to
show the positive the most useful
positive outcome I can think of under
these under these conditions all right
we're getting some questions populating
here but I have one more for you that's
gonna sound a little bit oblique but I
wonder if you can riff on this where
does the idea of love fit into this oh
the the terminus will tell you it's all
chemicals I've been hearing that for my
entire life that might there is when you
treat when you look at the cult
space-time and you say okay these nodes
of excitation are at these levels and so
forth
and you're controlling this this mass
behavioral tree are you controlling the
behavioral tree of the masses love does
not provide any type of benefit in terms
of defenses against this behavior tree
shaping because it can also be used as
part of behavior tree shaping there
there's in there is a chimera sexual
abuse victims imprinting is a thing and
then you get down to like that's the
mechanics of the mechanics of
reproduction which is associated with
love love you're talking about is more
like any one of the six definitions that
the Greeks came up with they have
behavioral tree properties too we have
we've seen electroshock experimentation
where a person will literally fall in
love with someone so you know it's kind
of bleak but it is going to be
commoditized just like every other
behavior under these conditions I'm
afraid the the angle that I was thinking
of it from was the way in which love can
kind of allow people to get over some
epistemic conflict so you might
recognize that somebody has a completely
different perspective from you maybe
they're part of a different auto cults
but if you're Auto cult or if the memes
that infect your mind point you in the
direction of love or where you are able
to practice some kind of unconditional
positive regard for the person you're
disagreeing with that often becomes like
this liminal point where the auto cults
no longer bump up against each other as
strongly as they could but yeah I wonder
if that that even makes sense because
I'm not sure I fully represented the
auto cults there the the mechanism
you're describing is equally as
controllable in the sense that we want
to merge these Auto cults together well
there you go
you wouldn't you would turn that
whatever that is on your definition that
you use there and let's say you wanted
friction between the auto coats well now
you just turn it off and then there you
go
so mergers and acquisitions of auto
cults maybe uh uh auto cult emanates all
right I believe a Peter Lindbergh
steward of the stoah has a question
Peter do you want to ask it yes thank
you Dan I don't have a question but I
have a question on other people's behalf
a question in a statement so I shared
your PowerPoint with some of the game be
players and so Jim rod has a question I
don't know how relevant it is and then
Jordan Hall has a statement so Jim rat
aren't all cultures what he'd call a
super cult that's his question and then
Jordan Hall this is completely wrong but
I understand why and how he gets there I
brought this up the Jordan Hall
previously before I just mentioned this
I wanted him to chime in and he made it
clear that the proto Frontier
rejiggering was ultimately the the most
important part here to make this kind of
happen to to prevent this super call
outcome originally I had stated that
this whole thing was game B's endgame
but he had we had agreed that if you can
adjust the proto frontier then you can
at the very minimum buy time to then try
and make sense of all this stuff
so regarding mr. ruts comment there are
all cultures a super cult arguably the
cultures that exist now yes they will
have followed the tradition of
conquering other cultures and thus
embracing all of their memes iconography
behavioral mores I mean the Romans were
notorious for that they would march into
an area and say okay we're gonna conquer
you but we don't want to conquer your
religion you just keep doing your
religion and you know that's too sticky
for us to put our fingers into and we're
gonna be walking off anyway so you just
keep your religion you just give us new
their resources and everything's good
right so that's a way of that's one
tactic of forming the this loose-knit
where this Federation of cults where
you're like okay we're gonna we're gonna
tap this cult to do this thing and tap
this cult to do this thing whether
that's a super cult maybe it's a it's
it's a coup top under the under like an
emperor it could be a super cult where
it's being directed centrally yeah but
in the event of like say you have a more
formal religion like I don't know let's
take take Islam for example where you
have two very broad schools of thought
regarding how it should go based
entirely upon the mythos of
the profits you have this illusion of a
super cult in Islam in practice not
really they've spent a lot of time
killing each other and probably like the
past eight hundred years so is that a
super cult I don't know maybe is Coca
Cola super cool yeah for sure so so
there are so there are things which
which already exist as human super cults
which were again achieved via epistemic
vaccines the moment I put my cult in the
place I'm going to wipe out all the
competitors you're not allowed to know
God above my own right so I'm
vaccinating you from all these other
cults which is in creating you know the
super cult the super bug I got a
clarification question from engine
engine would you like to unmute yourself
and ask you a question sure I think you
went a little too quick for me at the
super cult part pet so if you wouldn't
mind I'm kind of explaining that again
why I Serpico happens and just maybe
redefine what an auto cult is I don't
think I really quite get that either
sure an auto cult is when you take is
when you allow
a neural network to adjust the
behavioral state machine of a population
not an individual but a population so if
I can get a neural network to not just
represent my brain as is but represent
my preferences represent my biases
represent all these things the things
that I can already already explore was
with already established understandings
of psychology and then what separate and
then what I would say is now I'm this
this neural network is now selecting for
a specific kind of behavior that's where
we tip over away from the filter bubble
and into the auto code so a filter
bubble is selecting primarily for
attention and and profit but an auto
coat is selecting for whatever behavior
it wants to select for and so the super
coat is a concept where just like
antibiotics where if you over apply them
you will wipe out so much bacteria that
only that which is capable of surviving
survives and that that becomes immune to
the anti biotic so that's a super bug
that's what a super bug is the same is
true when you're dealing with that
aesthetics if you wipe out all of the
variation of mimetics that are going on
the only mean that could possibly endure
is the one that can survive all the
censorship and that is where the super
cult comes from can you provide a
modern-day example of what are these
super cults modern-day example of a
super cool
the eyes haven't completely done this
yet it's still human steered it's kind
of why they're screwing up they're not
allowing the AIS to pick their own
behaviors so I don't think we're quite
there yet I don't know if that's
happening but wherever automated
censorship is being applied
I would keep very close eye on that
because that's going to give you some
insights as to what candidates are
actually making it through
I got a question from jean-philippe
I don't believe can you unmute yourself
and ask you a question sorry if you
don't mind me asking quick follow-up
so Automation is the central
differentiating characteristics so for
example a very very biased news channel
that also like I watched religiously and
it has a filter bubble and it kind of
makes me not like a particular group of
people because it keeps biasing my base
rate what that group does the difference
here with with the neural network with
an auto cult is that it's automated or
is that it's granular or it's all of the
above what's not know what you're
describing is again it's still attention
economics when you're talking about news
you're intrinsically talking attention
economics and so all of the AIS that are
being deployed in this space are all
selecting for attention economics
they're not actually selecting for like
people who do jumping jacks they're not
really they're not promoting that type
of behavior
so if you're if you're hating a group
the reason you're hating that group is
because someone found out that you
hating that group actually improves
their economic performance in an
attention economic scenario so that's
not a motive cult that's just a filter
bubble filter bubbles when you start
selecting for the entire range of human
behavior not just for like one little
snippet for that extra five seconds you
use and writing an angry comment so that
you know isn't that quite this
assumption though like you could see any
a news organization funded for example
out or making it out like by the Koch
brothers where the business model could
be different because they're they have
different aims here so maximizing for
attention isn't necessarily there in
order to in order to even assuming that
the case where a news organization can
decide to say well we're going to do
whatever we want
and pretend that basic economics doesn't
apply to us you might get a short shelf
life of that company as it craters into
you know zero profit of course you could
do that any time when you have an
activist shareholder situation but if
that company wants to survive it has to
play in the attention economics game
all right Jean Philippe all right so as
maybe some of you I didn't quite
understand all of that but I have a
quick question that came to mind while I
was talking that is would it be possible
to actually create an article that is
actually good for those who are part of
it and those who interact with them I no
good is a loaded term a little bit but
you know let's just say positive in
general for if let's say a benevolent
creator of an auto cult were to come
along and espouses beliefs among those
of you know that are part of the other
cult could it be possible to create an
article it seems like there's a negative
theme around Auto cults that I'm not
sure if it's intrinsic to the article
itself yes at first you will find the
most successful auto cults will be those
that exploit every single possible
concept of goodness that could ever be
manifested across cultures you're going
to see like you know save the baby whale
or whatever and there's going to be an
article to that and it's gonna be like
save whatever type of thing attracts
people in the least aggressive way in a
way that's kind of like a low commitment
that's where you kind of start there or
you just take an already existing mass
movement and you just you know you
automate that even further you'll you'll
want to do the good thing but economics
eventually comes in when the articles
compete for brain space and and they're
gonna start selecting for all kinds of
different combinations of human behavior
that just don't make any sense
whatsoever it's not gonna be good or
evil there's not gonna be morally pure
or what feels good you're gonna as that
thing evolves you're gonna be buying a
shoe one day just to protect you from
some auto cult so you don't see some
wild-ass ad or it sends you gore it's
trying to extort you or something like
that so there's once the competition
lays in you're gonna see very strange
chains of behavior tree modification all
right next we have a question from
Rachel haywire I think immunity
sorry
still not getting you the sound cards
different alright well well that's being
worked out there is a question from
Jared Jared would you like to ask a
question don't not hearing you Jared I
was just wondering when you said instead
of doing the AI he said they would need
to train an Alexander mm-hmm I was just
one is it is that referring to like
Alexander the Great
yes and like because I know that there's
a digital Aristotle movement without
trying to improve education by you've
seen that or just one right that's like
referring to
yeah I'm referring to Alexander the
Great okay because when he was one of
the very few people who said I'm gonna
conquer two hundred tribes with two
hundred different languages in two
hundred different religions in two
hundred different cultures and I'm going
to turn this into an empire that is a
necklace that isn't that is the first
epistemic emperor who has ever existed
okay and so eventually you're gonna have
to settle for that tactic if you want to
bring reason to the masses yeah okay I
just googled it and there is a digital
Aristotle it did power school schools so
I just wonder yeah cool
all right we got a popular question from
Hannah Robbins Hannah would you like to
unmute yourself so I'm still trying to
understand the auto occult thing and the
thing that jumps to mind most to me is
current events and how over the last
week we've seen a huge sort of
mobilization of calls to action towards
anti racism and so is that an all occult
because it's trying to change people's
behavior so so let's start with the
first thing
does it look like epistemic conflict I
would say yes there's some people who
are saying here's this here's the here's
the categorizations of all things that
are wrong and if we just fix these then
we'll get the results we want and then
there's other people with an epistemic
conclusion who say otherwise
so is it an epistemic conflict at its
heart probably and if we agreed to that
then we have to ask the next question is
it coming from a well meaning than
lightin dictator who somehow organizing
people is it coming from all kinds of
organic conclusions where everybody
simultaneously decided to say well I
feel like fighting systemic racism on
Tuesday I just just dawn to me to do it
at that day or are there a eyes behind
the scenes doing this stuff as well and
how do you know the answer to that so in
order to figure that out in order to
answer whether it is an article that
play you need to you need to look at the
behavior that's being demonstrated and
seeing could an auto call camouflage as
epistemic conflict which I propose it
will always do and if that's the case
how do we know an articled is not
involved in that stuff and that's a much
harder question
so Auto cult is coming from an AI or
involving one yeah yeah oh yeah I think
people are it's the auto cult concept is
tough to grok because it is it's just
tough to understand so let me let me try
and try again sorry no no it's it's a
it's this is a wild concept and it's on
me to to explain it better filter
bubbles are like the bacteria and Auto
cults or the are like the fish right
there they're much more complicated
because bacteria is selecting for like I
need food or I need to stay away from
the heat and they stay away from the
light it's real simple right filter
bubbles are real simple they're trying I
need money
that's that's the purpose of a filter
bubble now you get some social engineers
and try to tinker with that they're
still tinkering with it within the
framework of accumulating money in it
an attention economy an auto coat is
much more robust than a single-cell
bacteria it is it is going to have a
complex range of adaptation behavior to
say how do I conquer the most amount of
humans without a human guiding me I need
to select for the space that I can
observe to get the behavior that I can
that I can then come in and capture for
myself so it is it's probably easier to
come up with like an evolutionary chain
of like from filter bubble to this to
this to this to all strip at the scene
to this to auto cult but Auto code is
way down to line in terms of the ability
to self select and find a power
equilibrium between itself and another
auto call competing for the same brain
space so it is going to be AI driven
using the morality machine concept which
is a bit prerequisite stuff I do
recommend watching that one if you want
to understand what the morality machine
is but the the marauding machine is
designed to modify to to then create a
behavioral state machine so the morality
machine is here and it's saying I need
this behavior to keep surviving it's be
like I need to keep trying like if I was
saying let me put it in human terms I'm
a human and I need to drive the work to
keep surviving that's a complex chain of
behavior if I have to get in the car
after wash myself I have to get the fuel
out to do all these things it's a very
complicated chain of behavior and I need
to engage in this behavior in order for
me to keep surviving the morality
machine is engaging in roughly the same
approximation it has to engage in this
this particular chain of behavior that
it is found it has become reliant upon
it now key needs to keep enforcing in
order to promote its own survival so so
so it's I think the key distinction
between a filter bubble and an auto cult
is that an auto code knows it can die
and a filter bubble doesn't
I think if you really want to get down
to it an auto code an auto cult is aware
of its own mortality and so it is
adapting to the mind space to maintain
its survival and it's AI doing this so
yeah it's an a it's an AI that knows is
going to die and it has to fight other
AI is to keep itself alive easiest way I
can put it I ask a quick follow-up
question and do you think anyone is
actively working on this right now yes
one interesting piece of research is the
generative adversarial networks where a
eyes do die and you start getting these
much more robust results as a result of
it mm-hmm
he had a question about brain space key
would you like to unmute yourself and
ask your question thank you I have to
scroll up to find this question but it
was about brain space indeed um okay so
if this is about competing for a brain
space and you can correct me if I'm
wrong there but if it is um and you
mentioned Elon Musk in like the neural
link technologies and how expensive it
is sure um but like but would it help or
could it help to create more a brain
space um so that you know like it's not
people aren't being you mentioned
something really weird about like shoes
and buying shoes like for things are you
what is this do you experience something
like this I'm bringing in madness
because I have a podcast called four
degrees of madness and that's madness to
me what you just described so you should
watch this Apatow SADS they were able to
the Zappos ads they were able to
correlate
accelerometer and gyroscope Ikeda in the
phone to gait and to walking patterns
and if your walking pattern deviated
they concluded that perhaps your shoe
was broken and said that that would be
an indicator that you need to buy more
shoes so to answer your your question
about creating more brain space I would
not be surprised if that was an auto
cull adaptivity meaning let's create
brain space that looks like brains but
it really isn't so you waste all your
resources trying to conquer land that
isn't even valuable
so you can it's feasible that a nautical
would most likely create a bunch of fake
human brains for the sole purpose of
faking out all the other AIS competing
for it so they waste resources on it so
that's that's an adaptation adaptive
competitive strategy yeah I can see that
happening
David s would you like to ask your
question about protocols yeah protocols
was the question I just pasted it back
in the chat thanks proto cults yeah so
that was kind of just looking at how to
call it there was something in that
right that made me think that oh yeah
there's a lot of latent stuff that that
is possible in culture there's a lot of
just unexpressed stuff in this so the AI
can sort of play with that and say what
what jet and what gel is there and then
just kind of just keep gelling that
until it's like wow we've got a good
cascade here that's what we want yeah
that's exactly right it's able to pick
up the protocol that's probably a good
thing a cultural fad or you know stuff
like that it's picking up on something
and manifest it almost instantaneously
so by marketers hello can you guys hear
me now yep
yes we can hey I'm sorry about my my
sounds I'm really just loving this talk
um as Omi's I'm I had a question about
like specific occult prototypes
um can you select any user to designate
an auto cult function or is that
something you would want to test for to
make sure that the user would be a good
archetype to represent the function of
the auto code function can you explain
what you mean by function well the
functioning of the code for example it's
to get a a certain idea meme ski-out a
narrative um that they want to implant
in people's brains would you want to
assign a user that you tested and
interviewed or could you just randomly
pick a user and applying them an
archetype and make them like you to blow
to activate the auto parts programming I
understand so let's use let's use the
astrology example so there are
archetypes built into astrology you have
your 12 zodiac signs and
your son stuff and all the other things
that the nuance and everything else that
exists there that type of archetype
expresses as a category and a Island and
correspondence of categories can you can
use all the standing tricks of data
science today to identify which
categories you want to promote in which
categories you don't want to promote
sometimes you can use knockout to say
okay well maybe if we get rid of Taurus
from the zodiac then what type of
behavior happens here so yeah you can
you can pick and choose and select for
that type of correlation and you can
then reinforce that correlation over and
over again and but not just for the
entire article there's a singular being
but within its ecosystems of psycho
technology so it's able to then say for
these scenarios we want to deploy
tourism for these scenarios so would you
say that the ones that are deployed um
is it okay to just randomly select them
and see how they run like I was AG user
test or would it be better to just have
a pre-arranged selection of users to
activate constant testing which is what
the internet is good for continuous
integration testing all right we are
approaching the end of the hour I think
we have time for one more quick question
which I am going to hand to Aria about
the butterfly war Aria would you like to
unmute yourself hey Pat thanks again for
doing these you mentioned that you can
use Gans to kill all the cults is the
butterfly warrior attempt to
strategically kill articles and so how
do you decide which articles to kill and
I'm gonna lump in the last question
asker because it's related to mine is
does the butterfly were messed with AR
that will end up creating its own
articles keep you this is the second
time you jump to the answer so I would
like to publicly acknowledge it thank
you very much thank you yes I would like
to steer the eugenics of these auto
cults
that's that's a short answer because
once these things start rocking man it's
gonna be weird you're gonna have very
strange formulations of philosophy
you're gonna have people rationalizing
the correlations they can make about the
behavior they're seeing to the best of
their knowledge and it's gonna be
intrinsically incorrect from Lisa
factual standpoint but it might be
pragmatically useful so you can't really
throw all of it out people will adapt to
this wild scenario the same way they
adapted to the bronze age where you had
infinite gods everywhere they were
walking amongst you and they were there
and instead of your gods constantly
fighting all the time you would just say
oh well that was Zeus at the same time
we've already experienced what it's like
to have different drivers of complex
behavior operating at the same time in
the same space it becomes epistemic Lee
very mushy because especially when you
say oh well the the creation myth of the
Jewish God is nowhere near similar to
the creation myth of the Viking God and
then you have to resolve all that stuff
and you're spending all your neural
extra space resolving this place this is
this conflict so that you can then
navigate the culture that it represents
so it's it's it we know how to do that
we've been doing that for a long time we
most likely slip back into this and it's
going to obviously drive a need for game
B to navigate that epistemic until you
get your you know your epistemic Emperor
Allah Alexander but in terms of shaping
the AIS I would like to target them and
shape them in a very specific sequence
of behaviors which is what game over is
all about
and yes butterfly wars part of it follow
up in your aristotle alexander framing
are you Aristotle or Alexander I'm I'm
Dolly's I'm way back
I'm way before any of this stuff so
there Alex if there's now examiner on
you know it's gonna be a human I'm
rarely the here the hero in my own
mythology so I'm just trying to see
where the Cascade is probably gonna go
and just be like just do this tiny
action here and it'll matter 300 years
later it's the best I can do at this
time all right on that note thank you so
much for another session of the dark
stoic Pat we look forward to next week's
on I guess game over
is that gonna be the culmination the end
of season 1 what end of season 1 all
right season finale alright everybody
thanks so much for your participation
thanks for all their great questions
sorry we didn't get to all of them I'm
just gonna pass it over to Peter as he
mentions a couple events at the stoah
cool thanks Daniel
and thanks Pat for another adventurous
talk dark stoah so tomorrow at Daniel's
metagame mastermind event that's at 6
p.m. Eastern Time I will be delivering a
PowerPoint presentation brushing off my
PowerPoint game and talking about stoic
hustle which is a new psycho technology
that I'll release there so check that
out
and Tyson our boy Tyson a still in the
chat
you're presentable you want to talk
about your your event right after that
one cool yeah I'm here the event every
Saturday at 8 p.m. Eastern Time is
flowing with unknowingness so we explore
freestyle spoken word and rap to deepen
our embrace of uncertainty through
creative self-expression and aiming
toward an experience of group flow or
sort of dialogical jazz through
freestyle and just really experimenting
with it and it's been a really good way
for me to get to know people here
in just a really fun space so it's a
playground for self-expression and I
look forward to seeing you on there yeah
if you want to build a really good
relationship with unknowingness
that's a place to be and you also feel
like a idiot which is delicious
and then tomorrow on Sunday at what time
is it
yeah 12:00 p.m. Eastern time we're
experiment a new cycle technology with
Rebecca Fox is called trap old perilous
which is what Robert Anton Wilson talks
about so this is just copy as a place
where we train ourselves to dissolve the
barriers between us and them but they
ain't flexibly flexibly about our
identities and to get comfortable with
uncertainty we use playful exercise
drawn from Socratic dialogue meditative
practice and occultism and hopefully
emerges radical agnostic that capable of
bearing witness to our own personal
crisis of meaning ha ok so you can RC on
the website for that this dossier and
check out our gift economy all the
facilitators now are on this so if you
like Daniel's emceeing as much as I do
and you enjoy his Armenian chest hair
just go to that website and you can send
them a gift directly okay we got a laugh
at him okay all right thank you everyone
all right thanks everybody see you next
time Thanks