all right welcome everyone this is Brett
pleasure of doubt with a another
awakening from the meaning crisis
discord QA our guest today is frequent
voices with fur Becky
diello goes yellow goes Titian is that a
word
Andrew Sweeney thank you Andrew for
being here today thank you thank you for
having me so Andrew is a writer teacher
and musician podcaster rabble-rouser
and he says he's in service of goodness
truth and beauty and so so Andrew we've
seen you talk a lot with John on you
have a bunch of conversations on your
channel and John's channel but you you
rarely talk about you so I actually
don't know that much about you from
listening to these conversations so so
I'm hoping you can tell us a little bit
about yourself you know your background
your journey and you know how you have
you've come to to meet John and get
involved with this this meeting crisis
project that we're all working on here
okay well I'm a Canadian expat living in
a Vaughn French which is a suburb of
Paris I'm I say that at McGill
University in literature and I've always
been kind of a amateur writer and for
most of my 30s and 40s I wrote songs and
then you know as social media kind of
evolved I became a blocker of some kind
and and got a bit of a following on
medium for various articles I wrote and
discovered genre Vicki you know around
the time when Jordan Peterson was was
huge had an immediate connection to him
to his ideas I've been practicing in a
school of Buddhist Tantra for a while so
I'm familiar with Buddhism and but I've
also studied you know comparative
religion quite a bit and philosophy so
so of course I mean I sort of ate up a
John Jones work because it seemed to
converge with a lot of my own interests
and when he put out his awakening for
the meaning crisis series I figured the
only way I could really digest it or you
know get it fully because of its the
technical nature of a lot of it and I'm
not a scientist
my background is more in literature and
philosophy so I don't know anything
about cognitive science but I I know a
few things about you know art and
literature I thought that I would write
about and I did a series on medium I
wrote about 16 essays and each essay was
based on three of the other series three
of his videos and I tried to sort of
condense his ideas in a way that I could
understand so and communicate his ideas
in a way that would make them more
accessible to a lot of people I knew who
perhaps would get get bogged down by by
the more technical aspects of the series
so I thought a series was important and
I thought and I wanted to propel him
promote it on some level and then I got
into a discussion with him and I found
him to be a real Mensch is that the
right word no just a real sweet guy and
and then you know and then I I also did
a series a letter series with
Christopher mastropiero which was
suggested by Peter Lindbergh and and I
sort of connected to it to Christopher
also and and I'm finding that the
discussions that I am enjoying are try
try try try logs right the deagle
with three people and I'm finding that
that is an interesting dynamic in terms
of my discussions with John but I'm a
teacher here in Paris I teach media and
yeah that's I think that's that's me I'm
just a you know in all rounds you know
online sort of troublemaker
as I say rabble rouser I hope that's
great thing thank you for that and you
mentioned you're a musician now now we
chat it beforehand and if we have time
at the end I think and and your sound is
is is okay enough we may get a song out
of you
a song or two out of you today sure so
that's that's very exciting so so you
have a you'll be YouTube a YouTube
channel and so and you've talked you
seem to talk to a wide variety of people
on this channel
how would can you tell us about your
channel well yeah I have again it's a
channel it's that I put them first out
on YouTube and then I have and then I
put them in podcast format and I have
actually two podcasts one is with a
gentleman named Alexander Bart who's
philosopher from Sweden and I started
sort of doing a podcast with him we're
going to have a talk with John in a
couple of weeks the three of us and also
also a guy named Zack Stein basically
what I'm trying to do right now is have
really deep conversations and in in a
trial log and in the three-person format
because I find there's a nice dynamic
with that so so my youtube is mostly
conversations with John with Alexander
bard with John and Christoph and Zack as
Eckstein and a couple other people like
bonito Roy and Jonathan Rosen
I'm quite a quite a few people but I'm
narrowing down my guest
so that we can go into depth with the
people I'm already enjoying talking with
rather than interviewing a wide spectrum
of people cuz I find it more like a
little bit different and more more
enriching than just like an interview
format so so what is the meaning crisis
mean to you
I think the meaning crisis has been
people have been talking about it for a
long time since probably Nietzsche since
probably Nietzsche declared God what God
was dead I mean if there's one place
where the meaning in crisis starts it's
probably an elitist declaration of God
God was dead in the present time I think
the meaning crisis has to do with that
the transformation of the human person
in the age of Internet and social media
so it starts off with let's say the
separation of you know that the dying
the death of Christianity in a way and
and and then this the scientific
worldview coming online and then that
being corrupted and and then just just
an all-pervasive you know feeling of
neat meaningless the list that pervades
people who are without roots let's say
the philosopher Simon well in French
posit deicing ma there's there's like it
lacking in roots so I think I think a
lot of people feel very very ruthless
and and I think that we're moving from a
very sort of you know we're moving from
the this sort of West Western
Christianity into a nomadic a nomadic
world and we're kind of going forward
and back words at the same time and I
think we're in transition so I think the
meaning crisis is all the things that
that John talks about like homelessness
dama side you know the sort of let's say
scientific reductionism lack of
understanding what is science and a lack
of understanding what is religion and
then the lack of Philip Sophia he calls
it so a lack of understanding of
philosophy either so we just have this
world that is very left brain oriented
and propositional II oriented and
and politically oriented and that is
sort of unaware of its own deep meaning
roots does that make sense yeah
absolutely yeah and now you have a you
have a really great YouTube video with
John really focusing on on the religion
that's not a religion and I I encourage
everyone to go listen to it because he
really they really have a very
down-to-earth conversation about it you
know says John is capable of having
these conversations on so many different
levels and sometimes you know it's very
high level and I find when he talks when
he was talking to you about the religion
that's not a religion it was very it was
very down-to-earth so I think it's a
great way for people to get up to speed
on it dawn on John's views of it what
what what and we hear we hear sort of
feel that we're sort of part of the
process of crafting the religion that's
not a religion there's a lot of
discussion we have going on which what
it might look like what structure might
be what do you think of the religion
that's not a religion and is it an
answer a part of an answer to the
meaning crisis well I think that John is
very clear that we need religio which
means we need we need this meaning
making community and we need we need
when he called psycho technologies to be
able to connect with with you know
meaning because a lot of the you know
technology is sort of reduces us to
reduces us to a lot less than than what
we are and I think he acknowledges that
religion allow it allows us to connect
with you know a deeper sense of meaning
in that and that that's that's been lost
and that a lot of people cannot connect
to any kind of religion anymore and they
feel on one hand they feel really happy
and gleeful that religion is over and
somehow that they're free but in a way
that there's still this enormous Pole
right and people's lives with without
that because it has to be acknowledged
that the religion creates community and
and also the lack of this metaphysical
basis of the Western society makes us
shallow and consumeristic and so so
again it's this notion of God being
being dead it's this notion of when God
is dead you know Nietzsche said that you
know we'll never wipe the blood off her
hands so we've tried to kill God and
we've been trying we tried we spent the
whole 20th century trying to kill God
and in a way God sort of comes back like
we seem to need this principle in some
way but then other people like John or
you know in the Buddhist tradition is a
non theistic tradition would argue that
you know there's also a non-theistic
possibility and I think John's view is
that we should go beyond theism and
non-theism at some kind of a way and
that maybe is the religion that's not a
religion so we don't have the
supernatural aspects of religion and we
can include science without a problem
but we also have second technologies
which will you know expand our
consciousness get us into flow States
get us into communitas get us into
communion with each other so I in our in
our discussion
I was defending tradition because I I
practice in a tradition and sometimes I
feel I don't want to advertise that to
people and other times I feel it's
important just to say okay I'm going to
stick with a particular tradition on the
other hand I understand it's I don't
have an answer to that question of
whether we need a tradition or not or
whether there could be a post religious
tradition or a religion that's not a
religion I don't have an answer in fact
to me it's more like a question that's
more like a coin
I don't think the second in their world
is that satisfies me on some deep level
fundamentally so so there is an aspect
perhaps I disagreement there but perhaps
not yeah I mean I think I'm for one are
you there yeah it's Kenny oh hello sorry
I was muted I mean so I'm just problems
earlier I was afraid that I was talking
into a void no problem sorry about that
yeah I mean I forgot why I'm one of the
nuns who who abandoned the belief in God
at a young age and and in doing so I I
also let go of the community aspect in
the psycho technology aspect you know
the ritual aspect of the religion and
and I got some feeling that that gap so
I think certainly for for someone like
me something like the religion that's
not a religion is strongly strongly
appealing and and I think I think that's
a big group of hoo-hoo-hoo John's
talking to us us nuns so we've got some
questions the first question is from
Mark who wants to ask about the
relationship between the meaning crisis
and music Oh interesting question well I
think he might want to frame it more
Pacific so or mark did you want to did
or was that was that it yeah no no let
me give me some framing if I could I
mark the fever Andrew nice to hear yeah
it's I've heard some of but not all of
your talks with verve a key and an
especially Christopher
and they're they're very lovely and I'm
glad that you do that work so the thing
that I sort of sense and maybe
incorrectly but I sense that every time
there's an opportunity in there to talk
about the psycho technology aspect or or
the aspect of of what we can do about
the sort of meaning crisis that then I
think you have framed quite well by the
way you seem to slip in music and the
music sort for me sort of touches on the
symbolic as well as the ritual as well
as the community Oz so it's a it's a big
play and it's a big part of the
religions right so it's a big part in in
in essence of religio so I wanted to
give you a chance here to expand to us
on how like if you were just to I don't
actually like doing this but I put that
but I think it's important like if you
were to put music lens on and see the
meaning crisis just through that and I
want you to just sort of freeform and
expand how that interacts with the
meaning crisis okay well what came to
mind as you were speaking was you know I
read a lot of Nietzsche in my 20s and
Nietzsche said that life is not worth
living without music uh-huh and we know
let a lot of what is what is put out
there as music it's not exactly music
it's sort of a substitute for music in a
way and then there's music which which
taps into something probably Eve deeper
than language I would say I would say
music goes goes goes deeper than
language it is a language in itself all
right it is a symbolic language as you
say and it's a it's a language of
meaning but it's a language of meaning
that doesn't require you know words or
in in a sense or if it's a song or
something like that it's myth myth or
poetic and the propositions are are
deeply connected to our
our embodied feeling so there's the
cognitive feel right now because people
are in such a language world there's so
much texting and language everywhere
feels to me there's so much there's so
much noise you know verbal noise and and
so much of music is actually noise that
that that that people will have a hard
time to connect with music and in the
way probably they in in a meditative way
that they used to at one quarter right
also because we hear a lot of compressed
music no coming through you know
computers and mp3's it's very compressed
it's like it's a music that doesn't
breathe that doesn't doesn't move and
it's it's it's music that's designed to
to give you a hit right give you a
sensation give you out you know pop song
is is a formula it's three minutes long
and it's like an orgasm but but but but
something that is a bit more
sophisticated takes you on a journey
with it not just the peaks but the
valleys the ups and downs of life so I
think music will always be the the
creative spirit will always need to
express itself in music it can't do
otherwise so there always will be music
and great music out there but but I
think I was thinking the other day about
how we're living in a time of the part
of the meaning crisis is there's too
much of everything right there's an
excess so you have to decide what is
what is you know meaningful and what is
not whereas before I guess you would you
know you would save up your money to go
to a concert or or there be a you know
there even further in the past there
would be special events where you go in
hear music and it would be like an
important and special event it wouldn't
be just this thing that you put in the
background to to distract you from your
own you know sense of meaninglessness
so so music music is the way we form
meaning I think music is the way the
soul forms meaning in its most refined
sense perhaps correct painting as well
it's different it's all vibrational it's
fine but vibration so so yes music is it
as a remedy to the mini-crisis but it
also requires I think real music you
have some today so so I think that the
creation of music needs to be stepping
outside of noise and going in into
silence and that music can emerge the
meaning so so when you talk about the
meaning crisis in early in its relation
to music I think that's the meaning
crisis is noise and music is the find
the fine single in the noise is that
does that does that is that I'm not
another think it's a I'm answering your
question but is that something to work
with or is that something no that's
really excellent you put a lot in there
and I just just as a quick hopefully
follow-up so I mean in some sense in
some sense I
let me in a way that will assist the the
meeting crisis in general we we need to
have a deeper less noisy environment
especially within the music environment
and and that that helps to maybe tune
the the psycho technologies that John is
talking about is that something like
what you're implying
well the psycho technologies perhaps
will open us up to the music like for
example you know you for me meditation
is like a hygienic necessity in a noisy
world right so so practice of meditation
always to me I was that I have always
meditated I mean I meditated for a long
time and I find the music emerges from
those states of meditation and I think
that you know just like you know the
they had to invent sports and gyms
because everybody was living in offices
right I mean working in offices so they
needed you know you needed people
started jogging and going to the gym
because they need you need to move your
body on someone in the same way because
we have so much noise and distraction
you know meditation becomes the psycho
technology you know the basic psycho
technology I think to help us with the
meaning crisis John would say music and
music and some kind of movement also
which which I agree with but the point
is really to get into a state where a
rest receptivity or you can actually
hear the word we're here the world
you're not just hearing the noise noises
in your brain and they're noise inside
and outside yeah that's that's
interesting I'm gonna have to chew on
that quite a while you've given me a lot
to think about it I really appreciate it
thank you very much thank you very much
that's a really great question yeah I'd
like to talk to John about that maybe
I'll bring that up with him in our next
discussion what one thing we're playing
around with on on this forum and some
other forums are ecstatic dance parties
we had to have one tonight which is
focusing on shadows yes so movement
activity to integrate the shadow aspects
and sort of dealing with difficult
energies such as anger grief frustration
laws the first time we're trying it
tonight
organized by want to remembers and so
that's we're playing around with sort of
the meditative aspects of music as well
mm-hmm yeah I know John was saying
something about all you know we do need
alternate alternate states I'm not
that's not the right word altered states
sorry yeah we do we're going to go into
altered states because we need altered
this is altered states to break the
framing you know of our world because it
becomes dull and mechanical if we don't
so we can do that in a very unconscious
stupid way right or we can do that in a
very in a ritualistic you know kind of
space sort of a safe ritualistic space
where you can expect suppress all as
dark music energies whatever in VR or
light energies it whatever in music and
dance and and you can express trauma and
you could express all that and and of
course that that goes back to to
shamanism and that goes back to area
that the religion that's not a religion
it's actually uh in my view of the
religion that's not a religion is
actually of a primordial religion right
in a sense because because we are we are
creatures who who are made to to to to
practice transcendence so so you know
which we do and all in all of these ways
right through art through as you're
saying movement through through
meditation all those things
so so I think I think movement you know
I think especially I think we need we
need to express you know some people you
know dirt chef's had this theory that we
have three brains you know we have our
and the first brain is is is
intellectual brain so so we need some
how to exercise our intellectual brain
and then that we have the heart and
that's the feeling aspect of our
existence and we need to exceed to
express and transcend aspects of that
and then we have the body which help
motility and the you know the the third
brain and that's movement and so so
those three those three things are what
make us human I mean that's one way of
looking at it anyway
excellent aunt Alicia oh yeah yeah yeah
hi so aunt Alicia has a question thanks
for that by the way what do you make of
Irv a keys critique of Romanticism
oh well it's it's romantic Gnosticism
you know has its darkness and dangers I
think we need a certain kind of
Romanticism and I sort of think we moved
between romanticism and classicism and
there's this kind of movement back and
back and forth the kind of romanticism
he's criticizing is you know sort of the
the polar opposite of let's say
scientific reductionism so on one
extreme you know scientific reductionism
which which only believes in the
propositional world or the you know what
can be measured and described in science
and then well the romantics want to just
smash all that and and live you know for
the self or something like that and then
there is a decadence to that but on the
other hand the romantics are very very
important because they open a whole new
territory for human exploration so I'm
quite fond of the romantics if I
understand his criticism of course
perhaps it's because he's you know he
comes yes he comes from a scientific
background then and my background is is
has been in the arts
you know mostly men in literature so I
think next one is Dave David you have a
question sure yeah so your work spans a
quite a broad range of different
thinkers with regards to people like
Peterson bard Rho IDW and how does Verve
a key fit in to that broader
conversation I'd say more specifically
what are his unique contributions to
that broader conversation of meaning and
religion but also what are the
limitations as well that you see with
his works and also the religion that's
not a religion well I wouldn't want to
talk about his his limitations you know
we all have our limitations in that
sense to be critical because I think he
is his contribution his intense and and
and full-bodied and important I think it
with respect to people like Bart Barden
Peter said though you know they're more
or less a extroverted thinkers you know
and so Peterson is out there going for
the gutter role in fighting the culture
war and that sort of thing and I don't
think John has a disposition that wants
to do that I think John is very a very
careful thinker and he's a very
respectful thinker and I think Peterson
and bard paint broad strokes you know
they're they're they're more like
Nietzsche you know Nietzsche was
supposed to feel as it philosophize with
a hammer and I don't think that's John
that's John's contribution I think it's
something else and I think he's right -
he's working on the meta meaning crisis
as well as the crisis so he's not he's
not directly engaging with you know
political concerns or that sort of thing
and
in that respect um yeah I resonate with
him because you know but I think there's
different strokes for different
different you know people different
folks yeah hmm yeah and I guess I guess
the the the the question on romanticism
is is interesting because I I'm a I'm a
romantic by by by disposition by nature
and and also I came from a very secular
background and and I and then I became
appreciative of spiritual and religious
traditions whereas he came from a very
fundamentalist Christian background and
and sort of you know saw the limitations
of that and moved here so he his
movement was is towards rationality and
and he's trying to expand the meaning of
rationality which was which I appreciate
but I'm but I guess I I sometimes I want
to I want to defend the pathos aspect
the bard talks about that the the end
the and I say the mythos and the pathos
and he's very into the logos you know
John is is very much about dialo goes
that's that's his thing not that he
doesn't understand those other things
but but that that that's his emphasis
and other maybe other people have
different emphasis these are the people
you mentioned does that make sense yeah
thank you
yeah maybe Joe I feel like I feel like
you have an answer to your question like
and I'd like to hear your answer to that
question somehow sure I'll just be brief
um I think that integral was very strong
in getting people who are religious who
are tied to those mythos pathos to be
able to bring that into a postmodern age
you know with
concepts like the conveyor belt with the
three phases of spirit etc but what was
missing was a way for people who are
gonna be more rationally secular minded
to have a religion and that's what I
believe John brings to it hmm right yeah
that was missing within the picture
right so you have integral and Peterson
who are trying to update and redo the
five the religions up the different
stages of development but what about all
the other people who are who are secular
who are in that rational state so what
can they do how can they have a habit to
religio and and that's what Jon brings
key key people's minds who are of that
sort yeah and he also has the dialogue
with people who are religious so so he
doesn't he his his lip he has a a
semipermeable membrane so to speak like
he has his views and but he also he's
also a very graceful way we're willing
to discuss that with a lot of you know
people who do have you know who do
practice religious traditions and and I
think they can learn from him you know
so yeah so he's like a bridge
essentially and if you'll want to get
into it like he's like a bridge in a
gateway that people um if they wanted
they can continue on to some of those
other things I've mentioned thank you
thank you thanks so a k-12 has a
question oh I keep on meeting myself
sorry a k-12 has a question Andrew I've
been a big fan of your your youtube
series for quite a while now I started
with Alexander bard thing and I just
didn't sleep for a week so yeah my
question is a little bit general so you
can punt it back if you want me to ask
you more specifically but I'm basically
just curious about what you think about
mervy keys Oh like psycho technology
thing and like if you've ever read Ted
Chang the science fiction writer like
kind of conversation augmentation
and stay pure Wharf and like tools for
thinking and their potential impact and
role in this I'm not aware of those
psycho technologists you met you
mentioned what do I think of John's idea
of psycho technology is that is that the
question well I guess it's just like or
what cycle of technology he has to offer
god damn it let me see if we test this
more specifically no worries I'm just
not familiar with with those guys you
mentioned okay maybe if I start with an
example and an expanded that'd be easier
so come see if your hypothesis is the
idea that like the language you use
actually changes the way you think so
there's a he wrote a story about it and
there's a movie called a rival involving
you hello
you've cut out there can you hear me so
it it's it's basically the idea if
you've seen a rival have you seen that
movie by any chance maybe yeah I think
so is that the movie with the big weird
thing that is that is in the middle of a
cornfield or something and then these
people kind of meet this this alien
these aliens that arrive exactly yes
so in learning the alien language like
she starts like sheep she changes I give
me it's a little bit a relationship with
time changes but I guess the the
prototypical example of this is like but
there's a theory that Chinese people are
better at math because 82 in Chinese is
810 to vs 82 so it's a little bit easier
doing addition because the way you
literally say the words and so at least
John introduced me to the idea that like
thinking about conversation and language
as technologies as Psychlo technologies
well everybody's just obsessed with
self-driving cars and AI and so I'm
curious if I frame it that way like what
if at you have any ideas or anything
comes up for you in terms of
nomination or potential psycho
technologies you think that can be very
valuable or play a role and as well you
know I can I can the psycho technologies
that that I work with are in the you
know the tantric tradition so that's a
whole rich area of and that's a big
discussion and and also some yoga's and
that that kind of thing in terms of you
know I'm not I'm not a hyper
technological sci-fi type and so so so
but I do think that I do think that that
that well yeah I could say that I know a
bit Heidegger says that language is the
house of being so if you think of
language as a house as a place that you
live it gives you a different
perspective of what language is rather
than just a way of communicating Oh a of
you know discussion propositions or
passing information back back and forth
it's actually the place you live so
that's one thing that comes to mind the
other thing that comes to mind is that
as we communicate you know in this new
sort of you know internet space you know
our our language the way we speak and
think and talk is is being morphed and
distorted and changed and becoming a new
kind of creature so it is kind of like
you know this woman eating the meeting
the alien and then and then she changes
we're changing as we make this because
we meet the you know first the the
technology but then also the the yeah
you know what's underneath the
technology the the ideas and the
software and algorithms and and all that
so we're changing and I was listening to
Jordan hall talk about how it's like
when you're driving a car
you know you know you know you're used
to a car I used to have a car drives you
can shift the gears and you can go back
and forth and it's very smooth and
simple for you and then suddenly you
have to drive in a some other kind of
vehicle and and you lose your dimensions
you have you know you lose the the sense
of where you are and I think that's
where we're at right now we're losing
our sense of who we are and where we are
and and I think making working with
language at least in my own experience
as a psycho technology through through
writing through communicating is much
more important perhaps than we think so
I don't know if I've answered your
question at all but that's where that's
where it took me
well well what comes up for me when you
say that it's kind of like I guess I
would throw it back to you based on what
you said what do you think is the rate
limiting factor on the impact of the
psycho technologies that you talked
about Tantra or language and the way you
write it do you think it's more a
limiting factors what's that I guess
what I mean to say is like in this kind
of this trend of change who could be
most who do you think could have the
unlocking role or has the most important
role now is that the is it the tool
builder is that the poet is that the
proselytizer is it the teacher probably
the artist and engineer those two key
things simultaneous started taking over
like the the you know I think we have to
be more and more creative and I'm
thinking of I thought I'm engineer
because because engineers build things
right for example how could an engineer
be useful for the kind of Tantra psychic
technologies you're talking about well
it may be an engineer you know a
beautiful space for people to practice
Tantra or something no or they could
yeah and that's my mean that's the outer
stuff right and the inner stuff the
artistic stuff is oh you know what I
when I would call Chandra I do hesitate
to use that word because it's been so
abused
you know the worth or Tantra often means
it's it's sort of some kind of it's been
so sexualized and all that but but what
it really is is is the artistic working
of energies in your body and
relationships and and it's a very
artistic process so so yeah I would look
to the artists and the engineers I'm a
tool builders that's extremely helpful
that you're saying cuz I'm always
looking for what is the compliment and
who to learn from so thanks a lot
cool thank you very much sherry you've
got a question yeah my question are you
familiar with odd bar fields book saving
the appearances I haven't read it yet I
I've been wanting to read Barfield and
because I've heard him mention quite
quite a bit and so I'm sorry I haven't
read it yeah no okay well you might not
be able to answer the question and
that's fine but do you see the meeting
crisis as being a necessary evil
necessary evil in the sense that it it's
a it's a journey it's leading us to a
more integrated approach mm-hmm that's
interesting i was i was reading rené
girard you know ready to road yeah
he was I was reading and he was talking
about the scandal right and how Jesus
was saying the scandal is necessary but
but what was he who perpetuates this
scandal or something like that I don't
remember the exact thing so so in a way
in a way it happens it's necessary that
this this fall you know and this is how
in a way it's deep theological question
isn't it it's like the fall from Eden
right this is how we would become
conscious right this is how we we fall
from Eden we we start to wear clothing
and use tools and stuff but we
also suffer we also we also developed
weapons of mass destruction and you know
we you know so we develop evil as well
in the process and so then then what
we're in this situation so necessary
evil I I think it's just an existential
situation I don't think we could say
necessary or unnecessary but it's it's
how it is and and and and then so we
have to find meaning in this radically
world that is you know driving us
towards fragmentation and
meaninglessness does that make any sense
yeah yeah it does and if you haven't
read it yet you should okay thank you
that's great yeah see the guy does he
talk about needles and things like that
I was thinking of coke coke Corbin I
think okay study an ideology ah yeah
idolatry idolatry in the sense it's it's
not it's not really a religious book it
has a lot to do with language idolatry
and iconic vision you know being able to
look through something and instead of
being stuck at it and he has a theory of
original participation in the sense that
that's what the ancients were involved
in where everything they you know the
water they swam in was a metaphysical
soup so to speak yeah and yeah I was
just I was just listening to this this
guy he was a podcast maybe some of you
know him
Daniel what's his name not respectin
Berger the other one the guy who has the
emerged podcast forget his name
Daniel Thornton and he just came back
from a 75 day retreat and he was saying
that you know the kind of experiences he
had on those retreat like he was
having some experience where he felt
like he was being you know stabbed by
demons or something like this or and
then he had leaper than he was having
these you know he was being he felt
connected to these you know sort of
celestial beings of some kind and all
these things were happening to them and
he said that he thought that it's like
the Western world really does everything
it can to to either let's say make that
experience trivial make those kinds of
experiences trivial trivial or or or
make it so that we're so super super
saturated that we can't actually linked
linked to that that you know that
metaphysical depth that that so so so
again when we when we're laughing or
looking you know at ancient superstition
and religion we have to remember that
people had had connections who had an
experiences with stuff that that we can
no longer relate to yeah and then we
take a bunch of drugs and then you know
but and then we would go back to her you
know you know what I mean yeah he uses
an example of the word meaning breath
wind and spirit yeah so if you know if
an ancient person was one walking
through the woods and a wind blew on
them it was all three of those things at
the same time whereas for us there you
know our our our landscape has become
somewhat flattened exactly it's no
longer three-dimensional exactly I mean
that's often why you were personify
those things you would personify the
elements right and you would describe
them in layers like female goddesses or
something or you know you know the air
wind water and he personified them
because because that helped you to
understand the depth of them you know
right and that's not not not to just see
them you know
in water as being you know water is
being h2o or something right a bunch of
chemicals and but actually something
that is you know some angelic presents
are you know whatever you want to call
it in the Buddhist Tibetan Buddhist
tradition they call it Dakini so all the
elements are Nike nians feminine spirits
and things like that but so those are
psycho technologies which are you know
which we laugh at which we don't take
seriously today but right perhaps we
should yeah and he's really good at
demonstrating how language has flattened
the landscape yeah it's very good okay
thanks for that other tip I like to read
yeah thank you very much
thanks Laura thanks sherry Janna you
have a question hi
so I was wondering if you can say
something about the role of art
education in the meaning crisis and how
it might help and how it might be
failing to do that at the moment hmm
well I think by giving kids a bunch of
tablets or something like that that's a
big mistake I think education has to be
well I was talking to Zach Stein about
that and Zach has an incredible book I
recommend it to everybody called
education between two worlds well what
he promotes is what he calls the one
room schoolhouse which would include all
the generations right so one of the
problems with our education system right
now is I think that it we're you know I
think it's unnatural that kids are
corraled into age-groups whereas you
know if you put if you put a younger kid
with an older kid you have this
transmission from the older kid and
and so for the Arts I think arts arts is
arts arts is the part of the thing that
people have been lacking with arts is I
would have call it transmission and I
haven't thought too much about it or
tried to articulate that but that seems
right to me I know my daughter she's
she's 11 they did I went to this theater
group and they they just had a bunch of
kids kind of expressing themselves right
there was no content it was all just
about being funny and cute and and that
kind of thing so so I think kids are
lacking a metaphysical education they're
lacking probably a vertical aspect
whereas there's older kids and teachers
and that kind of thing and they're just
being told to sort of express themselves
and of course but but they're not being
they're not being taught actual arts no
so so I'm not saying that the
self-expression isn't extremely
important but but I think I think they
need I think you need a learning process
a long learning process I was thinking
of the painter season you know the
painter stays and he he was trained in
the classical tradition and at one point
he just got fed up and and burned all of
his paintings and then he created
Impressionism you know he created this
new kind of painting and it looks like a
postcard to us now we can't really see
how radical that was when it first came
out because there was no perspective and
you know you could look at the Mont
sainte-victoire
from many different angles and see
something different so but but he went
through that training you know so I
think arts training would be I think is
it is absolutely essential are just
expressing yourself in an artistic way
it's you know nice everything but
I have a feeling that that that that
yeah there should be more arts arts
actual arts education in schools and
that they should be they should have
they should bring back like history of
our classes so people are just you know
kids can learn about tradition so I
sound kind of conservative I guess what
I'm talking about
no I understand where you're coming from
Thank You Nick it's all so radical so
it's like because it's radical because
because
if you've read even Ilic this book d
schooling society you know I really
think that the school system is one of
the big institutions that is collapsing
and has to collapse and that is
perpetuating the meeting crisis and then
it has to be completely made on some
level with a deeper sense of the arts in
terms of the embodied arts let's say art
in terms of the body also training the
body as well as the mind and training
your your somatic sense your felt sense
your meaning sense in fact excellent I
could I could I could react to this but
it's four o'clock I don't want to delay
everything I have nowhere to go it's the
end of my day here in France
I've already has more questions I have
time go ahead unit oh I mean yeah I well
it's an interesting topic to me and I
had a this religious C type of primary
school where we did a lot of those
embodied kind of practices but then
indeed it was that just express yourself
without really integrating its
maybe that's also has something to deal
with this romanticism that Jonah's
criticizing and and on the other hand
you have this very strict this is what
art is and how it's supposed to be and
like everything outside of that is not
considered art and I think we have to go
somewhere in between
yeah
I think I think modern art has something
to say as well I don't I'm not
suggesting we should go back to just a
classical classical art ways Thank You
Nick you've got a question yeah I had a
kind of two questions one kind of about
Vajrayana Buddhism itself and then the
other about your relationship to it I'm
a little bit less familiar with
Vajrayana than I am
mahayana and hinayana and was wondering
if it would be fair to characterize it
as a kind of theistic formulation of
Buddhism and then the other question is
I was wondering what attracted you to
the Vajrayana form over the other two
forms I would say that Vajrayana is is
not theistic but it uses skillful means
it uses a lot of skillful means which is
called a paya and Buddhism which appear
to be a theistic but but finally the
theistic aspect of it the devotional
aspect of it you say dissolves but it's
a process so so there's different you
know there's very many different stages
like youyou for exemple in one stage of
our journey you visualize yourself as
the deity that's some kind of a deity
but that's and then you visualize making
offerings to a DV so you're a deity
giving to a deity which is very foreign
perhaps to to how we
you know Buddhism is some kind of
rationalistic you know yeah I think that
a lot of people how they they see
Buddhism in the West is is actually
through the lens of stoicism or
epicureanism or something whereas
whereas it's not actually how real even
my Hana Buddhism actually is so so so I
can see why you you you why why Jenna
would be criticized as being a theistic
form of Buddhism but actually it's still
grounded in the Mahayana in terms of
philosophy they always say that
Nagarjuna who was the great logician
right of Buddhism not good you want to
know am I saying that right he he had a
sort of limit at some point with his
logic he and he went in to vote your
honor because because he couldn't get
any further with his his logic with the
propositional he just kept
deconstructing everything until there
was nothing left you know people think
you know the the post modernists are
deconstructive constructionist they
should read Naga Juwanna who
deconstructs practically everything so
so I I think Vaudrey onna is is not a
practice it's not a practice that
appeals to everybody it appeals to
certain types perhaps
whereas other types you know other
people prefer Zen I've done a lot of Zen
I started off from stem as well because
then is a much more it's a less you know
what's in Zen you do one thing and Vadra
know there's 84,000 different kinds of
things you can do and then you just do
one thing that gives you the idea as
sort of you know idea there's supposed
to be an eighty four thousand different
practices in front Rio whereas in Zen
there's you know you just sit you walk
in the chop wood carry water
you know that's interesting take your
pick
you know whatever it appeals to you
whatever you are whatever you you know
meet me something but I think the
tantric prep is interesting for our
times in some on some level because I
think it's our it's it's radical to some
degree it seems like that difference you
highlighted between Zen and Vajrayana is
almost can almost be mapped on to her
fakies suchness and more this
interesting yeah yeah that's interesting
yeah that's it's interesting as well
what you brought up with I can't
pronounce his name yes in that
deconstruction and how the
deconstruction seemingly leads him back
towards a type of iconography which you
know I'm coming from a well very bizarre
Christian worldview perhaps where it
seems like that type of thing in some
sense it seems like one must deconstruct
Christianity to get back to the icon of
Christ and I was wondering how much
similarity there was in his kind of
creation or I had enough this bathroom
and I read I read Matthew Pazos book
yeah you know Jonathan pazzo right yep
and I read his book and it really
reminded me of you know he was he was
talking about the symbolism in the book
of Genesis and and he described it
almost like like like a Buddhist mandala
or the mandala of some kind name and all
and a lot of the symbolism that I know
from Roger gana I was I was I was seeing
it through that so that was very
interesting for me and I know that I
know that the earth into Christian
Orthodox tradition they
more with icons and emotionalism and you
know you know that's you know and ritual
and sort of colorful rituals and stuff
so in that sense I had the feeling that
the devout that the Vajra and the
tradition had had something in common
with Orthodox Christianity I actually
wanted to talk to Jonathan Padua but
interesting well thank you yeah I think
we have two questions left a k-12 you'd
indulge me again Andrew I don't think I
could say it verbally better than I said
it written so I'll just read it out I'm
having a hard time putting together
cognitive frameworks spiral dynamics
integral Theory etc and embodied
frameworks bio mode of bioenergetics
somatic experiencing in my life and
informing my life chat choices how do
you suggest one at a daily and weekly
scale implements integrating both sides
both sides you mean the integral model
and one other model I guess I mean like
kind of cognitive things like when
spiral dynamics makes me like thing can
analyze the world and myself it's all
kind of in my head better but embodied
frameworks like by emotive and Byron
Jax's all of my somatic aspect of it and
the emotional aspect of it and that kind
of how do you integrate the head in the
heart so to speak or then you know I
mean I mean that's a reductive reframing
of what you were saying because I think
spiral dynamics is describing you know
movements in
you know and in different development
developmental movements and evolutionary
movements and that kind of thing and
then there's that's that's all very
interesting and but then there's the and
there's you know the body and you know
what do you do with your body and I
don't know I think yeah I think you just
you just you just play around with what
works for you like you just you just you
know one thing my friend Alexander says
it's a bit crude perhaps but he says you
know you have there are people who are
in the head and other people are in the
dick so so the head people you know
they're hyper intellectual people and
they love all these this frameworks but
what they probably need is is they need
they need somatic work they need to
become embodied whereas there's other
guys who are just are women I should say
women who are very physical and very you
know they're in their bodies a lot and
they you know that's just fine but if
they wanted to to grow they think they
would probably I don't know study
something like spiral dynamics or go
into the more abstract go into the head
go into the head more yeah and the
spiritual people the new-age spiritual
people are always saying oh yeah get out
of your head and into your body and then
they're to let you know that the more
the more assburgers autistic types are
always being you know you know extremely
theoretical and abstract about
everything and you know are distrustful
of any kind of you know somatic
experience so so I think III think it
depends you like it like it depends on
who you are it depends on what you need
to grow and evolve right like there's no
answer to that question that's it's it's
it's it's deeply contextual then if you
if I could
could I ask specifically for you when
you reckon
that this was a value how did you
implement it into your life like I guess
it's that translation step from like ah
okay this is something I need a balance
and integrate and do all sorts all these
sides I'm having a hard time her than
translating that into like well what are
my actual life choices and my habits and
well you know I I studied literature so
I read a lot of literature when I was
when I was younger and at one point I
thought like okay I'm not I'm not that
good of a thinker I'm more of a you know
I'm you know I wrote songs and I was
into the art world but I so then I
started reading philosophy because I
told myself I have to become a more
clear thinker that that was one thing
that came to mind and you know I I need
to do somatic practices all the time I
need to do physical practices I need to
do physical work just because of who I
am just because otherwise you know my
head starts to spin and I I I'm I I know
I'm on another planet and I can't
function in the world so I need to
ground myself physically so I do I do a
lot of you know yoga and kind of things
because as I need I need this physical I
need to make the physical connection to
my body otherwise up I'll drift off into
into space so I'll become very
disciplined easy other people aren't you
know my voice very very natural she
doesn't need to do physical things that
much is very embodied already and so so
for her it's a whole other that's a
whole other story and I'm sure for you
it's it's a if you're a programmer you
know you're probably seeing in front of
a computer all the time so the best
thing you can do it would go go into
nature a lot do physical things use your
hands touch things so that you don't
become this disembodied brain does that
make any sense does that if you're
willing to share I'd love to hear other
examples than yoga that you do also
other examples
well I guess I needed to play a lot of
guitar when I was younger because I you
know I had a lot of feelings that I
couldn't express you know propositional
e yeah I wanted to that was that's a
budding experience doing some kind of
music oh yeah cooking I learned to make
I learned I learned to do a bit of
cooking over the kovat crisis cuz grouse
in this house long time so I worked on
cooking using your hands is very
grounding for intellectual types
yeah meditation has been that something
I've all have done since my since my
twenties that I actually can't function
without doing so it's it's just like
eating for me right meditation for some
reason feels cognitive to me more than
emotional learn embodied yeah it can be
sterile if if you're not if you don't
connect it to I understand I understand
that it can be sterile if you don't
connect it to the the heart if I could
see if I can be so prosaic
perhaps that's what drew me to budge ran
in a sense because Vienna there's a
there's a big emphasis on emotionality
actually those are those are practical
suggestions thank you thank you very
much thank your last question student of
movement David yeah so I wanna Nick was
asking about Mariana before and uh and
Tantra has been a recurring and a recent
topic in your podcast as we are with
sorry um and I'm you're wondering if
there's if you see like what what the
future of contra will look like in
general but also with like secular
religion and if it will remain esoteric
art or hidden rather than mainstream and
I guess specifically regrets whatever
baekje and his religion is not a
religion you think there's a way to like
extract it out of any of the specific
religions and have it like a cycle
technology because I've people have been
inquiring about Tantra in like you know
if Christian use it or whatever
[Music]
it's a tricky it's a tricky subject
because in a way it's you know Alexander
has this term called the barn absolute
and people should do Tantra behind
closed doors but that doesn't mean it's
because it's some kind of there's some
kind of you know trick to it or
something or they or that it's all sexy
and because again I think there are
certain people who are attached of types
and other are there other people who
aren't and I think it's something that
becomes very easily corrupted so so
probably one should even talk about it
you know but if it's done properly it's
probably done in a setting
that is that is closed that's my guess
and again I don't want to put myself
forward as an expert on Tantra and all
the other thing I sort of noticed is
that people think it's it's you know
it's a good way to get laid or something
and that's that's the reduction of of
what it is and not necessarily the true
spirit of it either so I'm more like I
can only tell you what it's what it's
not and that you study the good the good
200 teachers and get a get a good basis
in it like choke them trim pie or
somebody like that it was you know
pretty solid oh I don't know I don't
think it can be extracted and made into
some kind of technique that you can just
use to in some kind of a cheap way at
least it wouldn't be what I consider to
be Tantra it might be something it might
be maybe what Osho called neo choice he
called it neo Tantra neo Tantra he
caught it because he thought that you
know Westerners were sexually repressed
and had to do a lot of experimenting
with sexuality and like and maybe that's
fine I I don't but I wouldn't I would
call that neo Tantra and Tantra proper
so I am I'm sorry my if my answers are
kind of vague it's it's it's a it's a
hard thing to talk about somehow I don't
know why that has been maybe because
it's dangerous that's that's the first
thing they say you should say about
Tantra because that is actually quite
dangerous and that you don't want to
mess around it's like a dangerous sector
take psycho technology if you want to
call out that
mm-hmm yeah um some analogies I've liked
I like it's like a power drill as
opposed to uh well I I can't remember
the other analogy but anyways thank you
yeah
trumpet says it's like like honey on a
razor blade or something like that well
this has been fantastic you've been very
generous with your time and is it too
greedy to to ask for a for a song I'm
not gonna I'm going to refuse the song
right now being okay I don't think I
don't think I have the sounds then up
properly and I if I if I play you a song
I'd want it I want it I want to do it
right so if you know if you don't mind
get a bow up from from singing a song
I've got a bunch of songs which I put on
my youtube channel which which are
actually versions of stories from the
book of Genesis which I put to I kind of
I made them kind of like folk songs it
was an experiment actually was an
experiment in trying to I wanted to know
if I could do what Jordan Peterson did
in a song you know if you've listened to
Jordan Peterson's biblical like lectures
which I thought were the most
interesting you know part of his work is
that he he he took the book of Genesis
and he took he took those biblical
stories and he made them he made them
into a he described them from a
psychological point of view and I wanted
to know if I could I could I could put
them in your song you know not quite
like gospel music and not even with any
kind of theistic or religious sort of
you know because what a lot of gospel
music is very like as is suddenly I mean
the good stuff is not but manipulative
but I wanted to see if I could make
those stories come alive in a song and I
don't know if I've been successful or
not but if you want to check them out
there I put them out on my on my youtube
channel and
maybe if I get a good sound thing going
here I could share them but without the
proper sound I'd rather not if you don't
mind no no that's that's fine it's just
a good excuse to to have you back when
one day - for that you'd be interesting
- to have you sing and then talk about
your your songs that would be yeah I'm
really interesting that'd be cool and if
you have to give me a bit more time I
could I could you know I could good you
know I need to rehearse a bit remember
the words absolutely well this has been
fantastic thank you so much for for
coming by like we've all enjoyed your
your discussions with John and having
the opportunity to talk has just been
been great and I have a conversation
with John and Zach coming up soon and I
have another conversation with John
Alexander Berger coming up soon it
should be quite well yeah I listen to
some of your prior conversations there -
yeah that's an interesting topic all on
its own so thank you thank you so much
Andrew for being here and thank you
everyone for your great questions and
and for listening and Tyler for for
helping with the recording and we've got
some great Q&A s coming up we've got
just booking Jordan Hall probably later
this week and Chris Metro petrol for
hopefully this weekend so stay tuned for
that and tonight at ten o'clock Eastern
we've got a shadow dance ecstatic dance
party so everyone please come back later
tonight for that to try some
so thank you very much everyone for
being here this has been so much sorry
gotta fix my sound but yeah sorry about
that
hey guys thanks again thanks again
Andrew it's been been fantastic thank
you so much good thanks so much Andrew
take care everybody and yea I think that
everyone for being here that was great
thanks for organizing this that's my
pleasure