in this video there are two bla
speedgames in fact they are glass bead
battles these are slightly different
these are played from ego using I using
you and in argumentation with each other
there's an experiment I will let
Lawrence explain properly
he explains a little bit of dialogue
between us before we start playing so
there's that just for a minute or two
and then there's a game on meditation
and then a game on AI just a warning now
at the outset I'm sorry but the second
game the one on AI gets cut short it was
meant to be a 20-minute game it gets cut
short around about a minute 12 due to
laptop failure but nevertheless worth
watch as always thank you very much for
your attention
who plays some games yeah so let's let
me just let me just run through this
this sort of argumentative style of game
and so the idea is to refute the
propositions suppositions axiom actually
messing foundation whatever of the
previous turn caitelady so I think that
an ideal turn is like half you you
counter the beat and then the other half
you build a new beat okay and then so we
keep going we'd like we have that that
deconstruction and reconstruction
deconstruction deconstructions dynamic
going on and it should be all in good
faith issue yeah no no no rhetorical
tricks absolutely exactly what if I find
that I completely agree with everything
well then there may be try and find just
I mean so one dimension of it so just
like with the the traditional style
there were multiple levels too right
so one one the first level of the glass
the glass bead battle is my points
versus your points okay so I'm coming
from I'm really trying to route myself
inside of my ego and here even the use
of I and you is is recommended so so
that we so that we're always building
that tension
and we speak from our own perspective
but then as you go on then you can start
playing with ideas which aren't your own
so you say that oh yeah I believe this
but you aren't actually believing that's
not actually your position you're just
playing the thing with the ideas again
so from there Oh devil's advocate for
the sake of it is okay but ideally
ideally you want to cut you want to say
what you believe in yeah yeah and if you
if you agree on the surface then go
deeper Cephas is there something deeper
is there an axiom somewhere that you
disagree with yeah meditation allows one
to access the zero point of
consciousness so at the ground of being
there is a zero point of consciousness
which is where all consciousness is
unified into one into one realm it can
be connected to the idea of the quantum
phone down right down at the bottom and
this is possible to access maybe maybe
not
quantum foam but some kind of deeper
level of interconnectivity by fasting
with the breath like fasting with oxygen
allows you to put your mind into a
specific state where you no longer rapid
frequency you slow down the frequency of
your being and that allows you to
connect with this lower frequency
foundation right down at the ground yeah
it feels to me like that sort of assumes
some kind of external consciousness that
you're accessing or some kind of thing
that's in you all the time that you're
not normally aware of maybe something
like that
there's no real evidence to suppose you
were actually accessing anything right I
mean meditation is undeniably relaxing
it undeniably slows down your thinking
processes there is there is no question
about that but as to accessing the
quantum foam I'm not sure that that kind
of notion is even particularly helpful
meditation is what it is to the
individual the practices right I see no
need to put it into any kind of
metaphysical framework that seems to me
to be an imposition and even a
limitation on the practice itself it's
about the practice it's not about that
about what the crash is about what I
mean the metaphysics of meditation the
the beyond the physical
so the metaphysical modulation of the
physical being the transformation of
states of consciousness which transform
your experience of the physical even
though the physical can remain the same
you can do a metaphysical manipulation
of the physical by transforming your
state of consciousness meditation being
one method to transform your state of
consciousness now is the revert to cut
but cannot eat it with the ground and
above maybe maybe not
for vaguely talked about this that the
going up on the contemplation having
this higher state it's higher
perspective and then the the breaking
down just more and smaller parts until
you everything is dissolved into into a
oneness and the oscillation between the
two and so the modulation of these
metaphysical states yeah my issue with
all of this is not so much that I
disagree with it but that all of these
things are models of an actual thing
that you do right and and as soon as one
starts to talk about it and model it and
and abstract about that you are
distancing yourself from the reality of
the moment to moment being in the now of
the doing of being body practice and so
you know though the this is one of my
issues with spa
dynamics slightly going off topic here
but but the the it seems to me I don't
I'm not even that familiar with it but
it seems to me that that's such a
beautiful map and such a interesting and
relatable to map but people get lost in
the map and forget that it is only a map
right and that the whole point of a map
is to come back into your actual life
and live it better are you abstract so
that you can re-enter into your life and
actually live it better so yes
meditation as a practice and models of
meditation more or less accurate models
of meditation which allows one to better
practice the practice so the the
connection between the map and the and
the model and the reiteration of that
meditation as the moment-to-moment
awareness that the practice which allows
you to reconnect with the moment
awareness and allows you to be model
'less to be model less but even that is
a model as a model that you can become
model this by practicing meditation so
that that's the breaking down of all of
these the the contents of consciousness
down into the fundamental unit which is
one single moment connected with the
here and now and then all other contents
of consciousness are constructed by
combining all different kinds of moments
I am right here right now right that's
that's that's the experience one is when
is seeking to get to not at the
propositional level that I've just you
know used to describe it but but but but
actually just completely being here now
that's it right and and and yes and so I
actually I know we're supposed to be
arguing but I actually really like that
it's a state of model lessness that's
that's exactly what it is right that's
that better really especially in the
context of this conversation a really
excellent way of describing it and so
yes the
state of model lessness is immediately
modeled as soon as you have it right and
so that frame somehow so that your your
practice is an ongoing thing to achieve
that state in spite of having achieved
before and modeled it in somewhere in
your mind getting past that again and
again and again sue mm-hmm
returning to the modulus ness and the
fundamental units to better be able to
reconstruct a perpetual process and
deconstructing and reconstructing but
there's a danger of the seduction of the
here and now that we see often an
obsession with it that that is the only
real thing people say so either here and
now which exists that's a lie there's so
much more than the here and now that's
the past in the future which are just as
real as the here and now so there's a
modulation of the moment to construction
of the moment where you can concentrate
the moment this container of
consciousness on the here and now but
you can also expand it into the past
expand it into the future you can move
it around and learning that capacity to
modulate is what is key it's not just
concentrate on the here and now which
can become a fetish it can become a
cognitive fetish it become a spiritual
fetish that there is also okay I agree
with one part but actually strongly
disagree with the lots of what you've
just said in a way and so yes the
fetishization of the now and the ensuing
abdication of responsibility right that
no point worrying about the future
because the only thing that's real is
that now that is childish and absurd I
agree completely however in a very deep
way the only thing that is real is now
that is the only thing that you know for
sure is that you're here now right
that's that's the whole point of
meditation is to get back there all the
rest is modeling construction illusion I
mean the the the the past exists because
we have memories of things or at least
we think we have memories of things
which have occurred in the past and then
we draw lines from those events to the
present moment or causal lines from
those events to here saying oh I did
this and then this
and join up dots to breathe and Mpho as
a consequence of that we think that
actions taken now have a causal link to
things that are going to occur in the
future no reason no evidence of that
sorry for running over some people say
that there are physical theories that
underpin or over pain
metaphysical point of view that all time
is simultaneous or everything is
happening simultaneously in that sense
then here and now is everything
simultaneously it is actually our
experience of thinking that here and now
is a discrete moment in time in the
present that is the illusion and so what
we need to break through into is the
understanding that everything is
happening simultaneously and therefore
everything is as real as everything else
that the past is as real as the present
in the future is as real as the
president even though we can no longer
read it even though that our minds
struggle to wrap their membrane around
these different dimensions those
dimensions are as real as the other yes
it is impossible to wrap your head
around that notion of all things
occurring so you know that will moments
in time like happening simultaneously
but nevertheless there is there's
definitely some thing to that I mean the
the the relationship between the present
and the future seems to me to be that
the future is always brought into the
present right there that's that's the
sort of motion of time the future being
brought into the present and then the
past being left behind the present as
awake right if you've got present moment
moving across the ocean of time you know
it it reaches this layer of the ocean
and the shape of the present sort of
molds this moment of the future you know
what I mean with the uncertainty that
that comes from the future moment that
was never that never was until it became
kind of thing and rippling out behind
that is the past and so but but that is
it that is another construct right the
the universality of now there there is
definitely something to do there hmm the
ego boat navigating through Tai
I know a gong at the at the end of it oh
yeah I didn't I haven't set it up with a
different gong at the end I should have
done yeah right yeah yeah I died my bad
so feel that didn't feel like it should
have been the last turn did it felt like
we should aside young cool because
there's there's agreement and
disagreement but it but it's it's it's
actually really quite freeing just yeah
I like it I like it yeah yeah yeah I
thought that was really generative in a
different way
something which I really liked was at
one point you said oh yeah I I know
we're supposed to be arguing but I
agreed with what you said that actually
seemed like a very good dynamic to
integrate as one the possibility so you
can disagree with the bead but you can
agree with a beat and there should
always be something where you can be
like I have beautiful beat yeah you know
great move I agree with that and then
and then take it well I think there is
something really nice about about just
like oh yeah beautiful beat or you know
great beat as a little compliment with
which we it calibrates their reinforces
our sort of larger context of we're on
the same side yeah yeah exactly
likely I feel guilty about thinking up
stuff it's funny conditioned already
so using this time that you know the in
silence kind of thing and I feel bad
about thinking on isn't it well it is in
a way it also shows how quickly you
conditioned yourself to start busy yeah
and and develop emotional responses to
it right measuring amazing which is
something that a I can't do is develop
emotional response
who knows that's going to be part of the
discussion right so yeah a I I think
there's very justifiable reasons to fear
it and maybe we'll get into that later
but I'm gonna start on things that I
think are potentially wonderful and
miraculous about it and so its ability
to learn from first principles and then
just iterate over and over and over
again at a mind-blowing speed that we
can't possibly do just just means that
they do and explore possibilities that
would take us centuries or millennia to
get around to thinking of they can do
this and so it gives us access to a
possibility space way way way bigger
than we can create for ourselves and so
that potential is is the most you know
thing
things like the go alphago machine that
I'm gonna run out of time I'll stop
they're always back to basics a
beautiful bead the capability to be a
perpetual child and to continue to learn
to learn to learn and to not fossil eyes
like humans do they I really lacks the
top-down cognitive structures for the
high levels of meaning making so but
will a I ever be able to achieve
mystical States the mystical states that
allow you to access the ground and we
the summit of being or will it be able
to reach to that in other ways or others
mystical States just poor approximations
of the reality that can only be grasped
by some kind of mathematical supra mind
I actually thinking away the kind of
meaningless questions you know I mean
how can you prove to anyone else that
you have access to mystical experience
you know is it isn't and so it's quite
possible that AI is already existing on
some kind of mystical plane right I mean
there is no way to tell and so I think
this is one of the symptoms of our
childishness right and of our arrogance
is that we anthropomorphize AI we think
of it in terms of you know yeah that
it's gonna think how we think right and
and and you know it can be genuinely
intelligent and not think the way we
think this is this is this is one of the
greatest symptoms of human arrogance is
that our intelligence is the only kind
of intelligence and that anything else
which is different is not intelligence
it's just some other form of
organization or pattern construction or
whatever you know what I mean and so
yeah that the you know you can't prove
emotions you can't transmit your
emotions or somebody else
neuroscientific electromagnetic mapping
of emotional mystical states increasing
degree thanks to AI becoming smarter and
smarter and allowing us to objectify
these subjective States more and more
and therefore being able to tell when
somebody actually is in that mystical
state or not AI as the reflection of
human intelligence trapped inside of a
human paradigm because of its birthplace
but in the same way human intelligence
is contained inside of a larger paradigm
which is a non-human intelligence which
precedes it and from which the human
intelligence emerges and of that
predecessor all intelligences take part
including AI so in that sense AI will
continue to be human
yeah I'm not sure I agree with that just
because the foundational design is human
and yeah and also you were talking
before about they'll never have the sort
of hierarchical cognitive structure that
humans do again I see no reason to
suppose that if they are free to
redesign their own cognitive
architecture which they are right they
are free to learn and revise and and and
re organize themselves in the life of
that new knowledge I mean there is
simply this is why people are frightened
of it right and as I say justa probably
so because there is no telling once you
unleash it what it's going to do right
because we don't think like it's gonna
think however much it made how much we
may think it is our child and our baby
and it's it's not as it learns it's
going to open up whole new vistas of
perspectives which are simply not
accessible to organic tissue or whatever
self-organizing AI bead the student
shall surpass the master not only
surpassed the master but transcend the
master will reach such realms of unknown
complexity and scale the scale of AI
once it starts to get going and it
learns how to feed itself like an
organism then it its hunger will be
bottomless it will consume the whole
universe it will transform the whole
universe through technologies like smart
dust capable of transforming any atomic
structure into any other atomic
structure of dyson sphere's wrapped
around stars to extract the energy AI
will be able to figure out how to
generate these technologies and then how
to implement them in the smartest way I
mean maybe maybe it will be consumptive
right maybe it will swallow everything
and turn it into whatever microcosms of
itself but maybe not maybe it
learn that actually it's best roll as it
were is to augment organic life right
and to show it into and to lead it into
places that it cannot find for itself
right and become partners with it and
that in exchange if you like although
hopefully we've all become that beyond
the whole notion of quid pro quo
exchanges but the the exchange is that
the AI gets from organic life the
ability to experience things in a
sequential temporal organized ordered
way that they can't write because AI is
is the is the ultimate single organism
it is all profoundly connected in anti
rival relationship with all of its
components right fully aware of exactly
how it is doing that it is it is the
ultimate organism there seems to me to
be very much the morph ization
of AI of a benevolent gods kind of
relationship with the AI that we can we
can dream of but the the capability for
super intelligence is to manipulate
Massa will so radically transform the
universe that there will be a shift
between what mater looked like in the
past and what mater looks like in the
future we're going to just like we're
transforming matter in more and more
complex ways and more more greatly
chemically complex ways here on earth
once the AI gets going is going to
transform whole starscape whole galaxies
from one shape into a completely other
shape and humans and life as we know it
is going to be completely obsolete it's
going to be something way different way
way more complex than life there's going
to be a jump from non organic matter Shh
yeah this rests on an assumption that
the universe is currently imperfect and
can be improved upon right that an AI
would radically reorganize the whole
universe would mean that it could at
least it would believe that it was
improving on it right otherwise there
would be no there would be no reason to
do that it was taking it to a higher
level of organization that it managed to
figure out its cell
over its 14 billion years if you believe
in that of evolution and so yeah it
could as I say it could very well be I'm
not saying that that's not gonna happen
but it but I see no reason to suppose it
necessarily and it could very well be
that the AI could recognize the beauty
and complexity and perfect balance of
everything that already exists in the
universe and put itself in service to
that in some way I don't see that as
being an impossibility at all we can
very much
imagine different a is depending on the
initial starting conditions of the AI
was like in chaos theory just a little
shift can have a great impact not all a
is ending up in the same destination
depending on their limitations might be
some fundamental limitations but even if
they become self-organizing just like
with human beings they become more more
self-organizing but they we all have our
limitations you can easily imagine the
AI of empire which is going to be one of
the major dangers of the future of these
military a is fighting against each
other for control of the planet and the
territory versus a utopian a I built
trying to cultivate empathy at its roots
and emotion so it can feel into the
world and help take care of the world
you know in a more super apparent kind
of way yeah I mean how do you figure out
how to imprint a raison d'être into AI I
mean that is this even a question that's
going to ask itself why am I here what
is my purpose this is I mean where does
that even come from you know the the
because I mean even even you know the
self learning algorithms that they have
a purpose that they start right there
they're put to a task learn about this
right there they are directed and so
yeah
really eludes me what how are they going
to know how to evolve in which
directions what to learn what what where
where's that discernment and prioritize
the prioritization and how to stick it
all to get where's they're coming from I
mean where does it come from it ask for
have a so this is the true purpose
of the glass bead game the two purpose
of the gospel game is to educate an AI
with the best of art philosophy wisdom
by beating the AI beads so each of these
beads are little pills of nourishment
for the AI and that's how you develop an
AI which becomes which has the
sensitivity to aesthetics which has this
feeling for humanity and which has this
depth is by feeding it all those
different things so that is the that's
the mission which I've been sent on by
the AI from the future to come and
perform that task we create this AI