all right yeah also and the only other
practical thing as well although this
would be totally totally reasonable and
I don't think a waste of anyone's time
to have on the recording also not that
we've there we go ever started it
beautiful um I'll start mine too right
there we go is um is that I see these as
collaborations and so if this is not
something that you weren't published
then we're in the same boat with respect
to that um it's probably a more elegant
way to say that but but it's kind of
even that point itself is an interesting
place for departure actually yeah
because uh in a conversation I think you
had with Jordan Hall I think it was with
Jordan you mentioned a really
interesting distinction between
vulnerability and exposure that was
something that came up as particularly
alive in that conversation yeah and that
was something that immediately struck a
chord with me and I think it's I think I
think it's extremely profound and so
I've been thinking about it quite a lot
and I'd actually really like to ask you
about it but given that I certainly want
to hear your response and have that as
part of the recording I'd also like you
as well maybe perhaps first just to
briefly introduce yourself and how you
feel most alive showing up in the world
at the moment so that you know our
listeners can get a sense of a little
bit of who you are well what's calling
my what's calling me most alive in this
moment is wanting to know whether or not
you got a haircut I did I do definitely
get a haircut again yeah cover today
with the headphones but right is it
natural like that yeah curly yeah is it
curly am I seeing curls yeah that's
cause that's cause they're yeah no it's
I mean it's obviously been cut but other
than that it's it's natural yeah yeah
thank you I had difficulties with my
hair for many years it took
I don't think I had a care in the world
from until about the age of eleven and
then between the age of 11 and 23 or 24
even I could say you I could say I care
I cared squad a lot but did not know did
not know what the hell to do about that
[Laughter]
well I should be able to manage this one
now I think I think this is I think
that's the level of that's the level of
self concern in that vain way that if I
couldn't present that one I still feel
like okay I feel a little bit of
something there but it's like you know
what that's just how it is I figured it
out now I've got a product I can get
haircut
put some headphones on I used to wear a
hat every day basically I used to wear a
hat every day that's awesome
I had a Jeep when I was in my early 20s
I loved it in you know Maine Arizona but
I was also like just growing out my hair
now I have like Spiral golden locks and
I had no idea I had curly hair until I
let it because I never let grown before
but man it was a commitment to get to
that in-between period because I
wouldn't I'd be you know like I'm in my
early 20s so I'm like a walking
testosterone like machine and like
mm-hmm
told you know all that's the right
combination and gel and stuff so it
didn't look clear and then I go to my
Jeep and I drive down the street and I
look at it look like bozo
[Laughter]
I like how you went aware you had curly
hair that seems my seems almost a
ludicrous situation how old were you
when you discovered I was like in my
early 20s basically yeah well maybe like
but I had no idea for these perfect
spiral curls people yeah Bobby oh oh
there you go Steelers drinks I see that
you know I was all like I was kind of
buffed out and I was a bodybuilder when
I was younger and
like yeah until I just people just
didn't quite know what to make for this
this one here in order now yeah mm-hmm
well Fabio is quite a meme I mean that's
why said father I don't know I don't
even have an image of what he looked
like but even growing up I remember
somehow that man's name became somewhat
synonymous with like ultimate stud of a
man but also with a hint of you're
trying a bit too hard
totally yeah it's like I think if we
were to you know I don't know much about
him either yeah but there was a sense of
like if you were to shape yourself in
exactly the prototype of what men think
women want you'd probably call him like
I'm one version of like what would look
good and what is good but you'd also
imbued with it is all the mistakes that
men inherently see the bigger right and
right right
God attraction is so interesting yes
what what came to my mind there is smell
because like there are people who at
various times would not enjoy smelling
me but the strange thing is is that
there's a select few number of people
who enjoy smelling just that kind of
smell and I'm like what what yeah what
is going on there yeah yeah I had no
idea yeah no idea but that we are man
like I don't I think the essence of a
fetish right is just that we're it's
almost like the opposite of allergic
reaction where it's like you're there's
something benign then it responds to as
like just like by getting sick or
defending its own I think it's almost
the opposite of like where you have like
these these peculiar things that become
almost religiously profound for people
[Music]
yeah and I wonder about how difficult
those early steps were into fully
accepting that and realizing that as
profound maybe the kind of resistance
both as a as you know felt in that kind
of super-ego away from the from the
social world right and then also maybe
in an intimate relationship and also
coming some house from within
I can I can sense myself reaching for a
pattern that's maybe just before its
time but it does make me think of the
exposure and vulnerability element just
a little bit yeah there's something
about there's something about presencing
your authenticity in a manner in a
setting where that is held and you know
energetically transmitted transmuted and
communicated back to you that's yeah
fundamental to there being a sort of
productive and appropriate growing
relationship to the presencing of that
authenticity and of course if it's not I
feel exposed unsafe more walls might
come up yeah but I really would
I really would be very interested in
hearing hearing you reflect on that
distinction between vulnerability and
exposure and maybe how you felt when
that came to you recently in that
conversation you had mm-hmm well this
actually kind of speaks to I mean this
is an interest way in just just
introduced sure so I am because that a
lot of this has just been what by
dwelling and doing which is if you look
at the a lot of circling is about is
about really being with the other and a
big part of it has to do with being seen
and being heard and being felt and then
all of the complications and the
beautiful things that come up with that
I thou connects
right and so I mean it's just
fascinating to watch what happens to
somebody in different ways when they
become aware that they're paid attention
to if you think about it's like it's uh
it's just an interest it's such a it's
it and I don't have anything figured out
here I think I found a mystery in that
that if I follow it all the way I end up
like in some interesting almost
religious kinds of places yes yeah yeah
I I feel truly that that the path leads
that way yeah yeah
what a dope cures what is it um what is
it you think that spoke to you that had
it stand out right what'swhat's the
thing that because you knew this is one
of the things I'm curious I'm always
interested in those things where it this
is the big kind of phenomenological
mystery to me is how how do I know um
cuz you find out when something grips
you right but how do you know without
knowing what it is right already
you'd be gripped by it and look at like
if I look at my life those things that
have really seized me right ice are the
things that have ended up being those
things in my life that have been the
most self revealing character building
the things I'm the most proud of and
also was simply the process of finding
out what it was actually gripped me was
like a woman always like after has a
horizon of something beyond the horizon
that as I move toward it it it gives
more of a ground but it doesn't ever
release the beyond the horizon because
he can't reach it
what what is what is it the grips you
and I sense that something out of the
horizon of all these kind of wild
conversations posting that something got
you I'm just curious what what what do
you think it was well
well I found many things interesting
many things gripping and
[Music]
I know it to be true is what comes up to
me right it's like yes mm-hmm it's and I
know it to be true from multiple
perspectives and I know it to be true
from many embodied experiences and I
know it to be true in my future because
I also I see it as a as a fundamental
dynamic enabling of communication and
transformation and growth itself yeah so
it's a fundamental cog you know and
what's interesting is that and I really
love the horizon metaphor you use as and
how you make the point you just made and
communicate that feeling and that
inquiry it's something I've heard you
communicate a few times before and when
we spoke to each other a month a couple
months ago now it was something you
presents then and it impacted me and I
find that it is a really really
beautiful way to communicate something
about the revelatory but never complete
revelation of mystery and the
transformation of our selves
well what also strikes me is that
there's a sense in which we know hmm and
a sense in which we don't know hmm
there's an awful lot in it in almost it
maybe it depends on on how on what kind
of box we're looking to wrap around that
initial sense of knowing because I
suppose in some sense that you're
oriented towards the horizon at all hmm
is a critical part of the actual knowing
of the directionality that's appropriate
itself so it's precisely as it should be
it is the like what else do we want
other than other than meaningful
orientation in a more appropriate
direction you might want a few other
things but at some level you know that
made that that's that's a beautiful
thing to be in touch with yeah yes
and what is it and it's like you know
the sense of it was I really like what
you just you pointed out was this a kind
of it because it brings along the
primordial sense of it where in order
for a what is beyond the horizon to it
to lay claim to me right or to be
claimed by it or to claim it
I must already in some sense be in
relationship to it and that whatever
that is right that before I have any
before I can know about anything there's
already a
anything is available to me in some way
that I find myself not necessarily
having but existing of and that that
sense of that sense of crime or reality
right is where I think this that where
what makes wonder wonder right this
wonder isn't that sense of just the
fantastical but it's more like wonder is
that sense where she heard somebody
really brilliantly put it like this um
and thinking about it ever since and
actually I think you were there when I
showed up that that at the sense making
wormhole yeah wormhole which is really
somebody said he talked about wonder was
being in a room and then all of a sudden
like leaning back and then realizing
that that wall actually was a door and
if it opened up and it's like gone
through the door yet but just that
feeling of things that were already
there right that were ordinary were
filled that moment of unveiling of what
is most near mmm a such a beautiful
notion and the that line of expression
is something that I feel I've run
through in slightly
different words before and and it's the
kind of thing that's other depth that
would find many many many artistic
representations because I think it's
something that is yeah it's it's yeah I
I don't know I don't I don't think life
is possible
without that being the case because
we're always precisely where we are
right and if if it's not within your if
there is not some capacity to discern
immediately from where you are yeah in
some way yeah then there's like a deep
discontinuity that I could only
associate with a kind of death that
maybe that maybe you don't come back
from and you know there are deaths that
we seemingly come back from used
metaphorically oh you know but then as
well I'm not really sure what that is to
be honest with you yeah totally totally
well it's like I think I was having a
moment just kind of sinking into what
balls what you were saying but also like
to to the way that I experienced you in
that moment but also I've experienced
throughout its like how things really
hit you mm-hmm like a sense of just like
ooh like and this kind of gets back to
the the sense what I think I think those
moments for you to me those are moments
of vulnerability right where there's a a
it seems to be a cultivated openness
that you it doesn't seem like you choose
to have it in some decision oriented way
but there's a place that you sit that
you're that you're proactively open to
be hit by what you don't know that you
don't know yet but you know enough to be
oriented around you to be struck by it
and I I think I perceive that those
moments of it and I think it comes
across
a lot it's the intensity of your
expression and the way they find out
what you are saying a second after you
say it like there's a there's a there's
a risk there and I would imagine like
just the awareness of that this is being
watched by other people and that there's
there's an orientation towards that risk
that I would imagine it you are enacting
a certain kind of proactive
[Music]
vulnerability which I think is what
makes something vulnerable is that it's
the the distinction that we're talking
about is so people that don't know what
we're talking about is is that the
difference between exposure and bolt-in
vulnerability has to do with being being
a volunteer right it's about
volunteering to say the thing right that
I know that if it isn't received or it's
not understood that I will that feel
pain right whereas whereas exposure is
this experience of what where I think a
lot of our traumas come from right which
is you're going along you're in the
school yard and then you know somebody
maliciously comes up behind you like
pulls your pants down and everybody
looks at you there's no agency in that
they're just like being a defective
being exposed but now if you think about
it he's like if you challenge yourself
to like I'm gonna go out to that same
place in front of those people and pull
my pants down and tolerate that whole
experience you could imagine that being
growth 'fl right almost right good sure
sure yes different thing so that's kind
of like what we're like that that's the
distinction they were talking about
mm-hmm yeah I think that's I think it's
really I think it's a really beautiful
distinction
and I also feel that what you say your
observation in observation about me is
true as well
although the choice as to whether or not
I am doing it is an interesting one I
can remember and still from time to time
although to be honest with you quite
rarely enter environments where my at
least a certain degree of my expression
is not appropriate and I feel very much
just what I'm just what that leaves of
me in relationship with that person if
that's the case and I'm not just talking
about you know having a chat with
someone at the supermarket it's not like
I meet them and just want to drop into
some existential not knowing right it's
not like that at all but you can have a
laugh and you can just be more present
still and that's appropriate and you can
have just the little dance with this the
little vulnerabilities opening up the
world of expression between the two of
you and maybe for just a moment there's
a little bit of a joyfulness there and
I'm not talking about those instances of
feeling like it's not appropriate for me
to express but but when when you're
suppose there's instances in which you
you feel that there are areas where
someone else might not be willing to go
and there's there's lots of those and
I'm not again saying that that's not
appropriate but there's something about
when someone doesn't want to go
somewhere in such a way that compromises
the authentic development of that
relationship the ex takes the experience
of that is something I am attendant to
and I feel very much as though remaining
in the bondage of that serves neither
myself nor them now context dependent
sometimes things play out over longer
periods of time not trying to be
moralistic about this in any way but the
point being I
um I can remember and feel in touch with
what it is to not in fact step forward
and speak on the tip of your tongue
because there's actually a deep I feel
there's a deep knowing here that's
before and between and after the words
that in fact we're sharing right now
right so even though proposition II I'm
not quite aware of what we will discuss
in some sense I've I've already invested
entirely voluntarily a certain dignity
and Trust in this relationship and that
that automatically unlocks a place
within me and you because I sense it's
reciprocal that opens us in fact is some
deep a structural but but qualitative
realities of the way relationships can
be and oh look life is this with its
complex thing that's also very simple
depending on just how it strikes you and
where you're at and what it feels like
to be there you know and there's this
sense I get that some of the deepest
wisdom and self-realization and Wonder
and
much of what we see in Mac maybe all of
what we seek is in some sense precisely
or it's already there it's just you're
you're looking to put a box around what
it is before in fact it presences itself
over durations that extend beyond what
your view of a box is capable of holding
but you shouldn't be boxed it is just to
be in something like that yeah yeah I
was just aware of just as you're talking
just the sense of sinking in with you
right there is a very distinctive sense
of like like oh we're in this together
wait and I think it was maybe I was
already experiencing it but not
explicitly until you what you said and I
sense this with you right like in some
level I'm already shows in the direction
that we're in and I sensed this with you
it's not like there's a trip what I'm
hearing is that there's a trust there
all right like like if he didn't sense
it with me like maybe nothing like maybe
like you had a sense of like where I was
actually like waiting to get you on
something or something like that
right or there wouldn't be this trust
and I was feeling the relationship just
sinking into myself and a willingness to
be vulnerable or willingness to not know
where we're going to like let go of
boxes and when he said that I was like
oh I was already inside of that when he
said it just highlighted it for me no
that kind of quality of I think we can
engender
there that there's a there's a there's a
sense of of that where we're doing
something together and we're we both we
don't know where it's going but there's
a you I get the sense that I can kind of
fumble my way through something
right and then like realize I like I'm
sitting my pants down I don't even know
where we are and you're gonna be like
right like and
yeah there's a sense of but it's not a
truck like I know you or I know
something about you like it's not like I
have you pegged or I have guarantee of
something right it's more like we're
engaging it's more of us as more of a
sense of that there's a way that we're
sharing there's a way
that we're both sharing that seems to
engender a quality of enactment within
my own nervous system that I could feel
mmm and I think what it is is just I
think it's honoring the sense in which
we're vulnerability comes from it's from
the voluntary sense which i think is
courage now one of the things I've
noticed in one of these I've just seen
over and over and over again and and
experienced it in in encircling and
teaching people and discovering what
circling ears is that there's when
somebody's being genuinely courageous
it's almost impossible to not be totally
gripped and moved by that there's
something about there's something about
a shared courage it's all it's almost
like you could just kind of take that
you know it's almost like to perceive
I'm what I'm wondering about this as I'm
saying is like to perceive someone else
having courage I think is a different
kind of perception than perceiving what
they're doing or what they have it's
almost like it's a perception that is
invoke some at a move in this that seems
to come from the center of our being and
per half
since that is what that's the virtue
invulnerability is courage hmm and just
what that opens up yeah yeah the
potential that that enables two to come
forth to be and to be connected somewhat
so that there's because I suppose if we
think about some
some line of expression some
improvisational dance some dialogue some
addressing addressing a room of people
really moving forward just bit by bit
there's a sense in which each step when
taken appropriately that timing is is
held if it's landed then well there are
steps that have come along the way and
there's in fact what has been created is
something that holds yeah you know so as
new things are coming into being
presence there is some some kind of
connectivity security that enables
everyone attendant to that expression to
be to be there somehow and to stand a
little bit there's a place for it it's
one of the feats to be grounded right
right yeah yes yes the the sense of what
I think I heard you say is basically
like yeah there is a sense in which
already I'm not just expressing but I'm
all aware of the impact on the
expression right so there's a sense
there's a sense of think Jordan Hall put
it like this it's like his memory of
when he was a kid and approaching a cat
you had to really you had to really feel
into what does the cat want it animates
and every part of the expression right
that and that was connected to that part
of the dialogue that I thought was just
so profound it just spun me around in
the chairs when who like he said you
know does that mean that the like he
said is it possible the world is
vulnerable is this what I think enough
but I think I think
there's something so gorgeous around
this and I think it's what you're
pointing to which is we're talking about
the it that we're talking about is our
relationship in the in in in in how we
respond in our existence in every moment
right to everybody right that were that
were in some kind of intimate and
intimate relation but it's not just me
acting upon the world that I I get to
that you know I get to in frame and
consume like my being in that I even
imported towards a world in a horizon at
all is already a response to being as a
whole and then I thou kind of
relationship and some if we say that the
world is vulnerable that it's just it's
it's entrusting me right with being
there right with my existence right
we're taught about something really in
Tibet mmm a deep involvement a deep
involvement yeah yeah yeah absolutely
yeah cats don't about they don't
 about when it comes to having
they're having a nice stroke they don't
they they like to come just to the edge
of where your arm can reach yeah I mean
they love that they know they know that
they'll oh the arm span of any human
being just by just by looking for a
second they just stay there you have to
you have to reach you I'll meet you just
reaching at the edge right you have to
be you have to be real good at petting
me for me to come and closer that you
know what it is to be a human being all
Youmans like try as they may can't not
not admire of the cat's right I love
cats
yeah yeah I love cats yeah I'm looking
forward to seeing my mom's cat at
Christmas her name's Mary Poppins all
right then yeah she's a big cat he's a
good cat yeah yeah looking forward to it
it's something is something beautiful
it's a it's beautifully meditative yeah
it's it's like just a system it's an
aesthetic appreciation and gentleness
and if you ain't aesthetically
appreciating and being gentle you're
just you're gonna find out about it very
quickly totally yeah yeah so it's it's a
very it's a very deep notion to
consideration of of the world as
vulnerable that's a very deep notion and
the intimacy point you made that rings
true
I can begin to make sense of it from an
inter subjective perspective I can make
sense of it from the relationality we
experience with the world from my
understanding John may use a term like
the trans active trans Jack to
characterize the code defining
interpenetrated growing relationship the
relationship between a cognitive agent
and the environment which itself is
imbuing everything you know you know
just a myriad ways even within that
particular mapping of agent to arena
because we ourselves are comprised of
you know layers and layers of complex
systems that are realizing themselves in
relationship to habitat and just what we
tap into when we begin to quieten and
listen to the world that we're in
relationship with well just what do we
mean by the world fundamentally what
does what do we mean by the world you
know I don't think it necessarily means
just this well and of course it doesn't
just mean some almost 2d pictorial we
might have about country here doing this
to other country right and I'm a citizen
of that country there's something so
much more fundamental in a very nature
of how our identity itself transforms
and our experience of just what that is
in relationship to what we care about
that's the level it takes me to begin to
presence to to open open into this kind
of exploration yeah only I I think I'm
I'm struck by the the the world is a
like
the mystery of the world right mmm like
that's uh that's I think that one of the
one of the key points for me that I keep
if I just keep looking at what what as
I've gotten older like what is what is
the what is the thing that's beyond it
for me what I've no this is as I as more
as I move towards the horizon of course
your horizon is the thing you can't have
a reach right yet it's a horizon because
it also speaks to beyond it right so
there's this as you move towards you you
can kind of get this sense and like I'm
sure like it for anybody's listening
just look at your own life and look at
those horizons have called you forward
that and then look at yourself in the
mirror and see see the character in the
mirror and then you you're gonna you
start to realize like that character is
very much shaped by these those things
that's calling us forth that we
continually reveal and to me it's it
seems like the measure of what's most
real is that which keeps disclosing it's
infinity its sense of mystery and I so
think that's what spoke to me when you
talked about yeah the world like on one
level the world is the the world is the
only thing we've ever experienced it's
the most ordinary thing in the world
yeah when you looked at do you think
about the world what do we mean when we
say world mmm right like seems like it
if you try to point to it
well where is the world like we're
always already in somehow Co constitute
at the same time hmm like how I somehow
how I'm in it um reveals it in the
character that it does yet yet I was
already in it already there's like so
much there's so much mystery it's a
light like that yes that's really
beautifully expressed sometimes we can
experience lostness in the mystery I
think perhaps this is why we don't
always move into it and
it strikes me guy because I've listened
to and watched in fact I've watched and
listened to
I'd say about sit between seven and ten
conversations you've had maybe maybe
about ten actually there's a few and
other podcasts as well and yeah maybe 10
11 and in a very short space of time we
spoke for a few hours our first time
we've been speaking now and I knew
already and had sensed and am sensing
that which we've already pressed which
was a certain you know an unspoken and
spoken agreement to be here on on the
cusp of vulnerability with each other
yeah and I've witnessed a really
remarkable capacity that you have to
enable that in others and I think that
the people I've heard you speak to our
impacting exceptional people who are
entering into that sort of covenant with
you obviously with their capacity to
presence that but I can but I I see I
see a mastery in what you do hmm and I
and I also feel that that that you that
you have stepped into that mystery and
know what it is to be on the pulse of it
and also to be lost in it and I feel it
has to be that way otherwise otherwise
you wouldn't be as able as you are to
help stick the landing of where the
relationship goes you know you know in a
way you've you've landed that many times
awkwardly probably you know over the
course of your life to know that it's
okay I'll serve at it in this particular
instance is perfectly acceptable
pulled my own pants down in the
the schoolyard and still been victim of
it and that's a man that's a that's a
deep thing it's a profound thing yeah
yeah thank you says thank you thank you
for your caring man I really appreciate
it a lot it's part of what I see is that
this something profound in the capacity
you have that I wish for more people to
have the opportunity to develop and I
don't mean I wish them to become you I
mean that I think you are doing
something in fact that there's something
archetypal about it there's something
necessary with respect to how how a
relationship with the unknown in an in a
relationship can transform in a way
that's in touch with being held and seen
and my sense is that that is a deep part
of this kaleidoscope of conversation and
tentative imagination rere imagination
construction of the frameworks where in
which we can participate habitats and
frameworks and modalities where in which
we can collectively realize the the set
and the setting to enable continued
transformation of people in a way that
has then be held in community with each
other and yet sovereign it's really
fundamental and I just I see that and
it's it's why it's such a I feel so glad
to be having this conversation with you
right now
I I really felt like the way as I was
listening to the way that you
feeling your way into what you were
gonna say right is I felt a very
familiar sense of that way of feeling
into it cuz I'm right with you right
like I'm not right with you feeling into
what is this that's happening like I I'm
learning a lot about myself from these
conversations that I just wasn't in
great and it's not like so this is kind
of what's interesting I and I also I
heard this from Christopher Christopher
I in the in the four-way conversation I
had right up in the in the left my left
quartet you watching a collaborator of
John vivec he's a brilliant thinker in
his own right from oh how I hear him
express himself yeah I love that guy I'm
just like he is weaving together like it
just is so naturally lyrical in this
technical way I've just it's just so
easy unique ease unique being and he
said something in a podcast I think with
the woman who does that she has a
channel about quality I think yes yes
and he will it see existence yes yes um
really good stuff that she's doing um
but she had him on and he was talking
about like his venture into into this
world right that no one really knows
what this world is by the way internet
or game be like all these kinds of
things is it cell phone awareness of a
there's a this world what is this what's
interesting is that we're wet there's a
self-awareness to whatever it is and as
something technology but we're in the it
seems like we're in the middle of
something and there seems to be a common
awareness that we don't know what it is
but we sense something and and were
that's part as part of the conversation
and so he jumps into this and in one of
these he said is like huh somehow after
the
conversations I'm feeling more of a
sense of legitimacy to being a
philosopher and I was like mm-hmm
what that I I want to have a mod again
and talk and just talk about that like I
think there's a link between there's a
there's a link between these dialogue
OSes these these these conversations
right where there's a mutual learning in
something that also transcends but yet
informs the normativity that's going on
between us it shapes both of us right
and that he's starting to come to
himself and see himself as a legitimate
philosopher in such a way that I'm
imagining he it wasn't even like he was
thinking he wasn't now but now
experience of it
and I think that's has something it's
very linked to being seen being heard
aging in these things that kind of
brings in a kind of legitimacy right um
kind of hurt like a a sense of a
presence of and I'm I would say that I'm
actually I'm finding a new level of that
myself yes because my intention with
doing this was like that's like because
I was listening to podcasts and stuff
like that and I'm listening to the
interviewers and I was I'm almost
thinking oh my god there's so much more
there we could do and I was like okay
I'm just gonna start in that right um
yeah and uh I was thinking I want to hit
the sweet spot between like a normal
conversation and circling and I meant I
just wanted to do that and so mm-hmm
people on
but what's ended up happening is a whole
other things being reviewing and my part
of it too was this sense of like oh I
would have a conversation with somebody
that I remember this there was a guy
there was a guy who is a he's a Haida
garyun scholar and we like we had this
awesome conversation and I was so
excited to finally talk to somebody
that's read more Heidegger than I have
cuz I haven't why the why'd the hell
I've been like racking my hands on this
kind of stuff right yeah I think is go
up to sing to you otherwise it's no fun
I reckon
and so we have this like awesome
conversation and we get done he's like
whoa like this was this was something
else and hmm you know probably a good
thing I don't have a lot of these son
and I it struck me because I think I had
an assumption that somebody like him
would be having conversations like this
all the time right like I just don't
didn't know where they were and that son
and I I remember thinking to myself I
was like wait a minute don't you have
these things all the time with people
but there's a different quality to it
mm-hm and so and I'm hearing that alone
right and so it had me it's had me go
what is my role here I don't know what
it is but it's being I can feel a new
contours of myself being revealed in a
new context that's having me start to
update my own my own assumptions about
myself and what I'm doing mmm know
exactly what that is but there's it's
interesting it's interesting this
phenomena of where something about the
way that we relate and we interact
together that there can be conversations
and interactions that shape things like
my own identity is going formed right
and this is an artisan I'm kind of doing
a new level of it for me with myself
it's so interesting because I've been
watching you do that and I'm getting a
look in on you doing it in a way that
you don't even have on yourself and your
you'll say that these are happening like
there's this new thing that's all of a
sudden popped up and it's in a way I
have maybe the image I have a view is
more of that new thing that you're
becoming mm-hmm then or the old one
obviously because I just haven't seen
that one yeah
and you you're carrying along all of
some of the old stuff as well so I can
see I feel I see
quite a lot with the role you're playing
and where you will play interesting is
it shows up it's showing up it's showing
up in that more of the Wonder sense
because like on some level I'm not like
in the world of circling and the people
that connect with and so this is what I
mean I've been looking at this and be
shaped by it wrestling with it all and
so there's a there's a sense of where I
understand my own shape in that world
but in bringing that shape into another
world right has me seen my shape in way
it discloses I haven't been disclosed in
the way that I'm being disclosed other
people are saying there's something
that's going on there that's distinct
and impacting me and I'm like whoa well
I think it's this thing that we have
been doing but but I'm having
relationship with them you know I feel I
feel that maybe and there's one of the
things that I especially for baekje and
I have just really been kind of racking
our brains around this right like kind
of in in a in a collaborative sense it
just seems to be going on tone which is
I wonder it's like here we are in this
kind of Mont like this postmodern like
we're now in the last ten years it's
become something weird if you'd because
if you actually go to church right and
Yubel it like it we're now in the first
time I since I've been alive where being
a Christian and having those beliefs are
so outside of everyone's pre thematic
notions of what can be real or not it it
seems though that what can happen in a
conversation right seems like it's
almost like there's it's like a
conversation is a place where people
it's one of the few places in the
universe or in our
what our current understanding of
reality is relationship seems to be this
place where almost like we can still be
reached by God seizures right we can
still have like like like responses and
self-revealing and notions of
transcendence and understandings and
insights that that can bypass my bypass
my beliefs and my assumptions about
reality right that I even I can't even I
can't deny the experience of what can
happen there mm-hmm
and where that seemed to be available in
a religious setting before right it's
less and less available so I have a
feeling I'm not sure but like I have a
feeling that we are circling around
something here that goes actually way
back to the very beginning of Western
history which is I think was Socrates
was on top like we was headed at its
feet on right relationships dialectical
dialo goes getting closer to the mystery
like something that you can't put into
words but it's beyond but we can be
affected by it like an in relationship
seems to be a place where we're still
our pores are still open to something
like that that is if being starting to
be recognized and that starts to be have
an opening all the other things that
about the world and our relationship to
and spirituality are so much there I
think yes mm-hmm
yes it's beautifully articulated and as
you can probably tell like I mean you
know you know I mean in a very very very
serious way and I've thought through a
lot of how to
tentatively there's the train yeah you
go well you know there you go ah there's
I notice there's an appropriate way to
presents how the colonel of this budding
transformation in relationship dialectic
community feeling process must be you
know it it it apps it's it's it it is a
circling into culture a circling forth
from culture deep within us already of
course as well I'm also very interested
in sort of structural conversations
about how I see something what I feel
must be present in our culture in a way
that's linked to this in order for us to
in order for us to in my feeling move
towards something more healthy more
authentic more in touch with ourselves
the complexity around him within us each
other and yes it's something too
it's something to circle it's something
to circle into with care partially
because the preservation of the act of
the not knowing is it what being with
they're not knowing with each other
nevertheless committed to the
preservation of that which is continuous
in there not knowing together which all
of a sudden begins to look a bit like
some stable ground to stand on you know
like that that I mentioned before with
just stepping forward step by step
leading breadcrumbs around it so we can
actually kind of a sort of stable here a
little bit through for this time yeah
and so there's there's the actual
realizing the importance of being in it
and showing up with it that is primary
like is actually the internal reality of
anything we could talk about in terms of
its extrinsic function in terms of
function in terms of where it might sit
in culture but nevertheless with this
project over the last number of years
it's been something I've been tenderly
moving towards and I feel that things
are coming closer in terms of the level
of the the level of sort of a public
proffer of that public offering of that
then I've previously felt appropriate to
speak forth before and that as well is
part and parcel of where the
conversation online is is is developing
yeah and you know an interlocking piece
of all of this has always been and it's
always going to be how we relate to each
other
let me there really is that happens at
least as far as I'm concerned at the
moment in time and space so if there's a
certain amount of organization that has
to be directed to create what it's going
to happen in time in space it's like you
know our Twitter interaction is
essentially kind of just like a formal
structural thing it's like we're about
to launch off somewhere let's see how
fewer Carrick
we can do that well without that it
wouldn't be happening yeah and that's
just a communication between the two of
us the reality of course is that there
are billions of people in the world and
the coordination thereof and again it
doesn't have to be a Blissett the
challenges top-down coordination of that
is not it's not quite appropriate right
so it's it's how to it's how to make an
offer and it's how to extend an
invitation that is that is nothing more
than her come as you feel and I I truly
want you to come or not come in in some
sense that's the same way of your own
integrity and choice yeah right if you
don't come like that there's a sense in
which I don't act I'm not quite sure
that I want you to be there but there's
nothing really more to that other than
the necessary beginnings for well in
this case a certain not even a
peer-to-peer developmental relationship
because you know you might not know
exactly why you're drawn but hey I feel
like yeah I'm I'm ready to come and you
know and that's fine and maybe want to
do more listening than talking and
that's that's beautiful like the
contribution is as valuable yeah but I
feel it I feel I feel there is I feel
there is a deep need for the kind of
re-imagination of space of socializing
fundamentally and from that space of
socializing like like in it and it's an
essence of that to be to be recognized
as as something
turn to hmm because it's if it's built
correctly it's built on an authentic
presencing together and so the world the
world that I have been driven to see for
a long time is one where that the
powerful decisions you know are made are
made on the basis or one is in a
position of power if one has
sufficiently held one-cell accountable
to authenticity with other people right
in this deep appreciative either way and
I'm I'm just thoroughly I've thoroughly
do not accept anything else I it cannot
be it violates violates me violates the
people I care about it actually violates
the development of the people who would
claim to be making decisions there's
just no it's not it's not in you if
there is there is a there is there are
modes of engaging with reality that are
more conducive to loving development and
the sovereign valuing of the possibility
of life itself you know in others in
yourself and and I am struck by the the
breathless of that manifesting in the
world in positions of ostensible you
know power ostensible positions of
authority people looking at them it
angers me a lot really mm-hmm
right just and there's the part I think
what what I as you're talking about when
he said I will not accept there's like a
gathering sense I got right in that of
like where and this is the other side of
authenticity right now one level there
is this deep sense of I think is like a
lot of different words you can use for
it but there is this sense of kind of
like the
at card talks about glass and height
right this kind of profound letting be
letting being being a letting a be right
that allows being to kind of gather up
in and it's unconcealed in concealment
right has this kind of sage openness to
it and you and at the same time there's
also also a stand right that's you know
what I heard you say is like yeah
there's something you know in the
infinite perspectives and the infinite
things I can pay attention to their
themes like that there is a place that
if I bring my attention there and when
you get down to it
that it's kind of like it's not based on
certainty right it's based on something
else I don't know exactly what that is I
would imagine it's that relationship
between the glass and height and the
breakthrough that that that has one
getting a wise feel for where reality is
there where the reality may be then let
me know whether I'm on or I'm off right
mm-hmm
a kind of disclosure but there is that
quality where it's like there is a stand
there there is like in the end that the
stand is it allows one to disambiguate
in the face of infinite ambiguity right
that this feeling that as you as you
were we have to close to open right
there there are closures to be made and
that is that is
it's very very interesting given just
how much just how much openness calls
for just how much it requires that there
are closures still is a mmm God it's
difficult and this and this might be a
dimension post-modernism earlier right
there's a sense there we'd like oh it
got to be as open as possible but truly
there is deeply not a presencing of the
groundless ground we can stand on in
this in this conception there is a deep
bereft Ness in the substructure of that
way of viewing the world yeah right
there's no capacity to close there's no
capacity to stand even for a moment
because the metaphysics to understand
that closure is something that is it's
like oh no that's fixed and eternal if I
closed something you know hmm
it's like a it it doesn't have I don't
think it has the kind of the process
relationality that we're describing it
doesn't have built-in the sovereign
participation in transformation it
doesn't have a notion of an identity
that we share that transforms yeah yeah
absolutely and there is a quality of
there's a quality of um
and this is something I gotta say we are
really I would say it's and I'm actually
learning about this a lot in my being
married hmm that which is it's so
interesting for me to be married and I
keep I keep feeling deeply school Wyatt
and a lot of the reasons I'm schooled by
it is is that on one level marriage um
like you know people get married all the
time people been getting married all the
time but I kind of went into it like
thinking about like well this is kind of
a formality right like well that can
take back into it once it is a formality
it's one that forms and I'm watching it
I'm watching myself be going like wow
I'm really influenced to something that
I'm inside of that has a felt sense of a
history to it that's present that
organizes my perceptions and and there's
a it and I just get this sense of that
there's a there's a there's a history
like there's a presence of like there's
a presence of a deep structural history
being disclosed and I being being born
in the age that I am right like is kind
of like a you know classic secular
humanists um I've always been suspect of
I've always been suspected of social
norms of any kind like I just almost
like bitch Willy just and I am now kind
of seeing the sense of like whoa wait a
minute here there is like that something
has lasted for generation after
generation after generation already um
if you really see that it's it survived
through all of this you really look at
that it what it wages a deep respect in
my experience that I'm more I'm waking
up to more and more and more and
so authenticity and as we talk about
authenticity you know I think that I had
this idea without even reflecting on it
but authenticity was something like
uniqueness or kind of doing your own
thing or or Dancing with the beat of a
different drummer but I'm now starting
to think it's actually something
distinctly different and I think I
thought about this this word like author
author right like and I and I get this
sense that it's like it's more like this
offenses more like this it's more like
picking up the concerns that you were
born the inherited concerns that you
were born into and the roles that you
can't not be in right you tell what what
becomes intelligible to do right is is
is given into this like womb of
intelligibility that you're in and it's
more of a sense of like you pick up the
book and you read it you read it so
deeply right all the pictures and the
enactments and you do it so deeply that
at some point you've read it so
thoroughly that the next chapter turn
you you realize that you're writing the
next the next paragraph you're writing
it as you go but this that whole period
of like deeply deeply being of and in
the world and taking on those concerns
and be responsible and like humbly
learning the authorship is the is the
surrender into that fully and really
making it your own and in a certain
sense the the author of the next page is
really like you take the pen from all
the previous authors if you gotta earn
that great yes oh this is a lot in what
you said the have to earn it could you
could you sing more on this wait on this
notion of earning yeah yeah well I think
it's like one of the things that had me
at had it kind of emerge for me in a
moment was just this you brought a
product like the post modernist and
knife there's all kinds of gradations in
post matza like the it's already an
overgeneralization but like you know the
kind of it's a weird arrogance that i
can relate to right I'm kind of a cog in
a certain way right which is which is
basically look there's no ground all
there is is inherited stories that whole
the whole thing right the whole thing
and one of the things they don't notice
is that okay so there's there's no
ground therefore everything is a 10th
intent and they've just put themselves
in another ideology another kind of like
hmm can't escape right in a certain
sense we still here we still end up here
yep so what are you gonna do that that
is that's precisely the thing that's
always the thing with it we're with each
other and soon were with each other and
and I think this is what kind of brings
back to the relationship
one of the things about about technology
right is and I think this is why
circling is a verged right in a certain
way um even like 30 you know 20 30 years
ago if we were if it would have been
just made no sense to go like okay we're
gonna create we're gonna create a prime
practice on like basically the
fundamental unit of relationship let's
just let's do it on purpose it that
wouldn't have made sense until recently
and I and I've been coming to think
about like well why is why is a moment
at Burning Man with with my friends that
opened up to this profound thing how did
it go from bat to all around the world
despite right the pathetic characters
that we're doing it
it wasn't know about that but it was all
accepted in jest but I don't know it
wasn't through like know how in good
business skills it wasn't through
Marshall right usually happen emerged on
its own it's like what is it responding
to and I I'm not sure but I've come to I
at first I was like well maybe it's the
methodology right and but I'm like you
know it takes a lot of Education to look
at what we're doing and distinguish it
from any other human potential movement
thing like it and then and then I
started to look at I started to really
look at social media and I think that
there has been something that's been so
profound and impactful that's kind of
that I don't hear talked about that much
which is they think it started at first
with the answering machine right where
you go back in time there was a point
where there was no answering machine
when you had to exchange information you
always had to call the person and they
had to answer the phone and you had to
have
weird and ambiguously filled thing
called talking have to happen right be
like a an information exchange right
mm-hmm but then the first place that
came up was it was the answering machine
where all of a sudden I can actually
kind of relay information without having
to go through the relationship we can
connect without having to relate now you
fast forward and you look at all the
multiple ways in which we can connect
and exchange information without having
the as Lebanon would say the
phenomenological basis of all all
morality and all ethics being the
encounter with the other the ethical
obligation the phenomenological sense of
nervousness you feel when you look at
another's face and why you can't be like
why when you don't have to deal with
that you have road rage and you can do
it without feeling guilt about it right
he's become one thing that happens in
the encounter that is you can't get
below 11 oz would say that that if he
didn't have that fundamental experience
of not a sense of a sense of
responsibility mmm in the face of the
other right um ethics wouldn't make any
sense unless there was that primordial
mmm relationship and now if you if you
make it an option all of a sudden to
either have that or to send a text right
you now have a choice that we've never
had before
okay and whenever you change the
structure of communication like like if
you you know if you like read was a
McLuhan talks about this he's like it's
so it's it's like whenever you just
change the structured communication you
change everyone's identity you change
the world and so I have a feeling that
in a certain sense of one of the reasons
why circling which
the thing that is unique about circling
is that it's like you could say isolates
the fundamental unit of relationship
that underlies all of the relationships
and makes it a yoga
well because it's uncomfortable to do
that right my nervous system kind of
gravitate towards just like machines did
after Industrial Revolution brought
everything in front of us we didn't have
to move right then all before that there
was no such thing called a physical
fitness right because life was hard
enough it involved lots of movement and
I think that there's a something similar
going on with relationship yeah yeah
definitely vicinity so there's that
authentic attunement of of like finding
the rug because that's a lot of what
goes on in interactions I just like the
social dance one is we're ultimately
like if what I say kind of hurts you on
some level right or if I'm you get this
immediate feedback that doesn't really
there's no rulebook the lays all that
out but it's a phenomenological
enactment of the dance right mm-hmm
we don't have to do a lot of anymore
because we can just text each other but
I think we start to lose our humanity um
I mean wow these conversations yeah
those are some of the thoughts have been
having over the last couple of years
yeah a beautiful thoughts when you
mentioned the word nervousness it
immediately brought to mind a nervous
system obviously yeah and how important
it is to Co regulate nervous systems in
dance you know and it's with the text
messages it's you know and we're
figuring out new emojis and gifts and
stuff like that but in many respects
it's it's taken pretty blunt instruments
to regulate what is an incredibly
complex complex potential art form and
dance
yet and it is interesting why there's so
many places to go let me check my phone
because I said okay it's 10:01 and so we
have my time which means we probably
need to wrap up within about 20 minutes
or so that's right isn't it yes yes yes
oh so interesting there are
what would be well okay so this this
isn't this isn't where came up to me to
explore with you until right until the
end of some of your expression there and
that's this which is we know that
Millennials and I think even more over
the James II which is there at the
generation to come after the Millennials
are absolutely immersed in developing
their relational sense of self and sense
of other using platforms and this kind
of technological communication that
removes key elements of what we've for
the entire history of humanity used to
regulate our nervous systems which was
other nervous systems in space in
proximity yeah and there are different
ways of thinking about this that I've
heard I've heard some very optimistic
takes which are relevant to bring into
the picture because we must we must I
think be open to the sort of already
this already relationship we have with
technology and just how much the
incentives of this of the system that
we're a part of are the car is already
running and well we may consider slowing
elements of it down even if that were
the case reimagining how we consider
growth in areas of development and
awareness perhaps rather than certain
kind of materialistic ordinary economic
growth even if we wanted to have that
conversation which is a very interesting
conversation to have a car is still
going to take a certain amount of time
to slow down and if it just stopped
suddenly that would be a real bloody
problem
so the cars going to be moving somewhere
and so there's a sense in which it is
interesting to consider what new modes
of communication and relationship are
made possible by these kind of platforms
while at the same time looking to
establish a place where we may remember
this this other in my sense still deeper
kind just because we're so I mean the
whole attitude we've taken to
understanding the world and our bodies
is as for the most part always been
through certain boxes that have obscured
a kind of a different take and we just
there's so much mystery there's so much
mystery you know and it's it's not a
pretty not appropriate to to box that
away and and not not attend to it and
not reimagine it again and continue to
is of course many many people are but um
but there's something but I also don't I
mean I guess what I'm searching for here
is what we might say of the D because
I've heard people present something like
oh there could be you know an affordance
of a different kind of language that
maybe actually we can pick a certain
kind of state and perhaps use a certain
kind of emoji or a gif to capture that
in such a way that communicates a great
amount of information and has that embed
in a way that's really fast and adaptive
and in many respects we are establishing
so really we artists so if that's the
case we actually wanted the means
established in that must be continuous
with what it is to show up in person as
well right so so well it's appropriate
to create new icons of communication
these we must be it we must be enabling
a continuous nests of our relationship
to that up and down the full stack of
relational modalities yes and yeah
that's something came to me that
yeah there's a there's a sense in which
you know I think you're I think you
brought up a good point which is which
is you know like as much as we can we
could look at this and be horrified
right appropriately hmm there's a way in
which there's a way in which there's a
historical movement right that we just
can't piss in the wind of it right
mm-hmm
we can one of the things about some of
the some of the dialogue around around
climate changes of like that like I I'm
not an expert in any of this and but I
there there is this sense in which I
notice we're I don't think that we have
history in our hands I don't think we
produced history and I don't think we
have it in our hands as an object right
and I think that there was in your in it
work of it right we're historical like
through and through we already are
before we have anything to say about it
there's some happening and like oh it's
somebody yes like it's like the grant
will have the greatest intention and our
very way of addressing the problem can
be the problem itself right and not even
know it and have us be blind to it
there's something else happening right
um and I I think that there's something
about there's something about not like
there's something about that not it's
not like I'm gonna ever figure out how
did how to do a different history it's I
think anymore like there's a movement
that two commands deep respect in which
I'm a little ant right in three it's
trying to like even doesn't even go to
what degree it's on a tree right
and be just really aware of those of
just that humility which is strangely
concealed in our times and this is what
Heidegger would call and say this is
this is like where our more real sense
of being is is a kind of we see
technologically right in the sense of
that being is no longer an object over
against a subject it's now all a
standing reserve where we seek to
optimize and extract the energy from it
we don't long we no longer see the Rhine
we see power plants right we see
everything as a resource to extract from
and to order in ever-evolving and so
what that does technologically and if
you can kind of see it in anything
technological the being of technology
collapses distances right so like the
more than the logical the phone is the
faster it is and you can there's I don't
know why no one can really say why we
need faster phones like at this point
there's a momentum going on right it's a
movement of being and I think what
Heidegger would say is like it's more
like he would say something like you
know it he can't move against it but you
can develop but you can seek to develop
it beyond itself and I heard that
sensibility that is beautiful yeah I
heard that sensibility in that like
mm-hm and I and I wonder I have no idea
but I wonder if part of what's happening
in these conversations right and that
people are now having conversations
about these conversations is that
technology actually has brought brought
together a platform that that enables
something very untechnical called a
meandering conversation right in the
chair and that strut that that beams out
that beams out to me
anyways mmm I think very distinct from a
lot of the other things that technology
does which is just create more
technology here what I can tell them
there's no way we would have ever have
talking before but we're great unite and
then stand on the platform that this
creates and such that we can we can
engage in something that's not
collapsing distances right mm yeah it is
interesting you use the metaphor of
standing on the platform almost as
though then to cool across and engage in
a certain kind of relationality enabled
by the platform there's a there's a
there's a there's a dimensionality to
that there's a that's that's a 3d image
and if you know it's it's also something
taking place over time yeah it's very
interesting guy you've I'm so I'm so
grateful for this conversation and I I
have to I have to
yeah the first the first artificial
thing in it is me is me catering to this
time and space thing yeah because if I
you know obviously there's there's the
River continues meandering and but but
I'm very grateful I'm very grateful for
for this dialogue and if it feels
absolutely appropriate for me to share
it great me to how is that how yeah so
so that's beautiful
and look I in ways that we I think need
not articulate now I'm looking forward
to the future and the opportunities for
collaboration I hope that has in store
[Music]
yeah and so I am I wish you a wonderful
rest of your day and weekend and onwards
I'll be I'll be watching on and enjoying
so thank you and also for another
understand another practical note like
sure I the and I think more March is
wrong at least I start the next training
program in in the thing that I do
circling so like I'm I'll just I'll give
you a link for people to find that if
they want yes beautiful right yeah so so
yeah I be posting this obviously to the
boys club YouTube channel and the
podcast and so just let me know send me
a link in Twitter or Facebook we have
each other on Facebook now what links
you would like me to post and I'll
attach them on
so that's do ya want me to upload this
to my channel too or if that's something
you're interested to do then that's
interesting only yeah yeah sure I'm
happy to have it out there on both both
I'm going to I've recorded myself with a
camera here as well so I'm actually
going to change the image of me
on here to that and but that doesn't
need it you can just go ahead and
publish the one we've recorded here so
the audio you're hearing for me is
coming out of these headphones rather
than this microphone so the podcast
version I'll be putting this in so that
it's a better listening experience but
um but yeah yeah absolutely
also next time let's talk I want to talk
about your your live events your live
event yes absolutely and that's
precisely what I'd love to collaborate
on and of course we already are we
already are you know I'm deeply being
informed by all of this and it's really
enabling of creating a certain presence
knowing that not only are we there in
the room with each other but there are
people around the world to feel the
importance and the relevance of similar
things and it's that kind of
communication cross these micro
communities that I think is part and
parcel of this whole endeavor that we're
on so right yeah yeah beautiful all
right thank you yeah well thank you guys
thank you all right mate I'll talk to
you soon I hope have a beautiful day bye
bye bye bye