[Music]
you
[Music]
welcome back to awakening for the
meaning crisis so last time what we did
is we finished up a cognitive scientific
exploration of higher states of
consciousness awakening experiences
these kinds of mystical experiences that
bring about massive transformation we
saw how we can give a psychologically
active description of these processes
that explain both the experiential
profile that people are having and some
of the features that they find therein
we were also able to talk about this at
the level of machine learning and
information processing and at the brain
level and what comes out of this is a
picture of a state of consciousness that
in which we are getting a flow state
that is improving our optimal grip on
the world optimizing our performance for
making sense of things and enhancing our
overall capacity for learning and
problem-solving and we saw that that in
fact provides a very good justification
for the states being the guidance for
the transformation of life and that what
they do is they give a brain state that
is highly optimized processing things in
a way that gives us a tremendous sense
of a plausible grip on the world and
that is making use processing that is
absolutely indispensable and
foundational for us it is it has a kind
of important priority in all of our
processing and what I suggested from
this is that while it doesn't give us
any good theories in a sense of
propositional claims about the
metaphysical structure of reality
these states do justify the their
claim to give us guidance so although
they are not rational in the sense of
providing good argument and evidence for
beliefs they are rational in the sense
of wisdom in that they optimize some of
our core processing for being in contact
with the reality in a way that is
coupled optimally to our own processes
of self transcendence and the
cultivation of wisdom so the buddha
awakens and that awakening gives him
this state that is guiding him to a
fundamental transformation in how he
understands the world and how he
understands not just intellectually
because that's what I've been
contrasting here but in a participatory
fashion in an existential fashion
himself in the world we talked about how
this is brought up bringing about a sati
deep remembering of the being modes so
that he is seeing through the
frustrating futility modal confusion but
there is more than going on this higher
state of consciousness is not only
helping him remember the being mode and
helping him to transcend through
systemic illusion and go through
something deeply analogous to a
developmental shift we can also see it
in terms we can see what's going on in
his claim to enlightenment and its
relevance to the cultivation of wisdom
and the enhancement of meaning in terms
of the pronouncements he made from this
state now talking about this is very
problematic because the attempts by the
West and to understand some of the
central tenets of Buddhism have has not
had a very good history I recommend to
you Stephen bachelors book awakening in
the West for how the West systematically
misunderstood and Batchelor makes a
current argument in a series of his
books I've got to meet Stephen
at a conference and we had dinner
together I recommend all of his works
very strongly and very highly to you and
so from his works and in discussion with
him he argues that the West is still in
the grip of a problematic way of trying
to interpret Buddhism so let's take a
quick look at that and then we will
return to what the central claims of
Buddhism are and I want to show you why
even that way of putting it is proper
perhaps incorrect so Bachelor in one of
his books along with others and he folds
it up with Buddhism without bu-but
beliefs and then later on this was
followed up by even a more radical after
Buddhism in which he's taking the
position of somebody who's post
religious very germane to many of us he
but he does argue in alone with others
that we face an interpretation crisis
when we're trying to understand Buddhism
we have two approaches that people give
us for how we should try and interpret
Buddhism of course this will not be
relevant just to Buddhism but for any
position that exists in a different
culture or history that we're trying to
understand via Buddhism or stoicism or
Neoplatonism for example so he says we
are confronted with two different
positions one is the claim that you can
only interpret Buddhism from within a
tradition and we have seen good reason
why you might argue that that this is
right the kind of stuff we're talking
about here wisdom and self transcendence
this is not largely a matter of altering
your belief this is about going through
transformation and your perspectival and
participatory knowing it's about
fundamentally altering your the agent
arena relationship your existential
modes etc and so if you are not engaged
with in the transformative practice then
of course you do not understand what
what Buddhism is it has to in that sense
be understood from within and this is a
general property of wisdom per se wisdom
is something that must be understood
from within the problem with that of
course is the it's myopic right there
are very many Buddhist traditions and
they are relative to certain times and
place in particular historical contexts
and to claim that that particular
interpretation a particular sect or
tradition is the sole pathway to
understanding or interpreting Buddhism
is of course myopic it's narrow-minded
and often parochial it claims things as
fundamental which are often very
contingent so what's the alternative the
alternative is well what the alternative
says is the problem with this is this is
very subjective I don't know if that's
exactly the right word but the idea here
is right this is the problem with seeing
things from the inside is that tends to
be very subjective and of course that
means you're not understanding the
phenomenon as is but you're only seeing
it through your own particular bias so
the alternative outside any tradition
and this is typify Din the academic
study of Buddhism for example like
within religious studies or something
like that and then the main argument
here is and this will often happen it's
not always the case but if you meet
people in religious studies and you'll
say are you studying Buddhism and
they'll say yes yes I'm studying
Buddhism and then oh and then you'll ask
them well what practices do you engage
in and they'll say oh no no I don't
engage in any practices that would be a
mistake if I got in too involved too
close to this material I would lose my
objectivity I would lose my ability to
critically reflect on it critically
compare it to other traditions other
approaches so the idea here is what we
will have right is an objective account
now although Steven doesn't mention this
in his book bachelor this bachelor
doesn't mention in his book this is very
reminiscent of the problem that Socrates
faced because what we have here is
transformative relevance and here we
have some attempt to get at the truth
and like the Socratic project I would
put it to you and this is what I think
Bachelor is saying is that Buddhism is
about both of these it's about trying to
find transformative lis relevant truths
but that means we have to transcend both
of these ways of interpreting Buddhism
so he points out that we have to get
beyond both of these in some fashion how
do we do this
well he points out that we need to do
this in a way that is going to be
relevant to issues of meaning in our
life so this interpretation crisis where
we have these two competing and
diametrically opposed ways of trying to
interpret and import Buddhism is
actually interacting with the meeting
crisis in society
because we're not doing this just in
some empty cultural vacuum we are
precisely interested as I've been
suggesting throughout this series of
lectures where that we're doing this
precisely because we're deeply involved
with the project of trying to recover
how we can cultivate wisdom and enhance
meaning in our lives in a cultural
historical context that is not
supportive and in fact often dil
Asterius to those existentially
necessary endeavors okay so what do we
do we have to break out of all of this
in some fashion and what he does is he
tries to see where these are
both fixated and what he argues is that
this will become my Opik because it will
get fixated on the particular
propositions of a tradition it will get
fixated on beliefs and this is in fact
what you study over here objectively you
study of course the texts and the
beliefs that have been propositional II
rendered by a particular tradition it's
this belief fixation that needs to be
broken through this is why he entitles
the book that came after alone with
others Buddhism without beliefs because
he tries to argue that part of what is
preventing us from really getting both
sides of Buddhism is that both of these
are fixed locked like being locked
inside the box in the nine dot problem
I'm trying to understand Buddhism as a
set of beliefs we have gotten so used to
this way of thinking and we'll see later
why it is a post-christian way of
thinking that these traditions for
cultic these axial legacy traditions for
cultivating wisdom and self
transcendence are to be understood as
Creed's as systems of beliefs that we
now even will equate right the word
belief with these practices we'll talk
about it as a belief system or will you
even use the word belief as a synonym
for faith etc so we have gotten so
oriented towards this reduction of all
of what we've been talking about here
all of this transformational process to
the possession and the assertion of
beliefs and again we'll see historically
why that's the case that we can't break
out of this interestingly although I
won't be able to do it in this video
we're going to see that breaking out of
right trying to understand
in terms of belief systems is also going
to be needed to address the meeting
crisis I have been pointing you towards
that repeatedly belief systems namely
ideologies are attempts to create
meaning but they fail for the deep
reason and you've already seen a lot of
argument and evidence for this is that a
lot of your meaning-making machinery is
not occurring at the level of your
propositional knowledge your your
beliefs or and and your assertions of
which beliefs you adhere to so he
proposes instead what we need to do is
we need to look at Buddhism ultimately
existentially now you remember
existentially has to do with these modes
he also invokes in along with others the
distinction between the being mode and
the having mode and he proposes that
Buddhism is remembering the being mode
and I've already talked about that in a
previous video and so he says look
traditionally what the Buddha said and
now we're returning to what the Buddha
said is in order to try and get more of
what his enlightenment was about
traditionally what the Buddha said is
presented as the Four Noble Truths and
these are four statements or
propositions that are usually presented
to our ears as claims to be believed and
that what makes you a Buddhist is if you
believe them the problem with this of
course is that it is taking place at
this very level that Batchelor argues we
need to get beyond it's not of course
that people don't believe things within
Buddhism is that what we've been talking
about here these processes of
transformation are taking place at the
level of perspectival knowing at the
level of transforming of states of
consciousness and at the participatory
level transforming the fundamental
machinery of the self of the agent arena
relationship and the modes of existence
so we need to understand these Four
Noble Truths as things that could help
afford the kind of transformations we've
been talking about the point about these
is not to believe
the point about them is to get them to
help you reenact the Buddha's
enlightenment if you're not doing that
if you cannot enact enlightenment then
you are not getting the Four Noble
Truths he proposes therefore that we
should not call them the Four Noble
Truths we should call them the four
ennobling Truths
I then proposed to him in person that we
shouldn't even call them truths anymore
because truths truth is a property of
propositions actually I said what you
should call them is the four ennobling
provocations you're trying to provoke
people into change so let me try and go
through the four noble truths but
restating them in turn as for ennobling
enabling that means affording
self-transcendence provocations by doing
that I think we can get back to if
that's the right verb what the Buddha
was conveying about what's going on in
enlightenment what kind of
transformation is being brought about by
the awakening experience and what is it
alleviating okay so let's go through
these one by one
okay so I'll present the the standard
way of representing the truth and then
the reformulation in order to deal with
bachelors I think astute criticism and
in order to interconnect with all the
argumentation we have been developing
throughout this video series so the
first one is typically stated as all is
suffering or all of life is suffering
now that's first of all if that were the
this statement to be believed it's false
because suffering is a comparative term
and comparative terms can't be extended
to everything that would be like saying
everything is tall that doesn't make any
sense things are only tall relative to
other things being being shorter so
first of all it doesn't really mean all
is it's something more like all is
threatened by well what's the all
doesn't mean everything in existence
should we interpret it metaphysically
well I mentioned last time that we
should be careful about giving
metaphysical interpretations to what
people bring out of these awakening
experiences and the Buddha himself will
Verret was famously reticent to give any
metaphysical interpretations to his
statements so let's try and follow that
in order to get at that let's note what
this word means okay because again we've
tended to allow a word to go through a
process of trivialization and reduction
and we've lost part of the meaning let
me give you first of all that an analogy
okay so the original meaning of this
word is insane but it has come to be
synonymous with angry I'm mad at Agnes
it doesn't mean I'm insane right it
means that I'm angry at Agnes how did
that happen well one of the ideas is
anger is a state that can rent and
render you if it becomes extreme extreme
anger can render you temporarily insane
and therefore temporarily mad anger is a
cause a pertinent cause of madness okay
so suffering people usually hear pain
distress when they hear the word
suffering that person is suffering but
that's not actually what the word means
to suffer means to undergo it means to
Lu's agency so you can actually suffer
joy you can have so much joy that you
sort of have lost control of yourself
you can have so much pleasure
it is not oxymoronic to say I'm
suffering pleasure
it means I'm having so much pleasure
that I've sort of lost control of the
situation of the situation right now
pain is a very powerful way of losing
agency why first of all that's highly
disruptive and secondly pain is
associated usually with damage and
damage is a state in which we're often
losing agency so right don't here just
pain the Buddha is not saying
everything's painful that's ridiculous
because if everything was painful
nothing would be painful even all of
your experiences can be painful
doesn't mean anything particularly
because many of your experiences can't
be painful in and of themselves right
because again this isn't an absolute
kind of claim instead pay attention to
this connection rather than this one do
you remember last video gave a parable
of this suffering it's the monkey that
grabs the pitch and then tries to free
itself and then the other hand gets
stuck in both paws and head and then it
gets killed there is nothing in there of
pain most of the buddha's metaphors are
not paying metaphors there entrapment
metaphors being fettered losing your
freedom losing your agency that's why
the Buddha doesn't describe
enlightenment in terms of relief but he
would famously say just like wherever
you dip into the ocean it has one taste
the taste of salt no matter where you
dip into my teaching it has one taste
the taste of freedom
okay
so what he seems to be saying is that
all of your life is threatened with the
possibility of losing your freedom so
let's go from all is suffering to a
provocation realize that all of your
life is threatened with a loss of
freedom a loss of agency and there's a
word for this kind of loss that's often
translated as suffering which is dukkha
dukkha again does not mean pain
what does dukkha mean well the etymology
is imagine you have a wheel and it's
off-center on its axis so the axle is
not properly going through the center of
the wheel and as the wheel is turning
it's destroying itself there's a
self-destructiveness or you have your
arm is out of joint it's disjointed like
when and when Shakespeare has Hamlet
says the time is out of joint right it's
out of joint and as you're moving your
arm it's destroying itself so it means
like an empty gap that's sort of dirty
so that as things are moving within it
they're destroying themselves so the
idea of something that's engaged in a
process of self destruction which of
course is one of the powerful ways you
can lose your agency is through self
destructive processes it's what's going
on here so realize that all of your life
is threatened very really threatened
existentially threatened by a capacity
for self destructive behavior
self-deceptive self-destructive behavior
so now you see what he's doing is so
situated very firmly within the actual
tradition so what what does he mean you
how can we try and
understand this a little bit better so
this is work based on some stuff I
published with Leo Ferraro and then I'll
talk about some additional and important
new work by Mark Lewis I want to try and
trace a kind of pattern in your
cognitive processing that can very often
occur and and the core of the argument I
want to make is the very processes that
make you adaptively intelligent and
we've been talking about this from the
beginning also make you vulnerable to
self deceptive self-destructive behavior
okay so let's say you encounter an event
and you interpret the event is bad okay
now one of the adaptive machines you
have is your brain immediately is trying
to predict and anticipate are there
events like that the point of right you
encountering something potentially even
painful or distressing is not just to uh
it's to make you sensitive in
anticipating what's going to happen in
the future okay so your brain now tries
to assess the probability of another
event like this happening now well go
tuned we'll get into this in more detail
later although we've talked a bit about
it already with ideas about salience is
I can't take it in all of the
information available to me if I was to
try and calculate the actual probability
of event I would have to track all the
variables in my environment that's
astronomically vast even a supercomputer
cannot possibly do this right it's the
thing the seeing is when we do
probability problems in school we are
given all the variables by stipulation
but the real world doesn't work that way
the real world has an indefinitely large
set of variables interacting in an
indefinitely large number of ways so
what do we do well we use what are
called heuristics we use shortcuts that
try and help us cut through and zero in
on the relevant data the relevant
information because we've said before
the zeroing in on relevant information
is crucial so one of the things we do is
we use the representativeness heuristic
you judge how probable an event is by
how prototypical it is how salient it is
how much it stands out in your mind
right and that will often interact with
another heuristic the availability
heuristic this is you judge how probable
an event is by how easy you can remember
a similar event occurring or how easily
you can imagine another event occurring
so these are these are actually very
adaptive for you
now the problem is you're in a bad state
because you've just had something bad
happen to you now that that trigger is a
thing called encoding specificity when
you're sad it's very difficult to for
you to remember events in which you're
happy it's very easy for you to remember
events in which you're sad because
that's because your memory doesn't just
store the facts it stores all that
perspectival participatory knowing it
also stores the state you are in this
leads to very sort of paradoxical things
if you lose your keys when you're drunk
one of the things you should do if you
want to get your keys back is get drunk
again because chances are it will
improve your memory if you're studying
for a test and you have a headache and
you take some aspirin when you're
actually doing the test take the aspirin
because it will improve your performance
I mean so there's classic experiments on
this in one experiment right you have a
bunch of people learning a set of words
right in the same room Group A and Group
B and then in the second part of the
experiment Group A does it in the same
room group B does it in a different room
that's the only difference in them
Group A will remember a significant
greater number of words than Group B
just because they're in the same room
okay now this is very adaptive you may
say that's great no it's not because
your brain is trying to always fit you
to the environment so it doesn't just
store information it stores how you were
fitted to the environment or the context
it's very adaptive so now what's
happening here
well you you're in a bad state so it's
easy for you to remember bad things that
means it's easy for you to remember bad
things and that means you judge the
probability of bad things happening to
be increasing this bad thing just
happened to you so it's very salient
that makes you judge that it's much more
probable it's going to happen and these
are reinforcing each other now all of
this is interacting with what's called
the confirmation bias we'll go over a
lot more of this later when we talk
about problem solving
what this is is an adoptive strategy you
use where you tend to only look for
information that supports your current
belief because very often trying to find
this confirmation is takes too long and
it's very difficult and complex so we
tend to look for what confirms so now
the confirmation bias now as I'm going
through my memory in my imagination I
will tend to look for things that
confirm my forming judgment that this
event is highly probable now all of this
machinery can go awry right all of these
heuristics will mislead you it's because
of this heuristic that people make
mistakes when they take loved ones to
the airport and things like that right
because we can imagine planes falling
from the sky and when it does it's very
representative for us as people describe
it as a tragedy it's in the news and so
we judged air-crane
airplane crashes to be highly probable
even though they're very low in
probability but then we turn and get
into an auto or automobile which is the
North American death machine without
paying any attention to it
so we misjudge probabilities because of
these heuristics now we can't do without
them it's like when we talked about
hyperbolic discounting you can't do
without them they're adaptive you need
them let's continue this so these are
all reinforcing each other the
confirmation bias so now what do you do
you judge the probability to be great
okay now notice how most of this is
happening automatically in an
self-organizing fashion that's again
because imagine if I had to do
everything fully consciously okay I'm
gonna pick up the cup now I no need to
start tensing my upper bicep I need to
start moving my if I had to move
everything caught I couldn't pick up the
cup I need my cognition to be inherently
self-organizing we've seen that throat
the way in which your processes need to
be happening simultaneously bottom-up
and top-down like when you're doing
reading and you're reading both the
letters and the words your cognition
needs to be self-organizing it needs to
be largely automatic these are
adaptively indispensable for you okay so
you judge the probability is great well
what effect is that judgment have on you
it's not emotionally neutral okay that
makes you anxious when your brain starts
to conclude that the probability of
negative ents is high you get anxiety
what does think got anxiety due to you
well you lose cognitive flexibility
you're framing on things becomes very
narrow very rigid very limited what does
that do
well that reduces your ability to solve
problems the ability to solve problems
goes down okay what does active for you
okay as that goes down you start to make
lots of mistakes and fail what does that
do well of course that increases your
anxiety and that reinforces right that
bad events are happening to you what
does all that do well all of this starts
to gather in your mind is I'm doomed
you get fatalistic well if you're living
in a fatalistic world you're going to
start interpreting more and more events
even neutral events as bad and the whole
thing starts to feed on itself the very
things that make you so intelligently
adaptive the fact that your cognition
zeroes in on relevant information makes
it salient the fact that it's so complex
a fiying itself in organising itself the
fact that it is trying to fit you to the
environment and process information in a
way that's doable within the real world
all these things that make you so
adaptive simultaneously make you
vulnerable
they're self deceptive self-destructive
behavior that's what it means to say all
of your life is threatened realize that
all of your life is threatened by dukkha
it's not that everything you're doing is
painful or distressing that is
ridiculous that is a meaningless claim
it's that every process you're engaging
every time you're exercising you're
intelligent agency you're making
yourself vulnerable the self deceptive
self-destructive processing we called
this and
then we published parasitic processing
it's not just about bad events this is
just one example we get into all kinds
of these spirals we'll put up on this on
the video a recent schema for what
depression looks like that was released
by some MIT researchers very complex
like this we call this parasitic
processing because it's like a parasite
in that it takes up life within you and
it right takes life away from you it
causes you to lose your agency it causes
you to suffer and here's what's
important this capacity for your
cognitive brain to be self-organizing
heuristic using right complexified to
create complex systems and functions
with emergent abilities has a downside
to it look this is what you know when
you're in one of these spirals you'll
know it oh no where I go oh no knowing
it what does it do for you what does
your belief do it's like knowing you
knowing that I should go outside the
square they go side the box doesn't do
anything why this is a complex
self-organizing adaptive system if you
try and intervene here the rest of the
system reorganizes itself around your
attempted intervention it can adapt and
preserve itself as you try to destroy it
why because it's making sure it's making
use of the very machinery by which you
adopt and make use of the things that
are trying to destroy you
it's that's how it works
no matter where I am this is a perennial
threat no matter what I am doing this is
always liable to happen now what's
interesting as I said my colleague and
good friend Marc Lewis we're talking
about comparing this to other work that
he he's recently been doing so some of
you may know Marc Lewis I highly
recommend you take a look at his work
Marc has been deeply influential in my
own thinking my ideas about dynamical
processing self-organizing systems
development he is one of the four most
important neuroscientists about
addiction and how addiction works in the
world I strongly recommend reading his
book memoirs of an addicted brain so
Marc was himself I'm not disclosing
anything confidential because it's right
in the book Marc was himself an addict
in his youth and then he overcame his
addiction then and he went into
neuroscience to try and figure out why
what is addiction how does it work now
that's important because addiction right
his addiction is primarily the loss of
agency it's not I mean addiction is
distressing and painful but when we're
talking about somebody somebody being
addicted the way we finally diagnosed
them is by how dysfunctional they become
how much they lose their agency right so
you are a video game addict if you are
playing video games to the point where
you cannot pursue the goals you want to
pursue in your life you cannot establish
and cultivate the relations you want to
establish in your life you cannot
cultivate the kind of character or
identity you aspire to if the video
gaming is robbing you of those agenting
processes then of course that is what we
mean by addiction addiction is a loss of
agency now when you take a look at
Marc's work Marc challenges Marc Lewis
he challenges right I just saw him give
a talk I've been having lunch with him
that
I also saw him have just a really good
talk at the Society for psychology and
philosophy or philosophy in psychology
we'll get the order right just this past
year and it he was not the only person
making this point but he articulated it
with his own particular explanation
which is his so the point that many of
people are making is the standard model
of addiction is incorrect fundamentally
wrong what's the standard model the
standard model is we have a biophysical
chemical dependency and when the
chemical is removed we get an
overwhelming compulsion to have to seek
out the chemical and if we don't get the
chemical then we suffer similar to as if
we were starving from a lack of food and
if we and so that's what addiction is
and the problem with this is it sounds
very commonsensical and the media likes
it it has the one unfortunate feature of
being almost completely false because
first of all you can get addicted to
processes that have no biochemical basis
like gambling for example secondly if
the if the overwhelming compulsion model
was correct you have a great deal of
difficulty explaining some very very
pertinent facts most people
spontaneously give up their addiction in
their 30s we of course get focused on
the people who remain addicted and
therefore we come to believe that
addiction is an overwhelming compulsion
but if you actually track people many
people spontaneously stop being addicted
here's a great historical example you
have soldiers in Vietnam during the
Vietnam War getting addicted to opioids
in Vietnam the opioid crisis not that it
isn't a crisis but we tend to think that
certain chemicals are intrinsically
addictive so they get addicted to heroin
when they return to the United States
the vast majority of them spontaneously
stop using the drug
but but why chemical not in the body
what's going on isn't there a
biochemical lack and therefore a huge
compulsion well think about it think
about it in terms of existential
learning see when they were in Vietnam
they had a particular identity they're a
soldier and they're in a particular
arena war they're in a particular
existential mode when they return to the
United States they become a citizen
right and a peaceful country the
relationship between the agent in their
arena is what is fundamentally being
altered in addiction so mark proposes a
model that he calls reciprocal narrowing
so here's your agent and here's the
arena and what happens is the drug use
is a suit is is associated with a
particular agent arena relationship and
what happens is and we talked about this
before remember this is always Co
identification
we're always assuming an identity and
assigning identity in a Co defining
interdependent manner what happens is
you start to lose a little bit of your
cognitive flexibility perhaps due to
something like this as you lose your
cognitive flexibility the number of
options in the world starts to decline
right as the number of options start to
decline you lose the variability for
your agency as you get a tighter
narrower less flexible cognitive agency
the number of options in the world goes
and what happens is these two things
worse
typically narrow to where you have no
options as to who you could be or how
the world can be and that's addiction it
is an it is a learned not propositional
II learned perspective early
participatory learning of a loss of
agency I pointed out to mark that if
this is the case there must be an
opposite if there's a spiral down there
must be a spiral up and in personal
communication just recently he said yes
yes totally and you know what that
spiraling up would be what would be the
agent arena relationship in which the
agency and the world are expanding
that's Ana GOG a that's the move towards
enlightenment what I want you to
understand is dukkha is these two things
because they're inter penetrating this
loss of agency because this this is your
agency as you're simultaneously doing
parasitic processing within you're doing
reciprocal narrowing without those are
totally reinforcing each other
that's dukkha and no matter where you
turn this is always threatening you
can't get free of that you can't run
away from it you can't deny it
remember the Buddha tried self-denial
this is like trying to hop over your
shadow you can't do it because it is
endemic all of this is endemic this is
the agent arena relationship you can't
do away with this this is indispensable
to be you being a person this is self
organizing relevance realizing
complexified processing you can't get
away from that because that is what
makes you adaptive so what do you do
that's what the buddha meant
when you realize that all of your life
is threatened by dukkha he didn't mean
believe that all of life is suffering
so
what we need is how do we address this
well once you realize it as a
provocation once I should like the point
is you should feel threatened
you should feel threatened because if I
can make you feel threatened by what
I've just done here how close and
intimate this threat is to you then
you're starting to enact the process of
moving towards enlightenment rather than
just asserting some propositions that
are largely inert so what's the standard
way of presenting the second truth
suffering is caused by desire and that
gets you into all kinds of problems
because then well don't but don't I
desire their enlightenment but then you
should not desire to do any you can just
get into all these weird loops and write
a better way of thinking about it is
realize that dukkha can be understood
realize that dukkha is caused by the way
in which you can become attached which
doesn't mean right that you just really
like something it means this sense of a
narrowing of yourself and the world so
that agency and options are lost the way
the addict is attached to their drug
which is not a compulsive desire
although they will experience it that
way it is better understood as a
parasitic processing that has led to a
reciprocal narrowing so that no
alternatives are available to you
the third the traditional presentation
is the cessation of suffering is
attainable but realize a better way of
putting that is realize that you can
recover your agency because this
narrowing down can also you can use the
shame machinery to anagogical e ascend
out of the cave towards the Sun of
enlightenment realize that this
machinery this complex machinery this
dynamical system can be exact 'add in a
way that reduces your capacity for
self-deception why how how do I address
this by a psycho technology the buddha
offered a psycho technology of practices
you know how you deal with a complex
dynamical system that is operating
against you by cultivating a counter
active dynamical system that is
operating for you you cultivate a
dynamical system that doesn't intervene
just here or here one at a time like
your efforts I'll try this oh that
doesn't work I'll try this because every
time I intervene it just reconfigures
and I'm doing the damn same damn thing
again Here I am in this fourth
relationship doing the same damn thing
again and I know I'm doing it and yet
when I try and not do it I find myself
doing it that will not work that's why
people end up in therapy but what if I
could create a dynamical system that
could interact intervene here here here
here here here here here here
simultaneously and I've made a
coordinated fashion what have I created
a counteractive dynamical system and
that it operates
didn't operate just at the level of my
beliefs but operated at the level of my
states of consciousness and my traits of
character that's what the Buddha offered
he offered the Eightfold Path the
Eightfold Path is a counter active
dynamical system that counteracts
parasitic processing and does reciprocal
opening beyond the ego self and beyond
the everyday world
so it's represented by an eight spokes
wheel it's supposed to be a
self-organizing system that rolls itself
in which each part is interdependent on
all the other parts you might have heard
it the Eightfold Path is to cultivate
right understanding right thinking
there's various translations of this
right sometimes right aspiration right
thought right speech right action Right
Livelihood and then right mindfulness
and right concentration we already
talked about this saying there's right
mindfulness and right concentration
means there is incorrect to one thing
this right is not moral righteousness
this is right like right handedness it
means getting an optimal grip because
that's what my right hand is an expert
in doing it means getting an optimal
grip notice this is about your cognition
this right is about your character and
this is about your consciousness and it
deals with ethical aspects existential
aspects central aspects it is the
attempt to give you a counter active
dynamical system that can deal with
parasitic processing
and that can help you reverse the
reciprocal narrowing until you get an
agogic awakening that takes you beyond
the prison of the ego and the everyday
world so we see what's happening here
what I'm trying to show you is this
higher state of consciousness this
awakening is set into a context of
helping you do important transformations
it helps you to remember the being mode
to get out of modal confusion it helps
you counteract parasitical processing
and reciprocal narrowing it helps
thereby to open you up to self
transcendence in a reliable and powerful
way this is what the Buddha was offering
people and I've tried to explain it to
you in a way such that both you should
feel threatened by what he is trying to
provoke in you and you should be
encouraged both of these are enactment
statements you should be able to enact
of the threat and enact the courage
encouragement enacting the courage that
you can respond to the parasitic
processing and the reciprocal narrowing
in your own life to the modal confusion
in your own life part of what we need to
understand is how we can properly
integrate this into what we have been
learning about wisdom and meaning in the
Mediterranean cultural historical
context and how all of that can be
integrated within a current scientific
worldview thank you very much for your
time and attention
[Music]
you
you
[Music]