so first of all I have to disclose that
a things we connect last time you had a
great influence your awakening from from
for the meaning crisis series had a
great influence on me and on my research
as well and with the information that
you shared you kindly shared and it was
very helpful because it expanded my
vocabulary and also expand gave me other
different perspective from where to look
at specific problems as meaning inside
concepts of meaning life that watching
to your series and and taking
information from you I I had the
opportunity also to talk to other people
about the about meaning and meaning in
life the hell that did not Susan wolf
I saw you talk to Susan walk which is
amazing you talk to innocent rod that's
great yeah and there sometimes was a
Kris conversation as well and the
conversation you had with Anderson told
to you have published not long time ago
was just great thank you
i young is very complex
people like us we do just we just we try
to get things here and there and we
create these concepts sometimes we are
not is not very well understood because
we haven't gone through the literature
properly through literature and you guys
just put me put the thing like very nice
well thank you for saying that
thank you for everything you said like I
draw that that's I'm glad to hear really
glad to hear that my work is so helpful
to you that's what I want to do that's
what that's the goal I'm trying to
achieve that's great and the
conversation today I I purposefully try
to leave it as
structures and structures as possible
and when I firstly contacted you about
this conversation and just to give the
listeners a bit of background talking
about the I practice martial arts
Brazilian jiu-jitsu and connecting to to
to the conversations you had with other
people's well we were speaking about
your think about your experience with
martial arts so about the reason and
meaning meaning meaning in life my
question would be a weapon dislike leave
it very open-ended for a martial arts
that is very focused on combat
competition that it comes from from from
a complete season of martial arts a
complete system I mean just not martial
bats as a way of living and that is
losing it maybe because it's specialized
in combat sports and self-defense there
are elements that it may not it may be
losing like being a tool for
transformation meditation and quest for
wisdom my question would be how without
having to to just take something and
copy from other style what would be the
principles of the elements necessary for
a martial art to be a complete system to
issue being a system of attack and
defense and competition but also a to
for meditation a to for quest for
meaning in life gaining of increase and
transformation mmm that's a really good
question so I guess there's a couple of
things first well I would I would I
generally talk about trying to cultivate
an ecology of practices and I you might
have seen some of the discussions I had
with reef Kelly or
the martial arts are integrated with
parkour practices and movement practices
and discourse practices so those are
still ways of answering those questions
one is extensively sorry all of a sudden
my throat went wrong extensively would
be well one of the things you might want
to consider is situating your combat
practice within some like mindfulness
practices some discourse practices some
other movement practices like parkour
like rape does or some of the stuff that
I'm doing with my Nana but you know
trying to situate a martial art within a
broader column of trying to teach people
various aspects of cultural
understanding and personal
transformation so one thing would be can
you situate it and then if you if you do
that then you've got a you got to think
about some very important questions one
is you want to you want to look for you
want to look for compensatory
relationships between the practices
right though what are their respective
strengths and weaknesses and how can I
properly align them and you need you
need you need mediating practices so
like an example I take from Rafe is that
you have martial art practices right and
then you have movement practices and
then you have moving mindfulness
practices and then you have sitted
mindfulness practices and then you have
these sort of short shared mindfulness
practices and you see how they all
overlap and they mediate between each
other they're structured so that there's
an ecology that mediates they could
speak to each other they can constrain
inform make each other more insightful
so I would think my first note the first
answer is the extensive answer try to
cultivate an oncology of practice and
like I say look for competent
compensatory relations of strength and
weakness and that look for mediation
relations so that they overlap inform
mutually constrain and talk to each
other
then there's the intensive answer the
intensive answer
is try to explicate the implicit
knowledge you're developing so one of
the ways in which I one of the ways in
which this became apparent to me and so
I'm going to recommend something a
minute is to go from doing a martial art
to trying to teach somebody else not to
do it because then what you have to do
is you have to go from an intuitive
implicit understanding of that that that
participatory knowing I fear of your
body what we're like right the way
you're knowing you're knowing of it and
through it and the way that's connected
to your perspectival knowing how you're
sizing up the situation salience
landscaping things right you have to go
from just running that intuitively
implicitly and you have to step back and
try and sit try and learn how would you
try to describe that state that knowing
to somebody help us what would what how
would you try to describe how to go from
not being in that state to being in that
state so the intensive strategy which
often helps through trying to teach
someone else what that state is like and
how to enter into that state you want to
take you want to have an exit you want
to have an intensive strategy of
explication where you're making it
explicit you're bringing conceptual
awareness to it you're trying to trace
out the processing you're trying to
break up your overall Gestalt of
movement into you know you know the
relevant components and and how they're
integrated together because that
explication of your otherwise implicit
intuitive knowledge and if you can put
it into conceptual form what people then
then can do this is sort of construe a
level when you get that sort of more
abstract conceptual representation you
can then transfer it to other aspects of
your life you can say okay I know what
this feels like I know what this is like
and I now know how to get into it not
just intuitively implicitly but I have a
how might I think this is what I do and
then think about how think about again
the mediation idea so I'm teaching the
martial arts right so I'm doing that
explication but then I ask myself how do
I bring that flow right and that
situational awareness and that elation
into my teaching my academic teaching
how do I transfer it because you know
and then so if you think about it these
two strategies the extensive and the
intensive then talk to each other
because right because notice I get the
intensive strategy of explication and
then if when I get a sort of an optimal
grip on that I can start to transfer it
to other areas of my life and when you
start doing the transfer right that will
then start to talk also to you Kent
setting up in ecology practices and then
you can get that whole thing organized
towards transforming your sense of self
your sense of world your sense of
meaning of this opposed to just you know
you know your sense of combat that's
very interesting in terms of that
background resources mmm what would be
the the first like the first line of
resources that they can go to in terms
of learn or get inspiration how follow
so I mean I like tweeted about this and
I recommend Kellis put out an online
course he's got videos where he's tried
to show and he's done recently where he
tries to explain how you put together
these ecologies or practices in the ways
that you and I have been talking about I
think you you want to you you you also
want to track down individual resources
that are you know geographically a
convenient to you for you know attending
a good mindfulness group taking up some
kind of movement practice the other
thing is to but you might want to take a
look at some of the online biological
practices I've been engaging in with
guys and stalk especially the guy who
invented circling and I did one recently
with Edwin Roush and so you could get an
idea of what that looks like and and you
could start to read some of the
literature on circling so I don't I
don't want to be too specific because
the the particular
ecology practices and the particular
places but that's that's what I would
recommend you are going to vary
depending on where you are but I
recommend you know I think race work is
a good sort of initial starting point
mark Walsh has a book out I think it's
oh oh oh I want to remember it I think
it's not beyond mindfulness and it's all
about embodiment mark Walsh's book is
excellent I thought I read it and
commented on it so there is a very
valuable resource I hope I get I'm
hoping getting the name of the book
write a mark of a guy wrong I apologize
but his book is is fantastic so that's
some initial places places to start
that's great what is circling about so
circle I got involved with circling
because of the work I'm doing with Peter
Lim burkas and whether the work I'm
doing is towards the next series I'm
working on the after Socrates series the
pursuit and cultivation of wisdom
through authentic dialogue and circling
as one of these modern practices was
invented by guys Sam stock who's a good
friend of mine did brilliant God
brilliant
and what circling is is a way of trying
to change what we're doing here
discourse into something that has a lot
of important features that you see in
sort of Socratic dialogue it's much more
about trying to use conversation not
just as a way of transmitting
information but a way for two people to
really get as guy says it really get
each other's world really so that I'm
not just getting information from you
and much more it's much more important
to me in the conversation to create a
dynamic sense of mutual opening I'm
getting how you're seeing me and you're
getting right how I'm seeing you and
we're using that to connect more deeply
through many different levels of our
mind and body to each other so we
develop a tremendous sense of
connectedness and a car because it
because this sounds sort of trivial but
it's really actually
the transformations that were often
seeking in conversation are not
fundamentally transformations of belief
the transformations of our sense of self
our sense of how to be with other people
our perspectival knowing our
participatory knowing and so circling is
a way of trying to reformulate how you
practice conversation so instead of
giving an emphasis on giving people
propositions obviously you're speaking
but what you're primarily trying to do
is create something like this mutual
flow between you and other people so
you're trying to tap into right sort of
the emergent collect the emerging
collective intelligence between people
the intelligence within distributed
cognition rather than within individual
brains you know the way like the
internet networks computers together
you're trying to network brains together
so they're forming this sort of you know
tight distributed cognition a dynamical
system and that's what your ultimate
that will ultimately afford a deeper
kind of trend transformation in people
then just trying to convince them of
particular conclusions within
argumentation
now what I want to do is I want to
understand how to take something like
circling and then reintegrate it back in
with argumentation because Socrates was
able to do both he was able to create
that sort of mid we called it midwifing
helping people to give birth to
themselves right which was always deeply
connected to his own project of
self-knowledge so he's doing that but he
also did it within the context of
argumentation which is again not
directed towards winning it's so what
you're trying to do is use the
connectedness between you and me and
then bring that into an argument ation
that is directed towards getting us more
deeply connected to wisdom virtue
reality is very interesting as something
related to martial arts so that I had
been noticed and after the conversation
with you in the information that you
have been sharing that something that
understand thought anew we spoke about
on the hero's journey it happens as well
working with competition on combat you
your
it's it's let's see how I put it because
I have to say it very carefully as well
because when when you have a young
athlete it's time a sport in general so
the is because he's young because for
being the best he will travel she would
try to be the best as possible in this
sport and as good as he he or she can be
so we'll try to be the best in being the
best so you're you're trying to win so
your your your focus on your goals is
winning from point A to B it'll be the
best but then there's one element that I
believe that eighty stays out but it's
it the motivation and the meaning in in
the the practice itself would be
becoming the best but compared to other
people compared to a set number of
elements but not necessarily not
necessarily will be being my best of
myself yes it may be connected sometimes
but you're not intentionally I have
experienced it I believe that they you
can try to give the best of yourself in
a specific trade or the best on in one
sport but not necessarily you may you
will not necessarily be transferred in
the best being you can be yes I agree
with that I think that's a very good
point that Andersen brought up and thank
you for pointing that out
yeah and that's interesting because and
that has to do and with you know the
degree to which we how should we take
the hero's journey within the martial
arts and I know Rafe Kelly is again
doing work on this explicitly but when
you set up what you said brings out a
really important point and that goes
towards
they have been doing quite a bit of work
on recently which is trying to try to
build on the work of La Paul and
transformative experience and Agnes Cal
art and aspiration right where you may
think that there's there's there's if
you'll allow me there's sort of this way
in she can frame the hero's journey I'm
going to defeat all of my opponents I'm
going to defeat all of my peers right
but there you could also think of the
hero's journey as an aspirational one
which is there's a future self that I
want to be and I'm not currently that
self right this is a self that you know
has perspectives and virtues and prep
and preferences that I don't have this
is perhaps and wiser self or a more
rational self or a more virtuous self
and that's a different that's a
different hero's journey because now the
relationship is between your current
self and your future self and it's it's
a very different thing because the
skills you need to build are not just
the skills of combat or the skills let's
call them the skills of victory you need
to but you need to build up these
important skills that peak like I'm this
agent right now in this particular arena
this is this is who I am and this is how
I see and understand the world and I
want to be that person you'll allow me
to use space to refer to time right I
want to be that person over there a
different person living in a different
world is why people go into therapy
right they want to be a different person
and living in a different world they
want to write and so their skills I've
get the skills of moving between worlds
in this existential sensible world are
not the same skills as combat they are
not the same skills as common you as a
and I agree with you I think you can
develop your skills of combat and be
best in that sense but if you have not
engaged in a lot of the processes that I
talked about the inactive analogy and a
Gog aid of serious play this is all in
my series for people who want to take a
deeper look at these ideas but if you
don't cultivate
the skill let's call them the skills of
transformation that trans frame used
from one world to another
you can have your combat skills at a
very high level and that doesn't mean
you've aspired very much at all right so
I agree with you that if people are
trying to incorporate the hero mythos
into their martial practice they should
sit down and reflect well which way do I
want it do I want it this way like you
know I just want to be able to defeat my
contemporaries is that the hero's
journey on I'm on or is the hero's
journey right I want to I want to move
to that person in that world and then
because then what you have to do is you
have to do with what we were talking
about earlier dandro you have to think
about cultivating all of these other
things so you can develop the skills of
transcendence and trance framing not
just the skills of combat and follow up
on this think it's all thinking about my
previous experiences as well do you
think that you you have you have said
the the if and I'm going to take myself
on earth actually as an example for
instance please please at some point of
my life I know I'm arrogant but before
before being married and in another
relationship at some stage of this not
only this relationship the relationship
didn't go very well and in broke apart
and at this specific moment I had to
look at my life on things that what have
I being have have what are tied what I'm
doing wrong and in this question with
this quest
what what went wrong with this
relationship then okay you can brand
other people try to bring over the P
phone questions none on someone someone
else is not my brain then you realize no
no no this is your fault so for things
that are your fault or my fault so then
realize okay they're things that I can
improve then the question afterwards
okay how can I improve these elements
that I have identified and it started
from that okay so what type of
experiences or knowledge I need in order
to improve these and these and these and
these exactly exactly
from this movie took me few years
actually from this book because and
there was a go there in this specific
case there was a Loki there's a there's
a relationship that doesn't work it's my
fault the field the next relationship I
want to improve these things and to be a
better person for this specific
relationship so what elements I need for
this and then starting this quest okay I
should guys this and this but in no no
occasion is okay I have to be best
better than this you know I don't need
to be better than anyone else I don't
have to compare to compare myself to
anyone else
but just my previous and bad yourself
yes it's yourself yeah exactly I think
that's exactly right yeah and so and
then and then I mean you didn't stop
being a martial artist so an interesting
question for me is I I expect that the
role of martial arts also changed in
your life because it's like how can i
connect the martial arts to these other
things that are I'm trying to how could
like that I'm trying to cultivate
because I have all these skills and
abilities in martial can they teach me
something can they you know can they may
bring help
I expect that possibly what you did is
you start to transfer well that's what
you see people doing they start to they
start to transform how they're doing
something that's already important
because you don't just give up when
you're like it's like okay I'm gonna
keep doing this but if I'm gonna be a
different person my attitude and
relationship has to be different because
here's what I'm saying
if I want to become that person over
there and let's say martial arts are
really important to me I have to deal
with my relationship to something that's
really important to me or else I'm not
gonna get to being that person over
there because this is so much a part of
me and if I'm trying to transform me
that means I've gotta transform how I'm
relating to the martial arts and I think
I I think that's an that's that's just
an important sort of thing that people
have to do they have to shift what what
did you get it did you get any like did
it start to talk did the project start
to talk to each other whether it was
what I'm saying as you just as you took
on this aspirational corset of I'm gonna
become the kind of person who can enter
into a deep and successful relationship
did you did you start to notice
different things and how you're
interacting with people even within
martial arts for example did that start
to change did you start to get any kind
of sense of the two they talking to each
other okay so I will have to give you
more background in order to position it
I started at this I started I started
martial arts in this specific momentum
of my life oh so yes okay okay so okay
so so I will tell you okay let me just
think how I can put it okay when I
realized okay something went wrong and
it was my fault
most of my father it was my fault and
then I had to look at myself okay what's
missing or what's wrong and from this
question and for the context of martial
arts
I realized that there is love of
uncontrolled aggressiveness that has to
be tamed somehow or controlled and in
this specific aspect and and then okay
so martial arts may be a solution
mmm then I thought and the thing might
might be live at this moment as well the
really really has changed a little bit
icky martial arts the arts of Mars so
there's nothing beyond the art of Mars
and martial arts that it is for I
believe at this point so what's the most
then I fell okay was the the the demo
sufficient martial arts that's out
Brazilian jiu-jitsu I'm going to do this
and see if I learn something in order to
control this so huh that's how I started
doing martial arts but but just keeping
with martial so over time then Easter I
start realizing more recently I said and
also I also practice practice
traditional judo sporadically as well
then I started realizing talking to user
I I realized okay there's some elements
here that we focus we are competitive
competition focus performance focus
which bring it bring meaning life it's a
certain meaning life and the
conversation that they had also with
with dr. Richard Ryan
because as I was asking questions asking
him questions I realized after this
conversation okay my old my perspective
is in in sports a motivation is
extrinsically motivated is not chasing
he said this another one point he said
no no no stop stop no you have to become
from inside
higher quality so yeah that's perfect
that's exactly what I'm talking about
right so you start with it and you you
sort of learn some their practical self
control but then you get this really
Socratic moment of insight you get a
moment you get a moment of
self-knowledge that your motivation is
extrinsic rather than intrinsic and then
you want to go to a deeper kind of
transformation to get a more intrinsic
motivation that's amazing
yes yes so in my research because apart
from doing and practice martial arts my
researching is effectiveness how how
good you can be according to your of
course your abilities in terms of
someone that doesn't do its full-time or
someone that does do full-time
professionally how how efficient you can
be in the martial arts and in terms of
of the the theoretical side of martial
arts is strategy
what's this knowledge but strategy very
very martial folks see if I get like
some some resources that I I got like I
have this book in special art the art of
war this Chinese enchant book there's
another another Buser yeah the Japanese
ancient book there's some book a book of
vibrates military a military strategy
that's death did this was my concept of
martial arts in strategy so and after
all this conversations that I have been
having during the past eight eight
months and some some research I do as
well with with Hinduism the Punishers
bootys as well and and practicing some
elements of meditation everything so I
realized that so much there's so much
more out there and also traditional
traditional judo and like research a
little bit about jujitsu
there are order element other than
Marsha if it's like decide this lissa
this this samurai the samurai he would
need like some spiritual practice
practice that wouldn't take so much time
let's say okay you you stay here you an
analogy you light a candle but it won't
take those so much time because your
focus yes would be on become technically
best
however this this martial arts which is
like competitive combat focus and it is
very popular very popular moment it
lives outside is this specific for a a
or some personality type all types but
there and lifestyle as well an age of
light if you are 18 years old you're now
familiar and you are strong and of
course you are going to destroy
everything but how about your fifty
years old if you're how about your you
can practice not twelve hours 20 hours
per week but only four hours per week
how about them you don't want or you
can't practice this this combative but I
still want to learn to transform your
life so this these are the questions
that I'm I'm a wrestling with I think
those are excellent questions I like to
thank you for sharing that because that
was a very helpful sort of case study of
you know that that kind of shift that I
was interested in that's very good
that's very good thank you thank you
would you like to talk about your next
video serious I'm very curious about it
so we're talking about these ecology of
practices yeah right and then in
discussions I've had with Jordan Hall he
said to me well you actually you
actually said you need sort of a meta
psycho technology that is gonna help you
you know choose and select and curate
and coordinate your ecology so a
Shepherd psychology and that was like oh
yeah that makes a lot of sense to me
and then I said well the primary thing
that needs to do is it needs to do
something analogous to what you know so
we have practices that take individual
intelligence and sort of you know a
ratchet them up and do rationality and
then ratchet them up into wisdom we need
a practice that's gonna take collective
intelligence and lift it up into
collective rationality and collective
wisdom because that collective wisdom
will give us the guidance we need for
ecologies of practices and then I
thought well wait a sec I know of such a
practice in the ancient world it was the
Platonic notion of dialectic dialectic
was kind of a meta psycho technology in
which you did and that's it you know it
has to do with Socrates which is what we
were talking about earlier you use this
sort of looping between you and I
remember we were talking about that kind
of what's going on encircling but you
also have this thing where you're trying
to get deeply more deeply aware of
yourself deeply aware of the other and
then they're using to try and get a
deeper understanding of you know what it
what is wisdom what is what is it to be
in contact with reality where you you
you you really try to again in dialogues
using collective wisdom you try to get
the the deepest kind of transformations
of your awareness and of who and what
you are possible so that's that that's
what the dialectic was dialectic was in
the neo platonic tradition it was both
something you did individually in sort
of a contemplative meditative way and
then you did is i illogically with
others and so it was this way of trying
to coordinate dialogues such that you
could deeply improve self-knowledge
knowledge of the other so you get more
deeply connected to yourself more deeply
connected to others and then together we
get more deeply connected to how reality
itself is unfolding the idea is the way
conversation sort of unfolds the way it
opens us up gives us deep clues into how
reality is unfolding and opening itself
up and so what I thought was the
following there's been a lot of good
work on what was happening around
Socrates because he's the he's the hero
of this practice right and so what I
thought is well I'm going to truly
really try to understand Socrates and
the peep
that immediately came after him and how
they especially the Neoplatonic position
how they developed this practice of
dialectic and then once I get it clear
and so I'm going to use episodes on that
trying to get really clear on what that
is I'm gonna use that as a template and
then I'm gonna bring it into dialogue
with all these emerging practices like
circling empathy circling authentic
relating the anti debate of Peter
Lambert you know insight dialogue that
came out of the Buddhist tradition
there's all these emerging practices of
discourse on authentic relating and then
what I want to do is I want to take the
Socratic template and integrate it with
the current practices and try make
something that would be powerfully
effective as a matter sico technology
for helping to curate the ecology of
practices in response to the meeting
crisis that's what I'm trying very
interesing and follow-up question is is
this related to the concept that you're
exploring religion of no religion very
much very much I think that I don't know
what sort of dialectic dialogue right
that I'm trying to get out is going to
be needed very much for what Jordan Hall
and I are talking about in the religion
that's not a religion because we're not
trying to found a religion I keep saying
that so people don't get confused well
what we see is the following we see that
in response to meeting crisis you have
all these new emerging practices you
have all these new emerging practices
all these new emerging communities you
have all these new these ways in which
people are experienced even individually
like yourself liendo they're
experiencing a kind of turning that's
spiritual in a sense but not necessarily
tied to any particular organized
religion this is happening more and more
and more we need a way for people to
talk to each other so they can network
so they can coordinate and so they can
compare and contrast and facilitate each
other's ecologies of practices that's
what this kind of dialectic dialogue
would do for us it would be with
it would it would get us a way to the
what was need is we need we need we need
forms of dialogue that cut through the
 and the self-deception so that
we can start making the kinds of
connections that make a new culture
because the new culture is trying to be
born and this is a way of trying to help
that happen then it's not it's gonna be
very different from both the failed
ideologies
I would hope of the past and it it's it
would I think it'll be different
although they'll be deep continuities
but it'll have some important
differences from the axial age religions
that most people now find non-viable
okay so at this point I I do have to ask
this question but more for much for the
listeners also because I thought about
this and I heard I heard you comment and
forgive me if I'm asking you that other
people they ask ask a couple of times if
I understand their concept however
however there is their established
religions with long history that they
they they they did they try to address
the same questions in in another way why
not use and I will make a note who I not
not use them as a basis for instances
where we have the concepts Arianna yoga
bhakti yoga karma yoga no action action
motivation devotion love near you see
these elements in other religions that
can be used as well yeah okay so and I
answered this question yeah I'm quite
happy the answered again by the way I
answered this question in a recent
question-and-answer Paul Van der clay
seem to like it but when I when I saw
him playing it I liked it but I think it
needs to be improved
there's in one sense the I I think it's
very much the case that individuals can
turn to a religion and enter into a
transformative relationship with it I
think right such that they can cultivate
wisdom enhance connectedness meaning in
life I yes yes
they can't there's no question okay so
what what but there's two things we also
have to pay attention to but there is a
growing number of people
the air no NES for which that is not the
case they do they write that they find
that they it's just not viable to them
it doesn't catch it doesn't take it
doesn't work for them and this leads me
to the second point part of what I think
and I try to give a long argument for
this in the series is that that that a
lot of the established religions came
out of the axial revolution right and
Christianity is much later but it makes
use of a lot of the axial ideas of
ancient Greece and ancient Hebrew
cultures right and the thing about the
axial age religions is they have this
two worlds mythology right there's the
real world or the illusory world there's
the heavenly world or the decayed world
right there's nirvana
so I'm sorry like there's all there's
the this contrast now the thing about it
is the history you write the history of
the West I would argue since you know
maybe the 12th century is been a whole
bunch of processes have undermined that
two worlds idea so that most people find
the two worlds way of thinking and
talking that is sort of prevalent it
doesn't link up with that you know the
the scientific historical worldview that
in which they dwell so and think about
what we're doing now you're in a
different part of the world than I am
and we're relying on very sophisticated
technology and then you know and you
know and we're coordinating it all with
very sophisticated AI right that's
making and and and like all of this and
and letting let the many really deep in
that point we are natural-born cyborgs
this is an T Clarke's point across many
species we have evolved to deeply
integrate with technology we are we we
don't just use technology we identify it
and internalize it right and so this
it's this this whole historical process
has been happening across centuries
there's now seeping into people's
seeping into people's bones right and
then let me give an example everybody
thinks that it's just natural to talk
about well my unconscious right and blah
blah this is oh I don't
you know maybe unconsciously that's all
Freud you don't talk that way before
Freud you know you probably believe
never read Freud you know and but but
Freud has insinuated a way of thinking
and you know and that way is also Freud
at least thought it was because he
thought of himself as an atheist it was
sort of linked to a particular
understanding of the scientific
worldview
I'm not saying Freud is right that's not
my point Leandro what I'm trying to show
is that our cultural cognitive grammar
has made for made many people incapable
of acting within the two worlds grammar
of the axial age religions they they
they they can't sort of it doesn't make
you think they feel that it's sort of a
performative contradiction like that and
that's and let's mean I said about this
that's not because like you know they've
all become sort of hard-nosed rational
atheists though they believe in with
strange and wonky things and they're
very hungry for spiritual experiences
and they liable to experiment with
psychedelics but they somehow find that
that when a of thinking that fundamental
programmer is moribund for them and so
that's right that's why they are turning
to generate we need to be able to
explain why all this generativity why
are people generating all these new
practices all these new ecologies of
practices all these new communities of
practice my explanation is the one I
just gave you and so for all of those
people we need something that is it what
and what I mean by religion is it can't
be an axial age religion and that's what
people mean by religion whatever else we
mean by religion but it can't be not a
religion it can't be the secular
alternatives like the the pseudo
religious ideologies that trench the
world in blood so it can't be an axial
religion and it can't not be a religion
the way that the way Marxism and Nazism
are not religious so it has to get
beyond both of those in order to help
these people that's what I mean that's
um
interesting conversation thank you very
much we are going to finish it now it's
a great and thank you thank you thank
you and I hope being able to talk
talking to you with him I don't know
other six months within six months time
I don't know to carry on this
conversation I'm happy to come back and
talk to you again Leandro that would be
fantastic
I would very much like that um so yeah
consider it done we'll just set it up
and make it happen wonderful thank you
very much appreciate have a good day
thank you bye thank you for sharing your
story with me I appreciate it thank you
very much surprised I think I'm going to
disconnect no bye bye bye bye