last time we looked at a couple of
challenges coming from Whitesburg the
first are the very good metaphysical
argument I'm using benefit Nixon
complete sense of majority sense that
there is no such thing as critically
independently existing problem problems
don't exist in the universe therefore
coming in intrinsically an insight
problems not the case looks like the
senators have been treating certain
things certain structuring of
information for example as intrinsically
as if they were both problems and were
specifically inside problems and Lars
Burns metaphysical argument cuts against
that very equal second argument that was
written a wise well even if there are
such a thing is is that problem to
thought clearly crisis one of genius
instead right it could be that we have
insight problems those after which
restructuring is necessary hydrate
problems those in this restructuring is
helpful but not necessary and then not
include problems in which restructuring
is minimal or doesn't play a very
probably significant role
it doesn't look at the response to the
first issue and this was the work of
young meaning Bowden and including on us
and others and this is where the neuro
signs of it so I started to take lead in
the research in an important way the
idea here as well we don't designate
anything as an insect problem we explain
to people what the experience of an
insect problem is the phenomenology what
the experience of an onset problem is we
just get people a whole bunch of
problems and aspects to report when
they're having an insight when you're
doing problems well and then we'll see
because when two things in the brain are
we finding it just pattern of activity
associated with insight and this is
always an important thing in neuro so
when you take a look at neuroscience but
you don't just want to do cartography
and is it theoretically explanatory we
already have independent understanding
and evidence or why this activity would
actually help to explain the behavior
that we
is under investigation of course as we
saw both of these things received good
empirical confirmation gets a sudden
shift in activation to the right which
poor probably corresponds to that cast
feeling of warmth spike because we know
that that has a physiological basis we
have confirming evidence that there's a
physiological change in current and a
sudden shift in activity metabolic
activity from right to the left of the
right hemisphere would bring about such
a kind of physiological change so that
all lined up very nicely and then we
have a lot of independent research
coming out now even biology the lab
realization of the two hemispheres
lateralization function is an ancient
strategy sorry whenever we see what
evolution the end up speaking
anthropomorphic reactive evolution was
in agent because our language is agentic
language we even taste ridiculous things
like it is raining
what's raining okay so Nietzsche once
famously said I think we're not I am
afraid we're not getting rid of God
because we still believe in grammar
so what please take that in mind
whatever I have to use this language to
talk about evolution so evolution has
zeroed in on this lateral vibration
across many different species with many
different evolutionary and histories
that come up it very similar so I
shouldn't negate the left atmosphere
seems to be organized for well-defined
problems there's a narrow scope of
attention it works in a step-by-step
kind of manner so you can get fine
detailed intervention it is very low in
ambiguity tolerance is pursued clarity
and certainty the right hemisphere is
for ill-defined problems so it has
wide-open attention in works in parallel
after speed it goes to the gist right
dairy ambiguity tolerance very wide open
attention etc and so the shift from left
to right makes sense and then I pointed
out how crusty and Kaplan and Simon has
been is in a purely abstract sense
before the grave
as possible they had predicted that such
a shift between these different kinds of
processing should be occurring so all of
this we're getting very independent even
from different theoretical camps
convergence on this being sort of what's
going on in insight so that seem to be a
very principled answer and has been
ongoing research and and this has been
one of the primary areas in which the
neuroscience has been becoming a
dominant player in insight it's resulted
in the recent book by human infinity
it's called the Eureka moment and so the
idea here is yes we shouldn't think you
can have a science of insight problems
that's of a statement and when I go
later the top of our relevance
realization I think it'll be very clear
wise to think mystic but perhaps we
shouldn't have been trying to do that
anyway we can have a science of the kind
of processing that goes into problems
that individuals or whatever subjective
reason experience for finding the inside
problem the second issue is the issue
about whether or not the problems that
we have been using have right typically
experience and process as inside
problems by our participants and so this
brings up the possibility that because
we have a very standardized population
and we have universal processes and
insight that we could end up with a
statistically normal set of problems
that that standardized population would
statistically normally find to the
inside problems now remember what that
means that means that this argument is
only good relative to the weird a factor
that is the setting although psychology
so please be very much taking that into
consideration with a death the work of
the boolean Moody and what they found
using cluster analysis by age is giving
people whole bunch problems is the
inside problems tend to cluster together
the normans very tightly than on inside
ones quite tightly
and then the insight one seems correlate
well with an individual differences
methodology about what kind of processes
seem to be predictive of solving the
inside problems and we took a look at
measures of cognitive flexibility which
is becoming an increasingly important
topic in cognitive psychology measures
of cognitive flexibility seem to be very
good predictors of insects so we seem to
have a really good response to what our
us component you're just doing a primary
gesture perfect competition yeah but he
tends to do stuff like that I'm not
calling you generate evidence there's no
thing with you okay so we have a really
good answer I think to the first of
Whitesburg criticism I think we have
sort of a good enough answer that we're
going to go back and sort of throw away
all previous experimental work
nevertheless more work should be done on
that issue about find you broaden our
cross conserve our plus cultural study
problem-solving so we then took a look
at a oh and sorry I forgot to mention
something when we were doing the young
demon in bone stuff we took a look at
not only the neuroscience explaining it
we took a look at the work of tribe
Snyder using tecs to actually shift our
help make it more possible for such
shifting of activity to do curb and that
we've got two separate experiments team
to significantly increase inside
problem-solving so this is that science
not only sort of explaining the
phenomena we're getting to a place where
were funny to be able to generally that
we'll see another way of generating it
not quite properly but from the
the other side we look at in addition to
pick support okay so we then took a look
at a further criticism from psych and
Whitesburg in 2004 in which confirm
immobilization do not see doing care
inside problems like it did for sugar an
ulcer I pointed out the shooter had two
responses to this one a rational
response which maybe it isn't about
control ordination but the kind of
processing the speed trigger and we have
independent evidence the predates all of
this that then strong support to the
idea that languages per se is not
relevant in triggering or impairment of
insight you've only seen a competitor so
that part of sugar lined up with already
existing arguments and evidence and then
should it gave another wacky crazy thing
about the cosmos somehow shifts in order
to make science harder or something so
I'm just going to put that aside because
I find a particular slip sir and like I
said he's joking but and quite it is it
is joking that he shouldn't go out
socially because it's just it was very
very poor if he's not joking that he
shouldn't go out socially because he's
losing touch with reality so no matter
what's happening and that's a pretty
conclusion and Schuler should stay in
should stay in all right
in order to follow up on that I started
into a critique of the construct of
verbal overshadowing which I had been
mentioning I was going to do already
sorry be comfortable tonight one other
note I mean one please alright so I put
it up to you that the verbal part of the
verbal overshadowing is irrelevant and
should be thrown out already putting the
construct into you know significant
question then I pointed out that the
notion of overshadowing runs off of the
searchlight metaphor for attention and
while there's truth to that metaphor I
also miss brains and misleads us in our
understanding of attention in order to
get into that I've tapped into sort of
some of the cognitive science around
attention and as I mentioned attention
is becoming a very hot topic in
psychology and philosophy and cognitive
science in general
precisely because sorry this sounds soft
emotional I guess it is but it wasn't my
intentions of thought came into my mind
but there's a lot of emerging evidence
on the stock kind of argument that I'm
making in this class that attention is
playing a pivotal role and we have not
paid enough to attentional mechanisms in
our understanding of cognition and
partially perhaps and that's part of
what my argument is implying that's
because we've had an overly simplistic
model of attention at work and so we
have a look at the work of Christopher
mole who argue that one of the wage wins
the searchlight metaphor missed
presents attention is it represented as
a singular simple direct process that we
undertake it would be like so it's
analogous to like walking or talking he
points out though that attention is much
more like our description like practice
or praying but where's attention is not
something we do on its own directly it's
a way in which you do other things but
specifically what it seems to involve is
what he called cognitive unison the
integration of very various processes
onto a common goal somehow getting
various processors to find a shared task
and the goal there end to be Co relevant
to them I pointed out that a way of
understanding how that might work is to
take a look at the work that plan you
did on attention and understand
attention as what he called integration
I suggested to the dots before Torme
instead I would suggest something more
like fusion and the idea of how subsea
what attention is it is a structural
relation and a function between
subsidiary and folk awareness and what
awareness is has to do with what
consciousness is I'm not going to talk
about what consciousness is here because
consciousness is the hardest thing in
cognitive science and psychology and
philosophy and life and your existence
so for example just whatever okay how
many of you would take the following
deal I'll guarantee you that you'll have
wealth power and all of the love you
want you just will not be conscious of
any do you want
okay now so that must mean you know
clearly what your consciousness does for
you what its function is why have such a
great value what is consciousness is
function it's most of your processing
you go on unconsciously and what is
consciousness for so why do you value
something so much that you have no idea
what it does for you obviously there's
an answer to that I mean I don't have an
answer but there should be an actor
I'm just trying to point out you how
problematic consciousness is okay so I
am take it that we're not going to
discuss what awareness or consciousness
is we're going to leave that alone
program because he doesn't have an
encounter massager it's something like
you know your basic you know
consciousness all of your environment
that's what awarenesses but given that
we agreed that we won't open that
Pandora's box of forms comes up for
mixed metaphor right um we can take -
Lana - we are giving us an account of
attention in terms of awareness where
attention is the fugitives and situate
where the focal awareness and a highly
recursive and layered fashion remember
we did the tapping exercises over time
and then what we noted is that we have
the possibility that after that singer
and other people and plenty of course
talked about you know the capacity for
transparency to opacity shift you can
step back and look at the security
awareness that you previously looking
through all right and you can do that
back towards something like
consciousness event or you can do an
opacity to transparency shift you can go
from looking at something to looking
through it especially looking through it
in a representational mayor and then I
first see that we also know something's
would come beginning of the class
there's another axis along which
attention can move this is the axis
between the paint role in the Gestalt
and I pointed out to you that both the
transparency and opacity and the
featural gestalt axes are relative axes
absolute points right and there puts
nice simple Cartesian graph so the idea
is there's constant opponent processing
between the Gestalt and the features and
this of course we need this account of
attention this was argued first five
neural network theorists people like
david normal cartoon Geoffrey Hinton in
the 80s in order to break out of chicken
and egg problem so remember this did
this last time so you read this at the
cap even though these two stimuli could
be exactly equivalent and you do this
and this was a very big problem for sort
of standard computational models because
you can you can get this kind of it's
something ancient Greek argument in
order to read the word I have to read
the letters but in order to disambiguate
the letters I need to read the word
therefore leading is impossible and what
one more part in the column and Hinton
showed is the way you get out of that is
you have opponent processing processing
in parallel within a neural network from
the Gestalt down and from the features
up so attention is constantly doing
result to Pedro it has the capacity to
constantly shift in and out transparency
opacity and then I also pointed out that
the tension doesn't just in this simple
thing took a look at the work of mates
and their attention is doing the sizing
operation is complex recursively
self-organizing process by the
speaking of teachers for grounding and
backgrounding figuring the foregrounded
features and then formulating problems
remember and so all of that complexity
is being lost in the searchlight
metaphor prevention I believe that's
where we got to exactly right now I
should I talk about the difference
between things being independent in
theory but almost always functionally
integrated together so blank stares
which means output then okay so from
replaces that I'm not this is not a
Cartesian trap right the global
processing of the salt the local
processing the features right
transparency reporting you in this way
so although we can analyze these two
things and it's not be erratic ly
identical together
it is that often the case that they are
so occurring together in a functionally
integrated question we've talked about
the possibility of this and the
possibility of this I've got to trade on
these two because these seem to these
these two things map on to some
functions we're going to process and
we're going to talk about when we take a
look at it's a problem-solving and also
two processes that are at work within
different kinds of mindfulness practices
so the idea what this is supposed to
represent is you're moving from vitro to
the salt and you're going or looking at
funding to looking through it this is
you're going from yourself to patrol and
you're going from looking through
something to stepping back from looking
at
so what I want to now do is try argue
how this different model of attention is
a lot of theoretical machinery for
organizing and bringing together blood
results in the insight literature about
what's going on in restructuring and
perhaps give us the basis for a
theoretical integration and also this
way of looking at attention will help us
to connect to processes that are at work
within mindfulness practices and then
that of course will afford us how can
you explain the increasing evidence that
mindfulness practices enhance your
capacity for insight calm soul which of
course has been the traditional claim
and then it is copies being
substantiative by ongoing experimental
confirmation ok ok so far all right so
let's think about what let's just let us
talk about this intuitively and then I
want to start following it up with some
research some of it done here at U of T
ok so doing this would break up results
in your cognition it would break up like
the structural functional organization
that you have imposed on things because
you're moving from Gestalt to the future
level
stepping back and looking at your
subsidiary processing would have the
effect of the automating it to a degree
one so automatic something is to right
do the opposite it is to take things out
of working memory out of funk justice
right so that you can perform the option
automatically that is without requiring
like directed manipulation within
awareness within working memory so
compare when you first how many of you
can outdrive it's getting better
it used to be they want to ask us almost
nobody could drive because other than
Toronto so how many of you been driving
for more than a year ok did my son Jason
destroys G so when you first start
driving I remember to myself I'm never
with Jason recently Jason but when you
first start driving like you're driving
like and you're looking at everything
and all you can do is try don't ami I'm
driving then you look everything right
but after a while right
that becomes procedure wise and it
becomes automatic and you can have this
really horrifying experience you can be
driving up in common highway and then
you realize I'm paying attention for the
last 15 minutes I get in my head on the
lot
so this phenomena which is widely
reported and documented is known as
highway hypnotism it's clearly not a
public impact is Amin's that you can
rely on some people call of your eternal
zombie you can rely on your internal
zombie to do the task of driving because
it has been automated but me the process
has been really it's been organized so
that it does not require write conscious
direction of working memory in order to
do the thing now the opposite is the
case if you try to redirect attention to
processes that are normally subsidiary
and happen automatically if you bring
them into consciousness then that often
has the effect of disrupting their
automaticity precisely because you're
now giving working memory access to it
so MIT so if you are typing and some of
you are writing and this is what I'm
suggesting was going on with concurrent
verbalization not that verbalization per
se if I ask you to try and focus on the
subsidiary processes in your fingers
when you're typing pay attention to what
your fingers are doing what happens to
your ability to buddy slows down and if
I ask you to pay attention to the
sensations in your fingers while you're
typing your words in look at notice you
could do all of this without language
being involved all interference isn't
from language per se the interference is
right when you are doing a transparency
of a positive shift that tends to D
automatron
some of your cognitive processing
understand evolutionary reason why you
should be able to do this because
sometimes you need to debug your autumn
eyes on other parts processing
so sometimes this will be the cabling
physically example this happens a lot of
martial arts you practice something a
lot and it becomes quite automatic and
then somebody will show you over but
here's a better way to do that and it's
really hard to change it at first and
you won't have to do you almost like to
like like disruptive you have to try and
pay attention do right break it up
I mean we're speaking metaphorically
this is nothing physical visible no
physical structure but you have to break
up your processing you have to pay any
attention to what you're doing in order
to make the move and then get the really
interfere with it in order to be able to
debug it you know we're talking about
exactly
okay so what I put it out for you is the
fact that you can get this kind of
disruption and automatic processes just
Y by doing a transparency or positive
shift
of course a clean example of where
transparency opacity shifting is
interfering or being interfered with by
automatic processes a clear instance of
where transparency of contrary shifting
and automaticity are antithetical
interfere with each other is the most
studied effect in seismology which is
the Stroop effect the Stroop effect is
that you're trying to do a transparency
to a property share and it's key is
right and that is interfering with and
you need to fuse with by the
authenticity of your process again all
of this is happening without language
language can make it happen but there's
nothing intrinsic about language making
it happen we also have evidence that
doing this kind of is going to salt to
petrol will break that processing and
this comes from work using nawab letters
if you remember with an a-bomb miners
were especially good now on letters like
member the meetings of the made up of a
bunch of little elves okay so Tigger
sorry that's her name
I can this bigger I don't know how to
come in 2002 following up on earlier
work that McRae and Lewis had done in
2002 I'll quickly describe it McRae
employed
yes
so what McLain Lewis did was they took
something that most of your cloud
processing both very automatically and
in a very good salt level which is
phases two phases interestingly this
seems to be a diagnostic difference
between statistically normal and
autistic people you tend to process
phases automatically or even salt level
we've got some evidence from eye
tracking that doesn't seem to be the
case or people diagnosed with autism so
if I do an eye tracking of you looking
specifically normal and I don't need to
pursue sorry about prism this is the
normal person looking at a face that
there's this incredibly complex movement
around the face that seems to be
oriented towards doing this kind of
thing bottom-up top-down creation of the
gestalt if you do tracking of somebody
who's diagnosed with autism you'll get a
very hard focus limited looking past
about so some people in fact there's one
peer at there Cohen who argues that
autism is having pretty costume mail at
a rate which is a very convenient way of
putting it Arushi and that's not what he
means is that opposite people that is
really left hemisphere coma
this also lines up with an earlier
theory by friends and others called weak
central coherence that autistic people
seem to be much more oriented to the
feature level this is also why not with
independent evidence in theory the
autistic people tend to over fit to the
data they tend to fit on the specific
features of the sample rather than
trying to distort it and generalize
beyond so all of these things are sort
of converging there's been some but not
much and the problem is in general my
opinion of the clinical research side of
mindfulness is while promising
it's very shoddy and crappy work is
often no good operational
operationalization the construct is not
theoretical parent you don't have active
control - there isn't one to tootle
follow-up there isn't theoretical debate
between different experimenters etc so
the theoretical debate and explain of
the competition is mounting learn about
the the cognitive study of Michael's
tend to be better because we typically
linked up with already existing research
paradigms in of new technologies and the
neuroscience stuff tends to be better -
about mindfulness so that's why I'm very
happy
so first of all there's not much
research and it's all clinical as far as
I can tell and and it's I mean I'm I
think I'm pretty sure I'm the first
person to decide were teaching about
mindfulness at this university
academically right and some of you know
my teacher decks prettier I mean I
believe what I mean are they leave in
mindfulness right and I think there's
still good evidence and argument to do
so some of that I'll show you today but
on the other hand you know it really
bothers me that like I'd like to visit
academic journal called mindfulness
which is a magazine of them called
mindful what then apparently mindfulness
is how we cure everything
it is the panacea and the cure or which
is the problems in the Middle East our
patient well and white kind overblowing
you know hyperbolic planes are me and
it's about my backlash is coming so I
just published a article in an anthology
about the need to reformulate the
mindfulness construct and really try it
much more closely some of you might have
done 471 with me last year we went
through all that how to get how to get
neither empirical research I get their
conceptual construct and how to get that
they rather the quality innovation
remind me so that belong in is important
places of a phenomena right now and I
know you're interested into cognitive
improvement technology cyber
technologies
thank you for leox wanted to give him a
very complete answer and it was relevant
to all because we are going to talk
about mindfulness over whether it's
possible to be left brain dominant but
then perform the shift from leverage to
great brain well and quickly that you're
still good like just being good at
inside problems mean that you're a great
brain dominant
oh is it just being able to do this I
don't think I'm not sure that
statistically
people should be talked about as being
right or left brain dominant I think
culture II I think Madoka's argument
that as a culture we have tended to
reward sort of left hemispheric
functionality and therefore the culture
we might be excused that way but I don't
know if non-pathological individual
should ever be I do not like the media's
attempt to create apologies wrap your
left right into your right brain and
this seems to just be a really really
shoddy and largely disruptive old saying
well you tend to follow enlightenment
rationalism and you tend to follow post
enlightenment romanticism and that's all
it is as part of a she thought so I
wouldn't I wouldn't I just don't want to
answer that question not because you
don't ask a question because you do I
just think that it's a mistake the way
of thinking and remember I cautioned you
given the increasing evidence for an
amount of the deployment hypothesis and
some of you would do 12 what we know
about this the idea that we can't we
can't the idea that we can strictly
localized functions to the area to
specific areas of the brain is
disappearing like it's going to be gone
how did your textbooks eventually in ten
years by the time you've graduated and
moved on we don't care what the college
anymore right so remember people can
show a lot of these functions who have
had hemispherectomy like if you lost a
lot of functioning in your right
hemisphere with that impact your ability
for depends when you like what
circumstances what skills you had what
type of technologies of rehabilitation
go through I like yes ok so it is
related to the right like it's not just
the shift it's not being out just being
able to know also would be capable of
insight if you had left hemisphere
damage because then you would be loved
your booty Taylor just wandering in a
profuse world in which there are no
boundaries and ever and there are
of relations of relations but don't
forget and this is what a lot of people
are now proposing at the opposite end of
the spectrum and people are bragging
Christie and others are talking about
this increasingly that we can see people
on a continuum where they tend to be
featuring biased and overfitting to the
data on and then you can be on the other
end of the spectrum right which is your
psychotic which is your overly committed
to relations and to consults right so
it's I think if what you're asking me is
and like I said I'm hesitant for the
reason that gaming trying to localize a
function but if if you sort of push me
on it the insight is in the dynamic
relation between the hemispheres not in
either hemisphere is that what you're
asking yeah but I needed to give you
that longer answer because it's not as
simple it's not a simple answer yes yes
it should be a simple question you
described our recognition of faces as
the uptown top down or bottom house
integration integration form of yourself
that's right
what is the top bottom bottom up is the
mean if not to feature although that's
what I mean
okay so you're you're tending to
perceive faces as a result right so you
you did you I can quite a bit of a
person's face right apparently the only
person that's fooled for example by
putting glasses on is Lois Lane right
most of you can take all kinds of
occlusion and so recognize my face right
so you can do something like that and
you tend to see a face as a whole and
what's interesting is the way that
machinery works if I take the same base
and turn it upside down your processing
goes from wonky it gets really bad
really fast right so
that's a sign um
now I can tell you have additional I
think what I think the result is forming
almost right away that's why you can
represent faces in a very good salty
fashion like so for example I think they
mentioned this so you take
four-month-old they can barely just see
it give them these two figures to stare
at freely and you can you can probably
tell me which one will they look at a
lot which one left now why because it
looks like a face no it doesn't that's
not a face if you met somebody like that
and that was really the place that's
what I'm fine okay so you're big I mean
so there's a lot of evolutionary
machinery at work because evolution can
like help you do
how can sort of get you in the automatic
processing if a relative reproductive
factor or a factor that contributes to
reproduction has existed in your
environment long faces have been around
a long time they've been around since
fish and faces are very valuable source
of information about an entity okay is
that enough on faces your test is here
by the way don't forget to pick it up at
the bridge you ever do the cases that
are getting soft see this top see you
are really intrinsically interested in
basis you're talking about 7:30 close
time there's more likely fit for the
peaks it's not something like expression
no I think I am because on time even
invoking this is where Mason's idea of
sizing up is really coming into play
you're not just getting like the
features you're foregrounding back
rounding right and you're also
formulating your formulating problems
which is I present with your nodding at
a page that's it rhythm with my words
I'm picking up on that which means oh
she understands me
where's Bieber nominally oh something's
wrong she's having a seizure
right okay and we're really good at this
by the way so you know Lebanon rules
work here and also the thin slicing work
Nick was in the psychology department
here he's provided really good
experimental evidence that gave our
exists that people can very rapidly
determine if somebody's gay or not right
and links gay so he's not he doesn't
have a political axe to grind he's
trying to see does this thing actually
this yes it does you have thin slices
show people very brief very brief like
like four seconds of somebody doing
something and ask them what what's going
on in their mind people are surprisingly
accurate up in slicing at determining
from a face you also know that most of
you are very good at like you just show
you the eyes and you'll be able to tell
me what emotion of your person is
experiencing and you use will weigh
about gentle that way about chance yes
like safe lioness or something it
specifically related
if people have difficulties for instance
someone's as with oh all faces look very
distinct I have difficulties recognizing
people or someone else's oh I can very
easily tell the people's like ethnicity
like oh I can put people in front office
is not like a one person is just
advantageous focusing too much on
features and what overfitting and the
other person is like general yeah I
think so
so people use very odd to continuing the
way you said so it's probably something
like that I don't know if it has
anything any sort of you know attempt to
sort of study that population
specifically in experimental fashion but
I think that's possible yes but you
should go now yes one more base thing
that is true so that's an interesting
question about the degree to which but
again they have to be careful remember
my answer to Ainsley it's not so much
like one thing or the other right it's
the real flexibility between so if
people are more sort of skewed and
blocked probably they will have
detriment for instance or
between okay so there is no quick theory
of handedness which is disturbing
because is very couple point its
efficiency in behind it so I mean does
shift around you're processing so much
somewhat but it's no simple thing that
if you're left-handed whether the
right-handed gonna meet your right hand
stairs almond something like that okay
let's go back okay so while the prey and
Millis did was they have two groups of
people
- while others call these three groups
one the control group and remember and
always tell the giving in the total
group of what you're doing a boring okay
so the first group right is going to
also in all groups all all three groups
are going to look at faces all right
this is worse for you okay and then what
you're going to do is you're going to
expose all three groups to Nawal mutters
okay so here you guys drive people down
and you're going to buy people up here
you're actually just going to give usual
that's like giving them to ruin a block
letter so I did yes
what you now do is you now give people a
face recognition task you seen your face
before now as you can expect the control
group stays relatively constant because
that's what you want if your control
group is walking around then scrap your
experiment friend okay so that happened
so these people's face recognition
declined considerably and these people's
improved now what's interesting about
this is you can kick you can do this
with novel letters you can also do it
with language but notice you can do it
with nav on letters you do it language
and here's how you do with language I
give you a bunch of these and I ask you
to describe somebody's face if I ask you
to describe somebody's face that
actually impairs you being able to
recognize that face later which means
think of a look at what this means you
shouldn't be doing but the police
shouldn't be doing ask people to give
description and then ask them to try and
point somebody out enough in a retina
and a line because it actually appears
but there's something that police could
be doing to overcome that and this had
to do with finger she did the same
experiment right specifically with NAB
on letters but in the intervening right
she would give people music to listen to
or mazes to trace through again non
linguistic stimuli that drives people to
the gestalt level and what she was able
to do is completely remove the
military's effect of having to describe
the face or have you gone down to the
feature level so what does it police
should do is ask you to describe the
face and then
face over to you seriously yes so but
people generally don't like to make
experience unplugging potahto
I know but as I find out laughing when
you're impossible
and so like is similar thing would
happen after I didn't do what I was
doing on my velocity baby plan my four
degrees and you do a lot of conceptual
analysis and logic and then you go only
people to try to talk to you all right
and then they don't want to be around
you you don't want to be around now okay
so what I'm showing you all of this is
that independent of language I can cause
so what I was showing you intuitively
you've got experimental evidence for the
interference effects by moving you up
and down the straw feet row moving Union
up okay so forget right and Dominique's
pushing you this way towards the local
processing division operation how you
operationalize that what you need I give
them I'll give you an oblong letter for
example and I so remember the income to
endow both mutter I do it taps as
priming you or requires you to use an
outlet the letter L so you're going down
to the future level already gives you a
class that Prime's you it requires you
to make use of an H right you up to the
assault level you only have to do it
relative to sometimes for studios
because as I mentioned repeatedly
assaulted each role or relative terms
nothing is intrinsically a fish fault or
feature
[Applause]
but the other point I was making is I
can do this with language as well I can
ask you to describe the features of
somebody's face and that will cause like
interference your ability to recognize
it this so when I try to show you these
language can do this but I've already
give you lots of evidence that it
doesn't have to do this and I can cause
this to happen without using language so
why am i doing this because I'm showing
you how useless verbal overshadowing
constructed okay
all right
so let's take a look at these moves
within the inside literature itself
potential moves then let's knock them
into and whenever I show you and even
have to bear with you as we start to
look at the inside literature it's going
to look like a very inconsistent set of
data about the attentional relations
with anyone I hope to show you how you
can actually well I mean remember young
Wilmington diamond pointed out that
metaphor brings lives and garden path
sentences bit about the same sudden
shift from left to right it would be
interesting if I would like it if people
would do with sort of poetry readings or
poetry generation what they're doing
with jazz music so jazz music musicians
are not being extensively studied and
we'll talk about this when we talk about
the flow state in particular in the
course because jazz is a powerful way of
inducing them closely it's second only
to the most powerful flow induction
activity we have which is what what do
you think it is no rock mining is pretty
good and that's why people do it because
it's the only reason why you can do it
because otherwise it's something from
Homer for torturing somebody indeed a
figment okay video games video games are
home for the most reliable way of
inducing the flow state so think about
why come after that later okay so I wish
that people would do with poetry there's
been some studies about hope or less
connections between poetry and flow but
I don't know if anybody's done some of
the neural imaging or getting Eugene's
poetry for example that they have
happened to the job I suspected that
they did we would find interesting
result very similar kinds of results if
you have phenomenological equivalences
people getting into the flow state doing
gorgeous that's the best bet here son
okay mmm so what do we want to do is a
lot of people have been making use of
the individual differences methodology
that was originally undertaken remember
by shoulder Mel trip and that also get
by googly-moogly working trying to find
the the processes it seemed to be
participative insight now let's remember
we know some already we'll come back to
them remember the cognitive leap in and
there was the perceptual restructure or
at least the attentional restructure
that that course is saying it needs work
so some of the first work around and
then like on this aspect of trying to
get clear about what was going on in
restructuring the work of knowledge and
associate
so and the original important
experiments are 99 in replication since
and he's done something more recently
and what knobbly did the original work
was not not looking Olsen by the way
some of you know also because you can
look at some of his work in your
research or your essays because I can
see the top is also the same Olsen
right is taking a look at a process is
that seem to be predictive of concluding
insight and the first that the first
ability Nets predictive insights what he
called chump decomposition the way he
did does he do he operationalize versus
he would give people Roman numeral math
problems with matchsticks and you have
to glue one of the matchsticks to
convert a false statement into a true
statement and people find it very
difficult because it often requires you
to grate up a chunk now where's a job
well this is one of those terms and
psychologies it sounds like it's an
explanation but it's really a
description that comes disguised as an
explanation
Chuck write me I mean for you've all
heard of chunking right and you know
that chunking has to do with somehow
getting more things through working
memory for the working memory wall line
this is a piece of evidence one of the
key pieces of evidence for the cashiers
idea that working memory is primarily a
relevant filter rather than just a
limited container space because you
cannot if you're measuring it just in
terms of quantity of information you can
get a ton of information through working
memory if it's been chunked enough and
the idea and then she points out a
better way of figuring about what
working memory is doing that is it sort
of profits filtering for how much things
have been processed for relevance how
tightly like how much Co relevance is
filed in your information
and that's all really a chunk is right
another way of putting it using our
language a chop is basically something
that you process as a result because the
features have a structural functional
organization that makes the teachers Co
relevant to each other and relative to
you
and of course you know that when you're
studying you should be doing as much
much chunking as you can and you should
be doing chunking of jumpy and in
seconds okay so what not book found is
the better if people are at tum
decomposition the better they are inside
how do you measure what you can you can
measure how well how good people are
trumping composition in terms of how
tight or loose the champions okay so
this is an obvious therefore
non-controversial them okay so
battlefield is a loose chunk because
it's easy for you to break it up into
two other chunks that are meaningful
only one field okay cap right it is a
much tighter chunk because if you break
it up you lose semantically you still
have graphic meaning you still know to
see years and years
right but you'll lose semantics near
look what the top cut it's not number
okay in the brain right and this is I
think part of this needs to ultimately
be integrated with things like Christmas
tree energy the way the brain is always
allowed to give our meeting so if you
are better at breaking up chunks right
guys quite good quite well predictive of
how good you are at solving inside
problems which right since we need that
moving your attention this way
facilitate inside
now in fact there's even sort of soup
represented not by giving it some
perfectly formalized but the idea that
of course the tighter the Chomp - the
harder it is to decompose it and he's
not work with Roman numeral they've done
stuff with Chinese ideograms so some
classical cultural aspect there which is
good by the way
that needs to be done more other than
what we called constraint without
patience and he's not what is clear
about what that means and part of the
problem he uses an analogy uses a
linguistic analogy he talks about like
in is that like when you're doing a
Chomsky tree for example the sentence is
the noun phrase or phrase this is a
determiner and now rather this is
perhaps an adverb phrase right a verb
and then this breaks down into a
modifier etc how do you thusly talks
nobody's home and you when you're doing
it you dream these trees at night very
boring and the idea is that the higher
up of constraint is but the more scope
is the harder it is to relax the
constraint so that you thought I might
need that constraints were organized in
a hierarchical fashion where you talked
about individual constraints and
particular problems so for example in a
matchstick problem breaking up a number
is easier than breaking then move in one
of the moving of matchsticks that's
being used as an operator like as a
minus sign because that's a functional
marker and so changing that is supposed
to be harder to do
I think this is this part of the work
he's onto something but this things done
but it's very murky and I want to try to
suggest you so this is not him this is
not a real Ricky attempt to be
constructive the problem about trying to
get this is I've really good evidence
that instead is largely procedural in
nature right and so constraints probably
aren't things like unconscious rules or
propositions what we would need is what
would a procedural version of a
constraint be well I'm already giving
you sort of a good argument as what it
is the more audible eyes you're
processing is the more constrained it is
that being the case we could then soon
as we do that notice that we could then
come up with a sort of a better way of
operationalizing and measuring this you
know the longer something is that
armitage the world advertised it is you
could measure that in terms of how
advertised something is by how easily it
makes demands on your working memory
look right that's the more obvious I
something is the less eclipse demands
our working memory so I could determine
how automatically something is by right
testing you can continue to do that
process a cat without interference as I
put more cognitive load on your working
memory so for example I'm putting lots
of cognitive working lots of diamonds
load on your working memory by my
lecturing what many of you are able to
still write which is good evidence that
is highly advertised which is why it's
so hard for you to break that constraint
in the strip effect you understand this
is not anything Norfolk does this is
something I'm doing to try and make this
more testable and measurable and
rigorous
so what I'm giving you is a plausibility
argument as to what's going on with
constraint relaxation I'm going to give
you some evidence for this in terms of
the way mindfulness facilitates inside
so what I'm suggesting to you is that
this is basically you should be
understood as the authorization now if
we do it that way then one of the
benefits of that is we can talk about
the intentional we can now talk about
both of these in terms of potential
mechanisms short decomposition is to
move this way intentionally to go from
the salt to featural the other
foundation is to go this way is to do a
transparency to little faculty shoes
so whatnot let's work is really showing
is that you doing both you'll tend to
get right and improvement in either side
and one trying to show you other work
that lines up with that
okay so far so I'm not going to rely
just on those I'm going to come back
we'll take a look at we're done here
what's going to happening others about
this idea of an integration of these two
the attentional processes a way of
facilitating insight and I'm going to
show you something that music that all
of this can degrade your performance and
that's going this way can improve your
insight and going this way to the
greater and such like what what okay so
going this way seems to facilitate
insight manipulating attention this way
and there's been knowledge is not worth
comparing by doing theoretical debate
experimental competition pitting there's
representational change theory to
stomach Aries is doing quite well but I
think it's I don't think it's going to
be a cetacean answer for the reason by
foreshadow or for buck but it deserves
to be taken seriously at least to say
that there's machinery this equation T
let's see - under the right
circumstances I'll comment on the stage
and come back to the point facilitated
sick so young Flanders and Peter said
Colin the young was at PA of mine and I
also talked in meditation
Joe Flanders was a through the mind and
took this course at one point and other
courses and you know Jordan Peters
Endicott has the possible do not know
what review right now as they say fifty
okay so they did work in 2008 now I'm
going to present this work as evidence
for the argument on building but in
order to be intellectually honest I have
to say that it is not completely
independent because if you go to this
article and you scroll down to the
bottom of the first page where there's a
new knowledge meant you'll see the
following thing the author's would like
to make John Cervenka for inspiring them
to do this work so it's not completely
dependent at this table but nevertheless
it is you know beautiful confirmation we
have it should be paid attention okay so
they did a bunch of tests I'm not going
to go over the whole experiment some of
you were looking at it in your essays
I'm just going to concentrate on one
important part they wanted to examine
the degree to which what they call
breaking frame and block that term for
me
with the reach breaking frame is
predictive on the insight and the way
they operationalize breaking frame is
they did it in terms of using what's
called the anomalous card sorting task
so in the anomalous card storage ask
what happened is I give you a bunch
playing cards actually pictures of
putting cards that are flash on the
screen screen rapidly but not so rapidly
then you can't have awareness of it and
you have to identify the cards that are
anomalous an anomalous card would be
something like a block three of parts a
black Lea parts now this task turns out
to be independently important so this
ability to detect anomalies is also
predictive well this is what from
George's other works shows right
people's ability to detect anomalies or
not detect anomalies seems to be quite
predictive of how prone they are to
self-deception which I mean I can't go
into it right now because this isn't the
course on abnormal psychology and
everything but it kind of makes sense
right one of the things in which we one
of the ways in which we can deceive
ourselves is by like not paying
attention to things that don't fit our
current structure it also points out
right interesting connection we need to
go the other way and I can't explore
very much here I do in another course
that of course one way of seeing insight
is that insight is adaptive
revolutionary machine for overcoming
self assumption one of the functions of
insight is to free us from the way
which we are is framing situation in a
self-destructive manner now being said
no and what they found was in fact that
they did some work on converging the
divergent thinking I won't go into
largely because there's a lot of
controversy over whether or not those
are consistent constructs well and the
point important for when the experiment
is that this was independent of those
factors independently predicted
independently predicted how well you
look solve inside problems now notice
what's going on in the anomalous card
sorting tells notice the two things you
have to do you have to break up the
default of the car to notice three
distinctive feature and you also have to
do something else you have to be on with
eyes your card recognition processes you
have to do transparency to app actually
shifted you have to become aware of how
you're paying attention to the cars now
we sort of feel aspects of mindfulness
that work there so what I'm going to
show you is that breaking frame is
exactly again this kind of milk going
downwards right breaking up the resulted
with features and doing the transparency
opacity ship in order to the anima pars
the friending of the situation
so similar work hand on independently
this time ended completely undependable
for me is work by McCaffrey sorry 2012
as far as I could tell McCaffrey is
unaware of the work-life failures and
plant of the unclenox and Peterson
I think he's aware of some above the
knot with work that it's not that clear
any lace what he did was he was giving
people a particular problem to solve and
he was looking for basically inside
problem solving the innovative problem
solving it's exactly the same thing look
at the work so what he was giving people
was the following problem I give you a
one-inch metal cube right I give you a
candle I give you two metal rings right
here's my candles in my one each pedal
to run a mill cube here is my two metal
rings and using only these things you
have to attach the two metal rings
together so you can't pull them apart
and I'll tell you write an app right now
if the Rays are stainless steel and wax
won't stick to them some people say well
you know I like the county when I try to
melt the two rings into each other many
of you know this cap off okay so now I'm
doing this backwards and of course I'm
showing you the top first are this
pencil
given the training direction and that
exposes the problem what they were
taught to do was to take anything and
break it up into its components which of
course is to do chop decomposition even
literally and it is to break the gestalt
up literally into its features they've
also taught to do something else we
describe the features in as meaningless
or functionless a term as possible
namely try to do a transparency opacity
chef try to take back from your
description the meaning that you're
projecting into them try to become aware
of what meaning you're attributing to
your processes so instead of looking
through your meaning at the components
try to step back and look at the meaning
and reduce it so they do the significant
transparency or partnership try to do
defies the meaning making meaning
attribution
so what people would be like they would
think about okay well I break this thing
off into its parts and this isn't just
wax it's this sort of you know semi
solid substance or even manipulate and
this isn't a wick it's a long string and
now do you have an answer you can of
course take the wick which is actually a
string and tie the two rings together
now interestingly if you took people
right and you gave them this training
program and gave them problems like this
he was able to get I believe it was a 67
percent increase compared control on
being able to solve these yes and that
is hot enough you can just also ring
inside sort of words with with sort of
we'd be wise know you is attached to the
wick so you can do it without this was
very separate and it looks a nuclear
physics you can also do that I don't
know if anybody did that it only works
because the wire independent children
with but it also depends also not
breaking up its the component keeping
felt like a twig in wax is wax and the
wick wick I guess I don't understand one
for some of the other problems but I
don't know they didn't report anybody
giving that so it but again most people
don't report all the raw data
okay no but you can find it on far
everyone to is a possibility but we
there's there's nothing to do anything
because cabling can write the wax itself
when pull these together you can't melt
them together with the point Mary yes
how do people come up with like new
insight problems so you basically do the
reverse lock I've actually talked about
this a long time ago and we have a
cultural practice for coming up with new
insight problems
it's called generating a riddle so do
you think that all occupations are the
generations of little so in that sense I
think there's something you're pointing
to getting is deeper one of the things
I'm going to consider is whether or not
insight and creativity and substance are
using the same machinery but insight is
using the machinery in Reverse as you're
proposing so a lot of people explore the
possibility that insight is about
solving problems whereas creativity's of
finding problems we'll take a look at
that proposal there's there's a
narrative a proposal it might be the
creativity is about finding problems and
then formulating them so they're
intelligible or potentially solvable
rather than just generating riddles for
people but what you just did is a
bonafide attempt you
how the machinery of insight and
creativity overlap so much what
creativity could be something different
from inside okay
well but yes in one sense sorry - all
right answer or yes on the durability to
solve inside problems positively
correlated with likes and instability
well the problem with answering that
question is exactly that the theoretical
issue that was brought up in my
discussion with Jim again and I
foreshadowed if for example if there's
no if there's no deep theoretical
difference between insight and
creativity we would find a high
correlation between insight creativity
but that wouldn't be meaningful because
all we've done we would find the same
but I like I like the way you talked
about it before us like insight is some
problem and it really creates leads
generating problem finding profiling
comes right where it's all about solving
found problems so when that like since
they used someone with sharing one day
that they should be highly correlated
with each other right and so what I'm
suggesting to you is we what we have to
do is get clear on we have to get a
clear consensus on the construct of
creativity in order to do the
correlational study you want to do
part of what I'm suggesting to you is we
don't have that yet I mean we even have
somebody his name is Weisberg by the way
argues that there's no such thing as
creativity well that's sort of his stick
right imagine living with them going
into learning room there's no such thing
okay well I never measure PC I have a
lot of sled for him I mean for the
gadfly of the inside literature and he's
got an important job okay so you're
you're saying each one of these is just
an example of no Livadia business so
you've got a lot of convergence for this
idea of breaking frame and if
operationalized breaking frame because
that term actually being used in this
experiment and these two intentional
moves you know going from the salt to
Pedro and going from and doing a
transparency opacity shift in order to
do Dymatize your framing of the problem
so that facilitates inside the problem
is go back to write the Train blue let's
go back to figure go back also to an
experiment done and I'm going to tell
you back in 2012 and doing this can also
degrade your performance in a powerful
way
all right so what Beckman did in 2012
right and this will mine up again with
what we saw
so you get so we were considering ideas
that you know insight is very procedural
thing and it's about you know coming up
with a structural functional
organization for your processing etc for
your problem your confirmation so
Franklin was trying to also test sort of
research procedural defaults at 300 taps
shooting shooting a soccer ball at a nap
I have to say soccer this was North
America right and then there was a
doodle one and I can't win with the
piccolo and so what you do is you have
people you first of all have been based
on you just add them and repeatedly from
certain distance shoot the ball act in
that you get the reliable average how
many goals they can swim and then what
you do is you have people that you then
surprise them you have you know judges
come in who could potentially move them
to a better league or something like
that this is all kind of deception
because it's an experiment and you
people are being watched and what would
you predict happen when they're being
watched what happens to their average
puts out okay because they start doing
this they start breaking up the gestalt
and they start thinking they start
becoming as a self-conscious they start
paying attention to how they're doing it
they de anima ties and that screws up
their performance that performance
degrades considerably which lines up
with also what we saw with the face
recognition etc then you get something
really interesting right for this one
and this was back to the conversation
has become scarce a while ago everybody
has to be right handed okay
because you redo the experiment and you
have one group just replicating that
right get the average baseline and then
it's getting them to shoot under you
know critical observation the other
would be the same thing baseline under
critical observation but while they're
shooting on empirical observation
they're squeezing a foam ball in their
left hand which is an extra task which
should degrade the performance in terms
of this cognitive load but what you find
is if they're sleeping the ball on the
left hand the performance doesn't
degrade why not not so much because they
do seem to be any seems to be if they're
sleeping in their left hand rather than
in the right hand to try to that's the
reasonable yes one on the test process
was another process which is what she
said then what sounds like that's what
she said so okay
why squeezing your left hand
what's up doing what part shifting
activation suddenly to the right
especially this part of the hemisphere
which is the area that was activity was
shifted to an inside so notice what's
going on here we get the pattern of
activity shifting that was insightful
generating is actually counter active to
this breaking frame
cranking cream is going to be right it's
actually detrimental to the performance
and the cure to it is the shift activity
like an input now it looks like this
move is opposite to insight yes okay so
they use the language of prominently you
can experience the probably difference
that can choke and choking can be
actually had the medical and here for it
is to do is to have something like an
infant experience so like what this is
we just thought of as evidence that this
facilitates insight and now it's inside
you the opposite and after they get more
confusing there's evidence that going
this way facilitate them say yes and all
that they're not acting measuring
actually but we do say that the shifting
in activity is it what with rescues are
from the impairment if the ship activity
in a way is very analogous to the ship
entities that we see in Yemen as saying
exactly the same thing
oh this little comparison is they like
dysentery with insight rescue this
activity disgusting
but what it's showing is their fines
when right this breaking frame can
actually mess up the shifting to the
right that you need in order to succeed
in the tax records head in terms of
problems not being knocked on the genius
class it could and but some customers
that that might not be the case I'm
going to propose you another thing but
don't give up on that that's relevant
and many of you are still pursuing a
critical line above this and that's good
and you notice I will working for good
result if you mark so that happen to
mark none of your stop it's very I mean
I'm making an argument and I think I'm
trying to make something plausible
because that's what you should do
education should be persuasion
weapon but also in importantly I want to
see and I'm training reporting skills in
all of you yes um I guess my question is
like more in line with this questions I
guess it didn't completely understand
I'm like I guess yelling both of those
both in sight and kicking a soccer ball
like they're both they're both
procedural but it's like different
procedures like maybe like maybe like
one procedures for like autumn eyes
activity the other activities of the
other sort of procedures for inside
problems which requires the Ottoman size
engine so it seems like it's
fundamentally different and well let me
try it this way I mean what you guys are
trying to do is do something we've
already rejected you're trying to get
back to the single difficulty hypothesis
you're trying to get back to all I have
to do is break the frame and that will
solve my inside problem but we have good
evidence and argument for thinking
that's not right and I'm going to add to
it in one minute
namely is it enough to break the
inappropriate frame of the nine dot
problem to solve the 9.50
for the mother right and so if you keep
breaking and breaking when you need to
restructure what is to restructure which
direction do you have to move to
restructure at the no time right so you
just keep breaking frame you're going to
choke because you have to be able to do
that shift like to the right well that's
the argument to make you have that's why
the argument also means the next point
I'm making
okay so in order so that we can talk
about these two directions right there
and because they taught this come from
me I'm allowed to make up the other term
right I'm going to call this breaking
frame and this making frame what I want
to show you right now is that we have
evidence of moving in this opposite
direction is also powerfully
facilitating stuff so if you start to
add this all together trying to get the
single difficulty hypothesis becomes
increasingly difficult okay sorry that
was self referential yeah it's sort of
ironically postmodern where self and
then we keep putting out the problem
with sort of mapping on sort of the
procedural tactics with actually
we involve our body okay two things
language good news sort of inferential
game sure although I think ultimately
these processes turn out to be deeply
embodied nature I'm going to give you
you're coming up to that respect to that
particular excellent experiment so what
we're saying is we're having a certain
type of motor activation right ensure
that the left hand and so that's what
hurts the right in students right
activating that Enzo so in some ways
it's similar very similar to what the
tDCS asserted for people wondering if we
had some attractive in a condition that
was otherwise facilitating automatic
some skills in this operation for
example if we had something that was
unrelated or beyond type tasks with the
hands to the best facilities or
interfere
because it's whether it's real relaxing
either so very much pushing up now could
share the answer I think if people can
get into a state in which the Congress
ability and this goes back way our
glorious it easily has not been either
hemisphere when the ability to ship
between them in a fluid matter I think
you could make a plausible case that
that's probably what the flow state is
measuring and so the research seems to
showing people to get into the flow
state they will optimize the performance
on these kinds of tasks but that's the
best answer I can give you a percentage
knowing maybe too much everything
sounded sort of - which line you pointed
out the blackboard it's an executive
action I'm sorry ah well there I mean
yet fairly basic experiment there's
there's similar stuff going on but we
only get the results that we don't get
the reports because it's being done by
Java and they're using PCs and stops
climates in induce the flow state to
improve the speed and accuracy of the
sharpshooter's things like that so
that's what some of that research is
being done they're talking they're doing
research on also inducing temporary
cycle turning you temporarily into a
psychopath
by shutting off areas of the brain that
are conducive to empathy and mindsight
and I'd rather report somebody from
firsthand experience these TMS
himself ever literally if you psychopath
get a like Dexter
alright and he talked about how clear
everything becomes because it's not all
messy and ill-defined by human emotions
and moral values and other people's
mental states and plants it all becomes
very clear what you should do this
terrifying we came out of it by the
other militaries twenty with that twenty
is probably the exact wrong birth
reviews so let's get go some way all
right you already have one instance of
this clearly any what positive reaping
is you go from features of the gestalt
and you go from looking at the result
right - looking at the picture looking
through it so first you're getting dot
and then you configure the dots oh
that's right into the picture of the
sofa and then very quickly you go from
looking at it to looking through it
thinking about sofas you're doing this
exactly what cognitively thing is making
frame it's going from featural to
Gestalt and it's going in is bringing a
no toxicity to transparency shift to go
from looking at it to looking through it
they have worked from
poor Stern that out in 2004 sir now at
2004 and hunted Carol from 2008 this is
construal level theory in to push people
to a higher level of control to the
gestalt level right it will actually
also enhance their problems their
ability to solve insect problems which
also lines up with what we saw with the
finger experiment we can push people up
I'm sorry my cramp Luis if you push them
up to a higher level you will increase
right the result tasks like face
recognition
if you push people up into a higher
level of control you will get
enhancement of their capacity for
solving insect problems but of course we
already know and this is old and ancient
within the inside literature cognitive
leaping is also a disaster if I show you
behind often you cognitively leap to
this sweater what happens in fixation so
automatic cognitively B can also be
detrimental to the inside
problem-solving so this is facility but
it can be detrimental
this is missile Tori but it can be
detrimental where you actually push
Audiology
okay so if we picked up on the idea that
attention is this complex multi-layered
self-organizing process then there's a
way of responding to this because if
attention is this kind of
self-organizing process right it would
behave according to what dynamical
Systems Theory says and in dynamical
Systems Theory what you have to pay
attention to the timing matters I might
get a formal computational system where
what matters is order before and after
relationships right in a dynamical
system timing matters so for example
which really important are things like a
phase function v
face function fit is right you want to
be using the correct function right at
the grep phase in any problem-solving
situation so for example if you need to
break frame and you should do this so in
in a paper that myself a mayoral wants a
book chapter came up 2016 we call this
scaling down attention going this way if
you need to break up an inappropriate
problem formulation you should break
frame then you break frame by scaling
attention down we also need an
alternative problem formulation you need
to engage the right atmosphere right and
in order to do that we should make brain
and you should make plane by scaling up
attention all the destruction is the
whole thing that the destructors came in
and they were very interesting they're
more interesting than me the pencils
seem to have a mind of its own and
wanted to plea towards one and then had
a very interesting destructor come on
stone okay so the idea is if you track
in an inappropriate problem formulation
perhaps because it's called it's all
explosive or a hidden sufficiently turns
your ill-defined additions well defined
in this right
then you should break up that structural
functional organization you break up
that problem formulation that problem
framing by scaling down attention and
breaking frame but you also of course
need to come up with an alternative play
an alternative problem formulation
when you're in that phase you should
scale attention up in order to trigger
the processes of brain making a part of
the skill our insight and disappear sis
where I've been arguing that it's
procedural in scale like a nature is of
getting that same function set
coordinated well now there's two ways of
trying to substantiate this with
argument any empirical evidence one
would be to show how this helps us to
better understand the potential for
mindfulness practices or facilitating
insight secondly we have independent
evidence that right attention is working
or at least the process of networking
insight are showing this kind of
self-organizing right restructuring
capacity this will we'll take a look at
the work of Stephanie Dixon about my top
organizing criticality with an intuitive
problem solving so those are the two
things I'm going to now pursue in order
to try and further argue for this
dynamical model now what's the promise
of dreams where should we do this well
the thing about the n-double models
especially because they've done very
well on things like neural networks
because no one that works right are
already working and they stop organizing
parallel fashion three here's a good
account of how fuels work
and they also as an automaker kiss with
us it gives us a formal theory for
talking about cell borders and processes
to be able to integrate aspects of such
dynamical theories so that we can think
about several mathematical model isms I
won't do any heavy math with you
that could be brought to bear to talk
about all these processes and our being
already brought today in fact the case
then we could have a way of talking
about all of this
that is non-computational but yet
nevertheless is based on existing theory
that already is successfully being used
in science and our mathematical
formalisms
that are already existence in other
words to put in the sentence we could
have as rid of the risk of theoretical
framework as a search inference
framework what I'm proposing to you is
that perhaps we're getting to a place so
this is this is not only in this lecture
maybe not even in the next lecture when
I try and argue that the debate between
the gestalt ists and the search entrance
framework hasn't been resolved is the
transcended that there's a new framework
of bridging that takes aspects from both
to come up with a different way of
trying to readers they talk about insert
on solving a way that also is giving us
much tighter connections to what's
happening in the neuroscience of insight
so that's where the argument is going
okay so so three big steps
the mindfulness steps the self
organizing stuff and then getting into
this way of trying to come up with an
alternative framework for talking about
insight that would capture the best of
both worlds
okay the mindfulness stuff which many
people often find the most interesting
part of the
course which now by saying that you'll
 you concentrate on the feature of
interestingness and it will disappear
for you because it will be automatron
your interest and energetic attention
it's like it's like the last thing you
should do when you look at somebody and
you think they're beautiful is wonder
yeah wonder why I think that person's
beautiful because you know what will
happen they will stop being beautiful
for you because you beauty is tends to
be a gestalt thing and will plop down at
a deeper level and left hemisphere is
rapidly looking for the feature that is
beauty oh that's right and people find
it okay so some questions perhaps
shouldn't be asked or at least they
should to be asked at the wrong time
although you can use it in any other way
like I've said time for a really great
thing to do when you're in martial arts
farming is compliment somebody on
something they're just done that was
really good how did you do that because
then I can do it okay so first of all
welcome into too much detail I do this
into other courses and when I 471 which
I won't be doing this year we'll
probably do again the following year
when we talk about the monocles contract
I have a hold for tier seven of course
dedicated did any of you take that
anybody do 471 comments to that it's
almost good nobody's home person in the
course okay so what we have is we have a
series of experiments that seem to show
that practicing mindfulness enhances
insight so read it out in 2010
and then pasta Panem - captain why not
have been contacted me wants to do some
work together on this stuff which is
kind of cool also going to counseling
which is 2012 some of you know this got
a year of course topic proposals and
then green Greenberg liner and mirin
2012 also LTS started really really poor
that's okay
there's a whole bunch it's a pasta thing
called second of history and then I read
you the list of names so I'm just going
to put your greenberg it out in 2012
there's been some more recent ones that
I've heard from kind of for them before
it all within an election so all of
these showing that if you so for example
the red house you have people following
your breath laughing they take the pass
now pointless exercise
so people are following their breath
right and what they're doing is they're
counting your breath and they need to
put up their hand every 10 reps or every
hundred left controller but they're not
expectedly people are giving insight
problems to solve and people who were
following the breath do significantly
better than people who want it cetera so
automatic osmond were able to show that
both trait and a mindfulness included
capacity for solving inside problems the
state mindfulness is
when I don't like these terms they
should use dispositional and a current
rather than state sort of rather than
tradesmen state but the state
mindfulness is when you do some sort of
mindfulness practice in order to put
yourself into a mindfulness state of
mind trade mind Felicity is how much you
dis positionally sort of set to go into
mindfulness states and what they're able
to show is both improve your insight
pump solving ability remember
greenberger now we're able to show that
mindfulness training especially helps
for for a particular form of insight
problem which is overcoming what's
called the I'm selling effect I'm
selling effect is basically a kind of
the understanding in fact it's
interesting because it's an interaction
between sort of familiarity and
fixedness they're selling effect goes
like this you give somebody a problem to
solve and they solve it with a
particular strategy right then you give
them another problem that can be solved
with that strategy but it will be a
really clunky and portable solution but
that second problem could be solved much
better with another strategy and the
italic effect is that people tend to
stick with the strategy that worked even
though a better strategy is available to
them readily available to them and the
actually reflects is very typically the
things have a German name that means the
robust they stood around for so the
understanding of that is very robust and
what's greenberg it all were able to
show is that it overcome right
the answer in effect if you have had
mindfulness training yes
I'm selling
inside in fact I don't need you look
like they enjoy the word effect which it
uses yes great mindfulness is its
dispositional mindfulness as opposed to
currently be in a mindful state big
mindfulness is how dispose probable is
it that you will go into Miami states
spontaneously so of course one of the
things you're doing when you're doing
mindfulness training is you you're after
just additional modulus you don't just
want the toy of meditation is not to get
just mindfulness in that time you want
it so that that will transfer to the
rest of your life so you get relate
mindfulness Arthur Beckman said as well
a long time ago it's not about altered
states of consciousness or altered
traits of character interestingly not by
the way the same architect men who said
that wonderful quote in 1967 proposed at
one of the primary functions of
mindfulness is to dianna vataj cognition
good question hanging out all the time
similar evidence hanging out 2013 that
one of the things that mindfulness does
is c2dm ties partnership specific
evidence for that is more and malinovski
2008 and also 2009 and more recently
that people with training in mindfulness
practice are able to significantly
reduce the triple Stroop effect which is
the capacity to do Dymatize by doing a
transparency to a paucity shift
let me take a look at things like
following the brass system if we use
here but also presuppose and most of the
training think about what your to be
taught to do I can talk about this is a
teacher this the teaching percussive for
112 years total this as in fact would be
good for 25 years you're teaching it for
the V so one of the thing one of the
standard things people do in one of the
most okay I have to be careful because
they'll be very critical about how the
West is important I'm going to say the
way the West has imported mindfulness
has been very skewed and
misrepresentation but that being said so
remember of an impact event racism
nevertheless the most popular times are
meditation practices mindfulness
practices sorry our meditation practices
that do things like follow the breath so
let's take what's happening when you're
following the breath is you're trying to
pay attention to your sensations which
is a radical kind of transparency
opacity shifting and you're trying to be
open and non-judgmental which is you're
trying to right you're trying to the arm
attached accomplishes very powerful
you're doing a lot of things that we
already saw for example with when we
talked about black and Whitesburg you're
supposed to not engage in any kind of
elaborative or inferential processing
you're trying to disengage from
inferential computational processing and
of course you're breaking up the results
of your experience because you're trying
to focus on and aware of all the little
differences all those different featural
differences in your sensation that you
normally don't pay attention to so one
of the things you're training right in
meditation things like the optimization
cultural criticism is your training is
scaling down training practicing scaling
down and what's really interesting when
you do it how many of you have done some
marvelous practice some of you I mean so
the thing that faces you of course is
that there's something like what you can
think when I close this market there's
something like a cognitive truth of that
right actually the matter are effective
Park
so right the thing that happens is right
if you'll allow me this metaphor and
give you enough so you know that I'm not
just speaking metaphorically so this is
the metaphors for pedagogical purposes
right and we talked about this before
but we're talking about the transparency
country normally we're looking through
how we're framing the part experience
like my godson and what you're doing in
mindfulness practice is you're actually
stepping back and trying to look at
remind kind of look at the sensations
and how your mind is trying to consult
and frame things and you're trying to
hold off from going into the consulting
and the framing now what happens is
there's a cognitive Stroop effect just
like it's very hard for you to pay
attention to the medium of the work
instead of looking through the medium
what happens is right when you try to
meditate your brick you mind keeps going
and you keep thinking about things it's
called monkey mind because they're kept
this type of monkey chattering and
jumping around and then what you have to
do right is you have to step back okay
this language is almost used in fact all
you have to do is you don't get involved
with the content of your distraction you
don't get involved with the
propositional conceptual content of your
destruction to actually label the
process with an ING word like thinking
imagining wandering complaining
listening and then you return your
attention to the gut so what you're
constantly doing if you think about it
is you're constantly scaling down
intention again and again and again
what happens of course as I said is you
can get I mean for excited practices you
get down to it it's called the pure
consciousness event you're not thinking
about anything there's absolutely no
transparency and there is no gestalt
there is nothing you're not even
thinking about your own consciousness
you're just conscious that might not
mean anything to you I'm sorry I can't
do anything about the body all I can do
is point out something to you that you
have a fringe of that right now
even now going on how many of you are
conscious put up your hands okay I'm
interesting the people that do the
project okay what did you do to know
that you were conscious
okay so there's an aspect of what's
called by some people knowledge by
identity where knowing that you're
conscious and being conscious are
exactly the same thing it's probably
only it's probably a future only appear
consciousness it's not a feature of
knowledge in general yes the blindfold
practices for elective office never been
like a few before but I'm going to pay
attention to your breath but just being
able to scale down you could
theoretically pay attention to your
breathing and also pay attention to a
few objects at the same time you could
you're lots of things yeah but the
important part is to pay attention to
you put breathing what's not helping if
you're not also the alien right so
that's completely right except for the
product is by remembering that in
meditation China do things other than
the cognitive potential stuff so paying
attention to the breathing also has a
relaxing effect on people attend to the
ground
I tend to get keep it up keep it up
oxygen in the bloodstream so you don't
fall asleep so I have a lot of other
benefits
I think that's why it's a typical focus
I agree with what you're saying I'm just
saying there's other practical reasons
where it's exercise now I think there's
a critiquing what you're saying Jake is
right and this is part of the mystique
of mindfulness that you've heard you
criticize later in prac right is it
there's some magic associated with the
breath and some people get all weird and
creepy about it like you know rap and
the original meaning of the word spirits
was drunk and so this is a spirit Annika
and I want these people to get away from
the community so although I think people
and people are being real it's like
there's practical reasons why it's good
to focus on the problem but you should
understand what who is doing that really
is the cognitive attentional processes
the attentional processes that are
applications that not anything
intrinsically to the breath per se sorry
I ranted a bit but he gave you every
opportunity to say hello it's the aim of
our being try a certain apply that to
every situation so like for example in
your studies well that's more again I
think that's a misinterpretation that's
been taken into the West which is that
mindfulness mindfulness is the state of
the state that you're supposed to get
that Michael the state is equivalent to
the state you get into in your
meditative which isn't necessarily
correct right mindfulness is meditation
is a good way of training mindfulness
but in but think about what think about
the past enough the eternal that Maples
do you know what the past the translates
as in say the point of this practice is
to generate insight so typically when
people and this is how I was thought
you're not taught just meditative
practices you also talk contemplative
practices as well and you're also part
of moving flow induction practice so I
was taught I was taught the past not
mess up and touch each one because the
point is the cognitive flexibility
the point is minima is to not only train
this but to train this and to train the
capacity for flow so that what you're
actually trying to enhance is the
cognitive flexibility of breaking frame
and making things we try to train that
skill you're not by meditating your life
you're trying to get better at right so
I think mindfulness is the frame
awareness that you have to have for both
rating frame and making prayer now I
can't give you that full of it here you
can read the article and the other is
that the marshal for defending them okay
so the breaking frame is in education is
the meditation aspect that is following
the brook so making frames in dr.
Schwahn well Megha I think is where
you're doing making break well I think
Tai Chi Chuan is constantly about
getting fluid in breaking a big book you
do a move and then you break it and then
you make a new move you break it and
then you need to make any move you're
constantly breaking and making and if
want to even do stuff like you want
moving and you have to do is opposite
right after this break right any
automaticity and generate it's like
doing figure effluents you put with your
whole body
now that's what the cultural fatigue the
wax has done what it likes to do which
is blue like to take this technique out
of this whole ecology of practice I can
transport it over here and I can mark it
as a single universal panacea for all of
our ills but if you pay attention right
I think there's evidence that you know
breaking Krampus Oh pigeon sorry because
of course we have evidence to bring you
bring the subject in play but we also
have evidence for is that you should be
also training making frame and training
the cognitive flexibility of moving
between making frame and breaking frame
and breaking primary and that's what
these traditions in their actual
cultural settings do people very rarely
do one
in fact what you should be doing
typically is doing a meditative practice
a contemplative practice some martial
art practice and also a healing process
like that's the typical training regime
this time your hand is up see my
peripheral vision yeah not now is
ignoring you because you would do a so
much oh I can hallucinogenic drugs have
a similar effect meditation yeah I need
I've got a couple talks there's one on
YouTube on altered states of
consciousness
I just gave one that was filmed taped
onto mycelium about being I know the
thing I know but is psilocybin and what
it does to this kind of machinery drugs
can powerfully interact with this kind
of training to be careful here right
there's legal implication okay but like
they I mean you won't get what you're
looking for what you're looking for is
the enhancement of your cognitive
processes through the recreational use
of this they have to be used in a
particular context within like I'm
arguing a whole ecology of practice in
order to get the kinds of effects you're
asking me about um also like like in
both you know meditation and quite
experimental you noticed like an
increased ability to like notice other
people's emotions sure and there's good
reason for that
yeah so when you're doing this kind of
stuff especially in your practices
that's by the way way to do a healing or
is welcome right you're actually so deep
you know what interception is
interception is your awareness of what's
going on inside your own body yeah okay
so the part of the brain that does that
is the insula and we have some
preliminary evidence in defense reason
that meditative practice would actually
increase the functioning of the end
but the insula is also what you use to
pick up on other people's mental states
in fact this is a pretty robust test the
heart rate test is a good test of how in
a pic you own so without touching
yourself sort it but something to do in
the next 15 seconds is tell me how many
heartbeats you have and then up in the
next 15 seconds or when you're no longer
anxious about it actually measure how
many heartbeats job and see what the
ratio is how good you are at that is
predictive of how good you are picking
up on other people's mental states so
there seems to be the machinery there
that's you and this seems to be part and
this is what your network theory is
basically pointing towards the machinery
in essence to sort of generate our
abilities is the machinery we are using
to recognize it in other people okay
that actually um that feeling falls in
line with what I was thinking before
could like I was thinking before like
the reason why promotion for meditation
makes you better at meeting others
because like every other person has like
a sort of like like emotional energy
their goal to be long and when you're
around them that that energy comes into
you and if you meditate or you do much
and you become more in touch with
yourself as you can notice ya energy
coming in to you better you can have
some result sure but up decipher their
emotions that's right and I mean and I
get that you're using that language
poetically metaphorically but you don't
have to talk about emotional energy
things like that if you talk about the
language of the insula and this kind of
stuff yeah so I mean one of the things
that will happen is if if they're from
the state and it is lots of people doing
work on this right but if this keeps
going forward right a lot of the magic
and woowoo and crazy stuff is going to
disappear from a lot of this literature
some people won't like that but some
people will like it because will
actually get a better understanding I
think of what
going on in these process like ap the
aquatic language to describe the better
like phenomenologically in browsing life
sure well that's only because we haven't
had the other language yet yeah I've
never failed when I get to here wait
wait what we do when I do flow to the
lecture will crash how could I flow more
yes that you can train all kinds of
interesting
restructurings and reconnections so it
is now pretty well-documented is
increasing empirical evidence for a
quiet synesthesia for extensive
monitoring of doctors we could even
become more symmetry if you want to okay
so if you're going to mention many
mindfulness practices are also
contemplative practices now part of the
problem here is I want to go back to
what these terms actually mean because
because of this weird you know reduction
is our beauty in the appropriation of
mindfulness so I'm engaging in some
critique of cultural appropriation here
right now what's happened is we tended
to make these two terms we tended to
make a budget terms also not as we
tended to make meditation and
contemplation that understands it is two
different ways of a talk about the same
thing we've also tended to think that
the words mindfulness and watchfulness
in most of the sutures are the same term
we've forgotten that they're not by the
way they're different terms we've
forgotten that the word for mindfulness
in the Buddhist ideas Jackie is not just
about paying attention if the original
meaning of this is remembering keeping
in mind
global restructuring not just paying
attention
although ok so again I'm trying to
collapse when I take an entire seminar
course to do contemplation meditation
comes from words that mean moving
towards the center the oldest meditation
manual we have in fact right it is
simply translated Cedric look at this
word contemplation comes from the latin
word right
contemplative this was within the
Western wisdom tradition special
exercises you know what they are doing
and monasteries and desert constructed
this is a Latin translation of the Greek
word we would actually have tattooed on
my right leg
Gloria what word does that make you
think of theory but of course they're
not talking about theory in our sense of
a set of propositions that are
inflection thing they talk about
something that happens in winds but what
are the theory allows you to do but this
can be allowing you to do right or what
is exclaim you will need to be aware
that helps you construct the frame
outright but note what allows you to do
is it allows you to see deeper
connections between things right so it's
about you to see below the surface of
things that's what you're doing when
you're explaining up sort of theory does
like this actually comes from right
seeing the god or L you know the eyes
seem it means seeing into the depth of
things what if there does is allows you
to understand the think of the word to
see deeply into things but what it was
used in this tradition it didn't mean
through propositions it
through training your attention of
awareness to see more deeply into things
so for example that's why I want to use
the word contemplation for going this
way this is not a patient this is
concentration so for example in Buddhist
practice you can and this is the word
that's actually you can contemplate the
three marks of existence you try to
learn not to faith but to see everything
is impermanent
so actually realize everything is
impermanent to see everything is
interconnected to see everything is
lacking a substantial self physical
decay parts of existence this is a
contemplative exercise it's not about
looking in at your breath it's about
trying to make an alternative framing
for all of reality it's trying to create
a huge result and a huge or complication
transparency ship you're trying to stop
looking at these don't see them as solid
independent things that look through
them however you need to depend if any
permanent yes now this isn't as familiar
to you which is my point
these practices are considered as
important if not more important than
meditation if you look right at the
original set the original ecology
practices the point of meditation was so
that you could then engage a better
contemplation so that you could have
insight into the nature of experience
and reality so if you look right these
traditions have mindfulness practices
that go this way mindfulness practices
will go this way and often practice it I
hope for getting a fluency and a
flexibility and break this try to make
your frame so when I try to show you is
that this way of thinking about
attention helps us understand what's
going on in the insight especially we
take all of these like processes
essential processes and put them within
what
Vivienne's contains a dynamically
self-organizing recursive process and
that that way of understanding attention
also helps us to make sense of like the
Western empirical evidence for the
relationship between mindfulness and
insight but also helps us to better go
back and criticize that Western
understanding of mindfulness and great
reorient it and one or more people are
doing this I'm not like a lone voice of
wilderness but we are at and pay
attention to what is actually going on
in these wisdom traditions that are
attempting to train insight and wisdom
and compassion so that's an argument for
why this is a better framework then this
search by title or prevention in the
right way so that closes now my argument
against verbal overshadow you would have
gotten any of this with a search like
metaphor for attention get it
differently that thank you very much
thank Christ I like your enthusiasm for
the weirdness