I try to imagine a fella smarter than
myself and then I tried to think what
would he do
charge up your axons ready your
receptors and shift your lobes into
upper beta phase you are listening to
smart drug smarts the podcast dedicated
to helping you optimize your brain with
the latest breakthroughs and
neuroscience Neotropics and
psychopharmacology hello and welcome to
smart drug smarts my name is Jesse
Lawler I am your host and this is the
180 first episode of this podcast
dedicated to anything and everything
that you can do to improve your brain
and in this case the brains of your
entire society potentially let me give
you a little tease of what we're about
to be talking about this is a cognitive
intervention that you have almost
certainly done yourself and very likely
everyone you know has done in one form
or another and has major ramifications
on the way that our brains are organized
that we start with at a very young age
and goes through some of our most
important developmental stages of life
and if those weren't enough clues that
this particular cognitive intervention
is state mandated we are talking about
education something which we probably
have not spent enough time in the past
talking about on this show but giving
its relevance to the brain and not
paying attention to it we do so at our
peril education is certainly one of
those things that's given time to get
its reps and we spend years of our life
in the educational system and it's
probably fair to ask since it's over
goal is to really have our brains pop
out the other end behaving in certain
ways is it doing its job and he is the
job that is doing a job that it should
be doing to begin with
given that the big big changes in the
way that society operates and what
people are expected to do from one
decade to the next or one generation to
the next is our educational system in
need of a big overhaul that is the
question being posed by our guest today
dr. Zach Stein will be talking about the
future of Education how we might best
design that future given what we know
about the way that brains operate
far-reaching discussion that goes into
both neuroscience and social policy that
will be in the main interview also up
front acknowledgement you can probably
hear it in my voice I'm getting over a
cold the last couple days so there will
not be any acapella performances in this
podcast by me or anyone else
luckily the interview itself was
recorded weeks ago back when I was my
healthy self but hopefully the before
and after bits would be sounding a bit
froggy you won't be too annoying if you
hang around until the very end of the
episode I'm going to give you a Stanford
researchers study trick this is a hack
that allegedly takes only 15 minutes but
can lift B+ students into the a range so
invested 15 minutes if it scores you an
A at Stanford that'll be in the
ruthlessness and a retention gimmick but
for right now let's kick things off as
usual with this week in neuroscience our
drug smarts this week in neuroscience so
when you think about endangered species
you're probably thinking about things
like the giant pandas they won't breed
in captivity or an exotic species of
frogs things like that you're not
thinking about humans and of course
humans are not endangered but there is a
small sub fraction of the human
population that are not getting any
greater in number and very likely never
will be that is people who have
undergone a corpus callosotomy better
known as split brain patients this is a
procedure that isn't really done anymore
medical science has moved on but it was
something that was done for a while for
people who are dealing with incurable
epilepsy surgically severing or removing
the corpus callosum the major bundle of
nerve fibers that connects the left and
right hemispheres of the brain severing
those connections was effective in
keeping epileptic seizures from
propagating across the brain but this
isn't something that's been done much in
the last few decades the split brain
patients that are still with us are
getting older and soon we're going to be
kind of looking at the last of Mohicans
when it comes to split brain people
which is interesting and important
because one of the byproducts of having
that procedure done on a number of
people with some really interesting
tests to how the brain operates what the
left and the right hemispheres are doing
semi independently of one another test
you just can't do in somebody with an
off-the-shelf on severed brain and for
many decades the conventional wisdom and
what's still in the medical textbooks
that are out there now had some really
shocking really peculiar findings we
talked about him on past episodes of
this show ideas that are pretty widely
disseminated in the public consciousness
based on the work of Roger Sperry this
was a scientist who won a Nobel Prize
for his work the original reports from
50 years ago now back in the 60s
suggested that if you took a split brain
patient and restricted their visual
inputs so you could show them objects
just with the right eye or just with
their left eye they would be unable to
verbally describe anything that appeared
on the left side of the space nor could
the right hand point to it or point to a
picture matching it or draw a picture
even though the right hemisphere of
their brain knew what was there the
right brain could use the left hand to
point to the target or to draw a picture
that matched it the implication being
that it was as if these patients had to
separate minds with one of the minds
knowing what was on one side of the
space even if the other half was totally
ignorant of it it wasn't just that the
physical organ of the brain
had been snipped in half a disconnection
point it was like consciousness itself
had undergone mitosis and you end up
with two independent minds which of
course befuddled everybody and then does
to this day it's really weird to think
what exactly does that mean for those of
us who are the unbasic did corpus
callosum but researcher year pinto at
the university of amsterdam has been
turning back the clock looking at these
original findings and trying to find out
is this something that should be taken
at face value it has the conventional
wisdom for the last 50 years been
correct because there aren't all that
many split brain procedure patients left
to double checked us against and
apparently it's a good thing he checked
because it seems that the answer is no
in his recent research published in the
journal Brain it appears that the minds
of these people remains unified despite
having the corpus callosum severed
there's certainly some difficulties in
communication that arise but the mind
itself remains one piece Pinto and his
colleagues conducted five experiments
with two split brain patients with each
experiment basically being variations on
a theme that was either verbally or by
pointing the patient had to assess the
position or identify pictures shapes
things that appeared on one side or
another of a computer screen and then
identify or compare those shapes to
things on the other side of the screen
and what he found was that information
processed by one side or the other did
at some point become available to
awareness to the mind at a unified
overall level which the patient's the
participants could report on verbally or
act on with either arm so left or right
side of the brain controlling now one
potential confounding factor is that
obviously the split brain procedure
itself happened many decades in the past
now and it's possible that the original
split Minds phenomenon was real but was
something transient and that brain
plasticity in the intervening years has
kind of fixed the problem
that's one will probably never know
that's probably a mystery for the ages
but says Pinto we have shown that
severing the cortical connections
between the two brain hemispheres does
not seem to lead to two independent
conscious agents within one brain this
raises the intriguing possibility that
even without massive communication
between the cerebral hemispheres and
thus increases in modularity unity and
consciousness and responding is largely
preserved so one of those weirdest of
all brain facts pieces of brain trivia
being a semi debunked getting slightly
less weird it reminds me a little of a
physicist coming out now and saying you
know all that quantum mechanics we've
been
about yes turns out that's not exactly
right but that is one of the great
things about science the way it's
supposed to work
nothing is ever static no fact can rest
on its laurels nor would we want it to
smart drug smarts the podcasts so smart
we have smart in our title twice picked
up a couple of five-star reviews on
iTunes listener squid gems from the USA
says I've survived four heart attacks
seven years ago and I need all the
information that this podcast has the
mushroom info the brain hack info
everything and living room of Mac also
from the USA says when I was introduced
to this podcast I thought it was just
going to be a commercial for
psychedelics instead I have learned so
much the podcast may have a slight slant
but it does a great job of presenting
some truly alternative solutions to
anxiety and depression thank you
well thanks to both of you thanks to
everyone that's been leaving iTunes
reviews and spreading the word on smart
drug smart in other ways I know some
other podcasters podcasters are probably
a tight little community knitting circle
kind of thing and of course naturally we
compare notes on how we spread the word
on our podcast how we get more people to
find out about it and I get to sense
that smart drug smarts listeners do a
better job of just gabbing about smart
drug smarts then some other podcast
listeners do about their respective
podcasts so group hug to all of you out
there very much appreciated longtime
listeners will know that for the last
couple of years each year I've done a
one-week water fast inspired by the work
and research of dr. Thomas Seyfried I
won't go into the full details now but
anyway early warning that probably
sometime in the month of July
maybe I'll just probably July but
looking ahead to doing a water fast
sometime in the relatively near future
if you are interested in participating
we'll get together an online group of
smart drug smarts listeners to
commiserate with one another during that
week definitely makes things a bit
easier also gives you people to ask
questions to ask questions come up if
you want to get on the mailing list for
that just drop me an email Jesse at
smart drug smarts calm I'll also be
talking about that more in an upcoming
newsletter peace on the brain breakfast
newsletter if you are not yet signed up
for the brain breakfast that is smart
drug smarts calm slash newsletter to get
me your email given that I am getting
over a cold decency forbids me from
saying anything about supplement
companies you shouldn't trust an obese
cardiologist and you shouldn't take any
supplement advice from a guy with the
sniffles but hopefully I will be
reputable again by next week
smart drug smarts so I'm about to be
speaking with dr. Zach Steen who comes
from a background of educational
neuroscience human development in the
philosophy of education at Harvard
University he currently teaches at
Meridian University and he's also on the
scientific advisory board of the neuro
hacker collective we spoke with Daniel
smocked and murderer the founder of the
neuro hacker collective probably a half
dozen maybe more episodes ago talking
about the future of medicine now we're
talking about the future of Education so
a lot of future thinking going on over
at the neuro hacker collective probably
never a bad thing to prepare for the
future we all know it's coming we just
don't know quite what it looked like the
first three words about himself on dr.
Zack Stein's website described him as a
high achieving dyslexic and as you'll
hear in the coming interview his
dyslexia has actually really informed
his whole view of the educational system
how it operates now how it could be
doing better and how it might be changed
to achieve better outcomes in the future
I feel like it's really easy to forget
when we think about education that
really education is a giant conveyor
belt for brains the outcomes that we do
want from our educational system are
essentially changes to the way that
people think and are likely to behave so
looking back at our educational system
in view of the recent findings that
we've had certainly in the time since
our education system is kind of
stabilized we know so much more about
the way that brains operate and what
they best respond to now how could we
retool education to work better for all
involved that's the discussion we're
about to have so don't fall asleep in
class settle in your desks and get ready
for this guest lecture by dr. Zack Stein
everything we know about the adolescent
brain in particular would suggest that
the school day ought to start much later
and more if not after lunch that's a
simple example of the way that schools
can actually work against the optimal
development of the brain there's also
the fact that for a very long time in
human history in fact the vast majority
of human history human brains did not
read which is to say we did not neuronal
II recycle our face recognition system
to become a graphing recognition system
and become literate and yet now we are
doing in schools on an everyday basis
forms of mathematics that were extremely
rare in ancient Athens so the
Pythagorean theorem for example was a
freaking mystical insight like it was an
insight into the reality of the cosmos
with a limited number of elite people at
now every eighth graders learning the
Pythagorean there and so literacy and
numeracy affect the developing brain
very clear so what we can say from just
this brief conversation of that through
the large-scale institutionalization of
school we've had a massive impact on the
development of the brain because so many
people now are literate numerous right
what do we actually see in brain
differences between literate and
illiterate people is it parts of the
speech areas that do double duty when
we're reading and writing I mean
obviously the visual cortex is going to
be involved but what portions of the
brain handle our reading requirements
there's a few things to say one is that
brains are very unique there are many
ways to become a reader so for example
with my dyslexia I became a reader in a
different way than perhaps you did if
you're not dyslexic there are some
generalities so I'm going to hone in on
one specific thing which you already
mentioned which is this hypothesis of
neuronal recycling and so this comes
from the work of Stan's loss to hain
he's a French antara scientists who look
specifically at mathematics and other
things but when he was looking at the
way we process graphene right which is
to say this unique thing in our visual
field which is a kind of squiggle that
has meaning
he showed pretty interestingly in
scanner and with a few other methods
that which gets recruited by the brain
to do that to recognize a graphene as a
semiotic object individual field and
what gets recruited is what gets
recruited before you read to recognize
faces and specifically emotional
complexity and so that's interesting and
there's overlaps and of course when you
look at fMRI studies it's always
averages of averages but the point being
that brain did not evolve to read I
always like to say this like asset
dyslexic that disability emerges at the
interface of biology and specific
cultural expectations
there's no dyslexia in illiterate or non
literate societies period dyslexia
doesn't exist in the same way when
you're using a pictographic alphabet as
opposed to our alphabet you can be a bad
typist in the era before typewriters
exactly right and so it's interesting
that we essential eyes we're going to
reify many of these disabilities as if
there's some genetic code for dyslexia
but there can't really be what there is
is a code for certain forms of
neurodiversity which interface with
cultural expectations and forms of text
etc so that's kind of one way to think
about it is that the brain didn't evolve
to read but what schooling has done is
on a large scale get everyone to use
their brains in this unique way to
neuronal e recycle some part that was
used for something else for this
radically cultural and kind of novel
activity of reading difference in speech
speaking comes naturally
reading seems to be kind of bolted on
and using other things and so do other
forms of high-level thought and symbol
operation schooling has a massive effect
on the brain and has been for centuries
for good and for ill and this is where
it gets interesting because school has
also made certain forms of neuronal
development let's say it's a proxy for
psychological development skill develop
certain of those are more valuable than
others certain of those are paid
attention to more than others certainly
those get financial rewards as opposed
to others and so there's a homogenizing
effect to mass schooling another
narrative here is that yes everyone's
learning to read and write and so we're
getting this new kind of brain that's
evolving at a large scale but we're also
getting a kind of regimentation
potential homogenize ation that
restrictive functioning on what could be
the potentials of the brain so for
example meditative states which I do a
lot of work with massive potential in
every human brain to be capable of deep
meditative state that's not in school
and so this is one of those things where
it's about not just the brain it's about
the way the brain is in culture and the
way the potentials that are implicit in
the brain are expressed or not expressed
given the context and especially given
socio-cultural context with all these
ethical and normative kind of
emotionally Laden expectations which is
what schooling us which is what the
family is so schooling and brain are
huge the simplest thing for me is the
time of day at start let's say this at
schools all the time because you get the
cheer from the students like yeah it's
way too early to take the adolescent
brain get it up at like 6:00 a.m. and
showered and out the door it's like what
are you doing it's like torture there
seems to be a lot of things where from
what we've learned in the past couple of
decades of research we're sort of
swimming upstream with our educational
system having kids which are wired to
move and using their bodies physically
sitting still in desks and you get in
trouble if you're moving yeah I mean
that's exactly right and that's another
case where good neuroscience even good
psychology we'll just say this is crazy
yeah you can't have a kid of this age
you can't reasonably expect them to sit
there for four hours straight one of the
powers of neuroscience and the human
sciences in general so it's philosophers
call explanatory critique which is to
say once you know there's a certain
process
at work you have no good reason to
behave otherwise if you're behaving
otherwise it means there's some ulterior
factor and so for the school day it has
to do with the way the schools have been
for lack of a better phrase a holding
pen for the youth while mom and dad go
to work the biggest problem with
changing the starting time of the school
day is it mom and dad go to work at 9:00
if the kids don't go to work until 11:00
there's 2 hours so what do they do you
hire someone to take care of them or
what happens and so it's interesting and
my latest book I'm talking about how all
of these macroeconomic reforms are
actually necessary to make schools the
way they need to be for optimal brain
development so I'm going to just rip the
lid off the ethical can of worms here
and say what are some of the frameworks
by which we might try to devise what
optimal brain development really is
because I was raised in the normal
American schooling system then it might
be that my brain is ossified into this
thing where I'm not even capable of
thinking some of the creative ways as to
why the system might want to be
different why producing people off the
same conveyor belt as produced me is
even a desirable thing this is the deep
philosophical question this is where we
land when we do this philosophy of
Education in particular the deepest
question the philosophy of Education is
what is the good human or the good
community education raises for us the
most foundational question as does
raising a child outside of schooling
who are we to shape this child and who
are we to not shape this child which is
to say that the absence of teacherly
Authority the absence of parental
authority is also potentially damaging
you can't exactly abdicate that role
exactly so and this was the problem with
a free school movement this is what John
Dewey was always criticizing was the
free school movement where if the kid
didn't want to learn math he didn't have
to well that's actually a huge
disservice to that kid and so it's about
this dance between autonomy and
community and about finding a way to
exercise teacherly Authority
appropriately and we are now in our
culture and a crisis of teacherly
Authority which is to say that who knows
what we're who to believe
is it CNN or Fox News is it the New York
Times or right is it dis college
professor or is blogger you never went
to college and it's really tough for
people now to predict what the
psychological and educational needs of a
kid popping out of the school system 20
years from now is even going to be
predicted in world five years in advance
is a tough row to hoe these days
precisely so again back to Dewey
he of course addressed this question you
asked
his most coherent answer went something
like this those forms of learning are
bests that enable more learning so it's
a call for forms of Education that are
open-ended
and that allow for ongoing lifelong
learning and so instead of for example
teaching science as a collection of
facts in the textbook you teach a
scientific method it's an open form
verse closed form way of defining the
goals of Education and so the open form
that do is preferring is to say that
freedom that's allowed to the child
that's best the freedom that we allow
them is the freedom that would allow
them more freedom in the future but so
if you don't teach the child mathematics
you've closed off this huge realm of
possibility for them and so there are
certain key things that need to be in
place to allow for freedom which is to
say we need to limit freedom to allow
for freedom and that's the dance of
teacher the authority which is to say no
you don't know what's good for you yet
but I'm going to allow you to grow into
your autonomy and as soon as possible
hands our reins back over to you for
your own development equipped as you are
to develop further and this is one of
the hardest moves to make as a culture
and as a school system where we'd like
to give standards and guidelines and
multiple-choice tests that say the
outcomes of schooling are X Y Z list of
things list of skills when in fact the
outcome of schooling needs to be a much
more open set of potentials we need to
teach you how to educate yourself to
solve problems that we can't even
predict you're going to emerge you and
so this is one of the turns were making
and schooling as a whole is away from
the kind of naive sense that it's just
this pipeline into this predictable job
market and into this different sense
that actually we live in a different
kind of society in an evolving world in
which the unpredictable is what we can
predict and so there needs to be this
radical kind of freeing up of what we
value educational because we don't know
as you are into that what these kids are
going to have to deal with 50 years from
now 30 years around ten years from
putting myself in the role of a high
school guidance counselor or something
like that I just have a hard time
pretending like I could really give a
kid reasonable advice on what the job
market might be like in 15 years are
certain job roles which are part and
parcel of modern society even going to
exist or will they have been completely
automated and this is the issue is that
the macroeconomic concerns such as
artificial intelligence induced mass
unemployment and actually one of the
hardest nuts to crack when it comes to
artificial intelligence and what I would
think would be the natural
would be a basic income guarantee the
issue here is what's the human if the
human is not a wage laborer
what's the human if they don't get up
every day go to work at nine how do we
give meaning to our lives this is the
kind of question the educational system
is going to have to start to answer and
it means a different kind of brain needs
to come out the other side of it right
we're seeing that we don't have that
kind of brain yet the school systems
failing to provide society with the
skills and capacity it needs what are
some of the ways in which developing
kids psychologically could or should be
improved in the current schooling system
I mean again a deep issue sometimes it's
called the hidden curriculum but it's
all the things that the school does
almost unintentionally almost by virtue
of just being school the playground and
gym class the difference between a smart
kid and the less smart kid and how they
relate to one another so there's
essential social skills that play out
and so often when I'm critical of
schooling sometimes we'll give a vision
of a society in which there are no
schools Ivan Illich wrote this great
book d schooling society and people get
nervous because they imagine it's all
home school when in fact the d.school
Society is a return to almost the
one-room schoolhouse mom schools are
also one of the only institutions that
segregate by age it's weird if you think
about it there's no other place in the
world except maybe an old folks home
where people are organized simply by
chronological age and chronological age
is a terrible proxy of development it
really is ready to do it by height it
would be just as arbitrary yeah exactly
and so one thing that I'd love to see
disrupted is this and the one-room
schoolhouse one of the virtues of it was
that you had all ages mixing together
and so oftentimes the older kids would
teach the younger kids and there's no
better way to learn something than to
teach it yeah and so there's that
dynamic which we're seeing in some rare
context of charter schools so that's an
example of the kind of social insanity
of school which is the age normed
segregation and then of course the
actual segregation by race and
socio-economic class so if you take a
critical theorist view of Education
there's always been what they call the
correspondence principle which is to say
the relations of schooling mirror the
relations of the labor market so that
when we have a growing Society at the
one-room schoolhouse when we had the
factory Society we had the factory
school now we're moving into this
postmodern thing and we've got these
kind of
charter schools so the idea that you are
habituated into the forms of labor and
authority structures that you're going
to be a participating in in schools and
this divided socio-economic lis so that
you find in schools in lower
working-class neighborhoods these
schools are rather very authoritarian
whereas if you go to suburban school
kids are allowed to leave campus and do
all kinds of things on their own will
casual Fridays and things like that
exactly so what you're looking at
they're being prepared for professional
life where you're given autonomy and
whereas the working-class kids are being
prepared for a different kind of worker
supervisory relationship so that's again
there's this social insanity and this
has an effect on of course the brain
it's very clear that the kind of
emotional environment that you spend
time and becomes the pattern of your
nervous system with learning
disabilities in particular there's a
great study I think it was Todd Rose who
did it and he showed basically that you
know it's not the disability itself that
ultimately makes kids fail it's all of
the negative emotional connotations with
schooling that follow from the
discipline it's not the dyslexia that's
the problem is the fact that I'm
constantly garaged by special educators
and negative feedback and for ADHD is
worse so if 80% of the feedback you get
at school is negative then you come to
have this emotional charged with
schooling you come to hate learning and
Michael Apple this great critical
theorist of Education you talk about the
structure of feeling of schooling right
the structure of the feeling of being in
the classroom and what that does to the
nature identity and your sense of self
it seems like there's a lot of societal
blowback or at least hard feelings now
about just how coddling in to some
extent just being a kid in modern
society is how we try to insulate kids
from any sort of negative feelings until
they hit 18 years of age and then all of
a sudden the world's can do whatever the
world normally does to them and that in
some ways we might be really under
preparing kids for the fact that the
real adult world is not always a nice
place what's the data have to say about
those sorts of issues I mean the data
does show that there are shifting trends
in self perception absolutely towards
what we would traditionally
characterized as narcissism but these
trends are they're generational but
they're also just cultural period which
is to say that yes younger people are
becoming more narcissistic but so is
everybody else
so it's always kind of an interesting
parents who are addicted to their phones
expect their kids not to be addicted to
their phones and parents who get up
every day and go to a job they hate
expect their kids they love school to
pursue a job that they're eventually
going to hate so I think it's
interesting and I think because it's
easy to point downward generationally we
have a long history of doing that yeah
and I think the first thing we need to
do is look in the mirror that adults
need to know about who they are and
whether they're actually accomplishing
what they think they're accomplishing
before they start so I could go on and
on about that but it is true that the
schools play a role in this but if you
look at the culture in particularly
social media everything that social
media is showing you has been on the
back end programmed and delivered to you
for your preference and this comes down
to the customization of advertisement
across most of your web browsing so the
consistent message you're getting from
the media is one that's flattering is
one that's giving you what you want to
see potentially even what you think you
need and so that's perhaps a deeper
trend there's a great book just called
mediated and about this it's about how
we went from broadcast the radio
everyone watches the same show gets the
same commercial to this different form
of media which is now much more
flattering which is to say that we're
creating these bubbles of perception
which make us delicate and make us able
to be bumped quite easily because we're
actually think we're exposing ourselves
to everything in the world by looking at
Facebook when in fact we're being
exposed to a very narrow bandwidth of
the world by looking at Facebook and so
that consistent self confirmation bias
that you get from these forms of media
there's one counterpoint to that which
is that a lot of what we're given by
social media feeds and things like that
tends to be that which outrages us or
makes us think that's the craziest thing
in the world I hate hate hate that with
six exclamation points because
algorithmically if we see something we
hate we're likely to take an action like
forward it to a friend hey don't you
hate this also and the algorithms pick
up on that activity so it's almost kind
of like polarizes things into stuff that
we're really really going to love a
really really going to hate and not much
in the middle that's absolutely correct
I mean I think we're going to look back
50 60 years from now at what's going on
with the social media and screen time
the way we look at cigarettes like we're
literally going to look back and be like
Jesus so yes when the outraging stuff as
you're saying is actually the stuff
that's the click based so the other
to understand about Facebook is that
it's advertising mechanism as the vast
majority of the internet so again the
advertisement does by its very virtue is
flattery
that's what advertisement does we've
gone into social media thing here the
broader point is that and again to do
the great philosopher of education is
that all the basic structures of our
society are educational and that means
that all the basic structures of our
society affect the nervous system in a
very profound way we can't think that
the self-driving car for example that's
coming isn't going to have a bigger pain
back in our nervous system think about
just a buildup of neurotoxins from
commuting people talk about depression
anxiety what if you didn't have to
commute an hour a day and sit in traffic
instead you could read or whatever in
your self-driving car so everything can
be seen through the lens of how it
affects the nervous system and how it
affects education it's one of the ways
I'm trying to articulate in my next book
the scope with which educators should
conceive their task which is to say that
almost all forms of policy can be
thought of in terms of kind of
educational optimization or nervous
system home so that we could live in a
society that was literally designed
across all the plains of our being for
development so this is kind of concrete
utopian vision that I lay out of a
society of educational abundance how
would you go about those big structural
changes what would you want to see done
differently as far as what kids are
taught in what order what level it's
personalized at even though you need to
accommodate ten or twenty or thirty
million kids at any given time so yeah
again I keep mentioning this next book
the title is called education in the
Anthropocene essays on the future of
schools technology and society and one
of the questions I ask is this question
which is basically how do we create a
fundamentally new kind of educational
system and I start from the assumption
that we need a path there and I suggest
essentially repurposing existing schools
so literally gutting the school
buildings and turning them into
educational hubs which are combinations
of libraries museums co-working spaces
daycare centers computer workshops so
what we have is in the school a new type
of institution and this institution
looks like an amalgam of some of what
we're seeing and let's say Silicon
Valley startup incubators and also some
of the kind of trendiest parts of the
charter school movement of course
pillages vision of the d schooled
society images vision of the d.school
society each child got an educational
credit card.we
she could redeem with elders in the
community so what i'm doing here is with
a vision of a network of educational
hubs so that schools and other buildings
in the local region become places where
students go and essentially create by
their own volition a kind of emergent
path for their own education by making
use of the decentralized resources of
the community that are kind of brought
together in the hub so related to the
hub vision is macroeconomic reforms
including things like a basic income
guarantee and labor market reforms that
would free parents to become kind of
teacher citizen scientists and populate
the hub and that whole thing can be
arranged with a form of skill sharing
network that's basically done online so
it's a taste of the vision there's a
bunch of different moving parts of but
essentially replacing a
one-size-fits-all school with a
decentralized network of educational
hubs so one of the things I'm building
this education hub model to accommodate
is radical social disruption and that's
important to keep in mind when you lay
out these kinds of utopian visions which
is to say you couldn't just
plug-and-play this into our current job
market and geopolitical situation my
argument is that educational abundance
is our only hope in fact that the only
way to get out of this and into a new
way of being human
beyond this global crisis the only way
to do that is by unleashing human
potential like we never have before
and this goes all the way back to what
we started about which what the schools
do to brains we need to create open form
schools that kind of catalyze uniqueness
and this is almost an evolutionary
argument like ecosystems survive based
on uniqueness we need people to think of
ideas and come up with things that no
one would have ever thought of if they
come out of a factory school where they
learn exactly the same scientific facts
etc so we need black swans to be
everyday current in terms of what people
do with their minds otherwise we not
going to solve these problems the
so-called grownups who are criticizing
the younger generation they're not
solving these problems as far as I can
tell things are not getting necessarily
better on all fronts
in fact on some fronts they're getting
drastically worse precisely because of
the lack of openness and freedom in our
educational system one of the things
historically that we've always needed to
do with humans is to some extent
mass-produced them if one butcher baker
candlestick maker was handy in order to
run a society you needed resilient
people that had that same skill set but
the one thing that we're
be good at doing with technology now is
once you can fit an algorithm to it just
replicate that and you do not need to
replicate humans in that same way
anymore it might be that where humans
really come in handy is for their
individual special uniqueness exactly
that's a post-capitalist vision of a
society after the wage labor system has
been replaced by automated machines like
that's one key thing that's happening in
this world system pivot and so as you
describe it means that the value of the
human is no longer the value that can
produce that's monetary the value of the
human the values that can produce in all
these other realms of human expression
and being some of which are extremely
serious there's a whole bunch of sick
old people who are cared for by
strangers there's a whole bunch of sick
regular people who don't get the care
they deserve there are whole bunch of
children who never get to see their
parents and go to alienating schools so
freeing people from the wage labor
system allows them to be people doesn't
allow them to be irresponsible drug
addicts and artists and whatever but the
point being that we have these strange
ideas about what the human is and
they're been given to us and enculturate
it into us and we need to drop and shed
many of those to survive and so that
means I think we do need to get a little
bit radical with our visions of what
schooling could be in the near future
these kinds of trends are already
holding I'm the largest movement in
education United States is the
homeschool movement that's largely
dominated by the political right and
kind of conservative religious but I
could imagine a very different ideology
motivating people and drawing them away
from the system so I think times they
are a-changin when it comes to education
in particular which means the brains are
changing when I think about some of this
it reminds me of the x-men of everybody
being a mutant with their own special
mutant superpowers but the downside I
guess or maybe the things you don't
think about when you think about the
x-men but you do when you think about
biology is that most mutations are not
beneficial it's only the slimmest margin
of random mutations that people just
trying out something new that actually
works out well what I do feel like we
might be losing it letting our
educational system be so personalizable
is that most of the time it won't work
out well for the person right now we
have a system which tries to do as best
it can for everybody it probably won't
do the perfect job for anybody but as
you increase freedom you increase
people's ability to screw themselves up
absolutely and this comes back to this
issue of teacherly Authority so one of
the details and the education
is the software that creates the
individualized plan for the student and
baked into that software is curriculum
design in terms of an integral theory of
knowledge and so there's all this detail
there about how we allow for the most
appropriate forms of freedom in the
moment without allowing for those forms
of freedom that will eventually disallow
future freedom right so this is that
idea of skeletal trajectory we want to
set to keep them safe especially at a
young age to enable as much autonomy as
possible and so this means that that
software is developmentally diagnostic
and this comes to a non-profit which
worked on this problem of how to figure
out where is a kid in their skill
development and what's the next best
step for them to take artificial
intelligence
tutoring system that makes those kind of
judicious decisions about well kid you
know I know you want to do that but
let's swayed a little bit do this first
and then think about that and that's the
role of intergenerational transmission
is not just a school not just the sand
at the chalk board and talk but to
create the environment where the kid can
play and be safe and just to flip your
argument on and turn it in another
direction one of the key things about
learning if you think of learning as an
evolutionary process is that mutations
need to happen that fail in order for
mutations to be found that work which is
to say you need to make mistakes to
learn and you'd need to make a sometimes
dangerous or painful mistakes to really
learn and we are mostly an educational
system that punishes you for mistakes
and actually makes you fear making
mistakes now if you need to make
mistakes to learn we should have an
educational system in which you are
allowed to make mistakes and in fact put
in a position where you can fail so
that's an important thing to remember
here too is that by not allowing
children to fail
we actually don't allow them to learn
but in fact enough freedom to fail
safely but not so much freedom that you
could fail in a way where your life's
destroyed and that's an important
difference and so hopefully the hub
network and this kind of software
platform that customizes the trajectory
for the child
hopefully that had built-in enough but
not too much in terms of educational
guidance and teach early Authority what
do we know as far as critical periods
for brain development or I think
actually determine your paper was
sensitive periods rather than critical
periods but how might we change the way
that we're doing things now to better
take advantage of the sequence in which
children might best learn things yeah
another great example where the best of
what we know about neuroscience
cognitive science developmental
psychology really contradicts to what we
do in educational practice and so a
couple of things here you know one the
notion of the sensitive period I think
is interesting but can be kind of
reified or made into something that it's
not so just for example foreign language
learning you know it is true that in
early infancy the human ear can
recognize all possible phonemes but
eventually that capacity there's a
process of pruning in the brain so that
you become able to mostly only recognize
the phonemes of your native language and
that makes perfect sense because now it
just becomes as automatic process but by
virtue of that when you go and learn a
foreign language as an adult there's
stuff you can't hear not without a lot
of practice sometimes never as an
example of a critical period that passes
but now that doesn't mean that you
cannot learn a foreign language as an
adult what it means is that you may
never speed that language in such a way
that you sound like you're a native
speaker but the main problem with
foreign language learning with adults is
how difficult it is as an adult to be
doing kiddie language and to be making
mistakes and talking like a child so
that's again the critical periods
absolutely true but it gets
misunderstood the work that I've done
has been more about large-scale
developmental reorganizations of
capacity and these are radically
neglected in the school system this
comes from the piagetian tradition of
thinking about cue and development in
terms of a series of levels or phases
which are a sequence of prerequisite so
your use of the word sequence there is
absolutely correct and there's a big
difference between what a 10 year olds
can do and what a 20 year olds can do
and we have good ways of characterizing
the kind of gradations of abstraction
and complexity between and so often what
we see in the schools is of neglecting
of the critical phase of when you can do
abstract on and then the next critical
phase of what you can do relations
between systems of abstract thoughts so
there are these key milestones in the
development of thought which could be
used to build curriculum in a much more
efficacious way but instead we expect
kids who are not able to even think
abstractly and we give them all these
abstract words and if you really ask
them deeply about what a word like
ecosystem means for example they'll just
say the forest out there and that's
great and that's how they understood it
and that's the representation level but
the abstraction of ecosystem has to do
with nonlinear dynamics for example
which kids aren't going to get and so
this is an example of it's not quite the
critical phases but it's about the
architecture of the mind and brain which
we need
at our peril as educators you simply
can't teach kids of them before is ready
nap doesn't mean that you dumb it all
down it means if you do Diagnostics to
figure out what's the right next step so
this sequencing in the delivery in terms
of developmental diagnostics is a big
kind of piece of that software I was
describing at the core of the
educational hub we need to know how to
identify that kid who's precocious and
already doing abstractions and we know
identify that kid who's doing
abstraction since one domain but really
struggles in this other so these ways of
thinking about the kind of mass
customization or the delivery of
individualized educational trajectories
it's where everything is pointing in
terms of what the neuroscience on
cognitive science suggests which is a
science of uniqueness and to bring doing
in the room again do we set all the most
important problems of philosophy come to
a head in the problem of Education yeah
politics ethics religion aesthetics you
know it's all in there
nutrition school lunches is a huge deal
and I always has been historically so
yeah I think it's all tied up in
education and a lot of that has to do
with the reflective ability of the human
to shape its own brain now we're finally
thinking about it in terms of the brain
do you think that given the fact that
humans tend to think on such short term
timescales like who's going to be the
president for the next four years or
things like that making changes in
education that has massive consequences
but not over a terribly short time span
is it going to be tough to get social
buy-in at given the long payoff before
we get real consequences you know I
think this is the time actually so we're
looking in the next five years maybe
even long as ten at something like the
Wild West in the educational marketplace
precisely because it's becoming a
marketplace so I think one of the long
trends in the politics of education
since the 90s has been to move to
privatize the schools which is to say to
take them away from being public and to
turn them into being private and that's
happening and I think we're going to see
that accelerating what that means is
that we're moving away from the mass of
school systems and a giant high schools
into kind of a fractured stratified
marketplace of educational vendors
they'll call themselves schools and some
of them will be the most amazing schools
that maybe have ever existed but others
shouldn't be called schools like we've
got Burger King Academy already down in
Florida Burger King Academy attracts
underperforming usually
and Hispanics from high schools who
would otherwise drop out trains them up
with a GED to be a Burger King manager
and this is a charter school run by a
private corporation that gets federal
money to process these kids and turns a
profit and gets managers for the burger
so that's an example of just the Wild
West that school exists and then we have
like the Montessori schools and the
Waldorf schools in Silicon Valley so
it's just the world we're moving in
education is one of increasingly
stratified what this also means is that
there's opening go back into the 60s 70s
80s try to change something in the
schools
these massive public bureaucracies now
we're going to have this more flexible
dynamic educational marketplace for
better and for worse and some of the
better will be in pockets incredible
stuff happening and the question is you
know will one of those pockets where
something incredible happens find
something that kind of goes viral an
item spreads and it becomes the new
center of gravity for tomorrow's
educational system and it could be that
there's going to be multiple high points
there might be mutually exclusive to
some degree like one educational
philosophy versus another but could both
be better than what we have now yeah and
that's what you hope for is a
polycentric emergence of these new
alternatives and this is what I'm saying
so I do think the time is kind of ripe
but it's not right for a massive just
swapping out of one big system swapping
in of one new big system but instead
this evolutionary chaos period where
there's going to be all these different
things happening educationally and then
the question will be what sticks let's
say that some twelve-year-old has gotten
ahold of this podcast and listens to you
talking says hey yo this guy sounds
really smart and it also sounds like
you're saying that the current system is
screwed up and I shouldn't necessarily
pay much attention to what my school
district bureaucracy tells me what is a
kid or a parent to do at this point
before these changes are to come online
my answer that question is usually
separate learning from schooling in your
own mind and in your own experience do
not confuse learning with schooling and
find a love of learning schools are
going to be what they are and I kind of
used school to pursue power which is
this I went to Harvard for a reason
strategically it was curiosity and I was
driven to be a scholar but it was also I
wanted to see what was going on in these
operational on educational places and to
be empowered by the knowledge that I
could get there
but that's not the route necessarily if
you learn to love learning then you're
going to be successful period and
whether that success is through
degrees and credentials and moving up
this kind
hierarchy or whether it's dropping on
highschool if you know how to learn and
can pursue it and love it I think the
risk is that you're in a bad schooling
situation and your parents can't move
you're kind of stuck in this crappy
school the risk is that you confuse
schooling with learning and you confuse
your failure in school with your failure
as a human being or as an intellectual
when in fact failing in school could
prove your success as a human being I
think that's important so that you can
survive in a difficult schooling
situation if you can find ways to pursue
your love of learning outside of it but
that takes bravery and it means being a
little unconventional and I think having
also some faith in the next 10 years the
world's going to be totally different so
that many of your friends who are in
school you know all prepared and getting
straight A's and with this career path
and 9th grade or whatever like good luck
to so 12 year old listen to this I would
say don't necessarily listen to your
teachers
so you're saying my degree in typewriter
repair is now useless yes that's not so
but your ability to learn computer
repair because you're a lifelong learner
is priceless and that's the difference
we should not teach typewriter repair we
should teach the ability to become a
repairman of any time which is to say
how to learn to fix the principles of
repair and how to learn I think that's
what we need smart drug smarts so thank
you so very much to dr. Zac Stein for
taking the time for that conversation
I like the occasional episode about
something like education as opposed to
the opiate crisis or an episode on
phenol piracetam or adderall or
something that not everybody is
necessarily going to be able to relate
to all of us have a horse in the race
and some basis of knowledge when it
comes to talking about the way the
education works but in some ways the
educational system can almost be a
victim of its own familiarity we think
we know it so well it seems like just a
part of the unchanging environment like
gravity not something that you think you
can really tinker with but of course
that's not true of course it is a system
that could be radically revamped from
what it is but then we get into the
really interesting questions of what is
optimal for those of you that want to
dig deep on this although the book is
not out yet it doesn't seem to be up on
Amazon or anywhere else that I can find
it Zach Stein's upcoming book is called
education in the Anthropocene essays on
the future of learning schooling and
human nature but that's due out sooner
than later we'll let you know when that
comes out put that as a late-breaking
news item on the bookshelf page on smart
drug smarts calm the really tricky thing
with even getting into these areas of
social policy is that everyone's going
to be second-guessing
the safest thing to do is always to
leave well enough alone recognizing that
a change could just as well change
something for the worst and for the
better even if we know where the obvious
holes in the current system are we have
the well ingrained well established and
laudable idea that equality really needs
to mean a quality of opportunity in one
of the ways that in theory at least the
equality of opportunity is enforced is
by giving everyone essentially the same
start in their educational system in a
perfect world it would be great if every
eighteen-year-old that pops out the end
of the basic educational system was at
the same starting block on the foot race
of life we know that's not the case now
but we have a system that at least is
trying to aim for an ideal something
like that
so the perplexing issue when you're
talking about big educational overhauls
is to try to get the whole big
educational monolith to move in one way
and say this is better so we're all
going to lurch in this same direction
together or do you say we're going to
let this school try this at school try
that sort of a marketplace concept and
some schools will succeed others will
fail you'll have much better chances to
find the really successful needles in
that haystack but on the other hand
you'll also have the schools that don't
perform so well and what happens to the
equality of opportunity for the kids
that come out of those educational
systems since these are all multi-year
experiments multi-decade experiments
really to run these tests so none of us
should exactly envy dr. Stein or anybody
else putting their name on the
recommendations for the way that
education should work in the future it's
a noble enterprise but one where you're
certainly courting a lot of controversy
but really interesting topic lots to
think about thank you so much again to
dr. Zac Stein and let's move ahead now
to the ruthless listen to retention
gimmick smart drug smarts ruthless
listener attention gimmick so it turns
out that there is a lot of very good
quotes about planning everything from
the old Yiddish proverb but God laughs
when man plans to mike tyson's everyone
has a plan until they get punched in the
mouth but there's also a great one from
President Eisenhower who said in
preparing for battle I've always found
plans useless but planning indispensable
and this idea was put to the test
recently by a postdoc researcher at
Stanford named Patricia Chen who decided
she wanted to see how students would
perform it based on more or less
planning for their studies literally
thinking through the process of what
university resources they would use to
study not necessarily devoting any more
time to the study itself but just giving
some students an intervention that
encourages them to do the planning of
how their future studies might go and
then seeing how that would affect
grades appropriately enough this was a
statistics class and she wanted to get
statistics on this so she divided the
class into two groups the groups were
identical as far as the breakdown of the
people they had on average the same
grades going in the same demographics of
the students that were in each group so
as a total placebo controlled experiment
looking for a causal relationship a week
to ten days before the test took place
half of the class would receive just a
reminder that hey you've got a test
coming up and the other half of the
class would receive a 15-minute survey
asking them to think about the test that
they were going to take they're also
asked to think about the grade that they
were seeking to get how important it was
that they got that grade what they
thought that follow-on effects in their
life would be if they wind up with that
grade it also asked them to think about
what kind of questions they thought that
the exam might cover which of the
resources available them they would use
to study lecture notes or practice exam
questions checking with the instructor
during office hours peer discussions
which of the resources they would use
and why they thought that that would be
an effective study plan basically just
forcing them to think through some sort
of plan could be a good plan could be a
bad plan said Jen all too often students
just jump mindlessly into studying
before they've even strategize what to
use without understanding why they're
using each resource and without planning
out how they would use the resource to
learn effectively I find this very
unfortunate because it undermines their
own potential to learn well and perform
well so when an academic dust had
settled and the results were in the
students that received this intervention
did an average of 1/3 of a letter grade
better than the students that didn't so
a C+ going to a b-minus or an A going to
an A+ and the results also seemed to be
additive those who received the
intervention prompts twice did better
than those who received it only once
furthermore in addition to improving
their grades the students who received
this intervention reported less stress
related to the exam and a greater sense
of control over their own performance so
even if Mike Tyson is planning on
punching you in the mouth it is probably
still worth making that plan how you
might actually best go about
accomplishing the things that you intend
to do is almost always something that
pays off in the long run even if you
don't follow through on the plane even
if life goes in a different direction
which of us don't want to get 1/3 of a
letter grade better in the class of life
just say no to drew scratch that say yes
to the smart drug smarts podcast join
our mailing list at WWDC our drug smarts
calm okay so you heard it that was all
for episode number 181 thank you for
hanging around until the very end if
you're curious about the links to
anything that we talked about here all
of this
we'll be up online at smart drug smart
comm slash one eight one last week if
you missed it in episode number 180 I
spoke with dr. Ike bloom and Maria
Steiner about the ongoing opiate crisis
in America and next week in honor of the
upcoming Memorial Day weekend we're
going to be talking a little about
memory probably sneaking in a little
over dose Edition sometime in the next
week or two also so keep your eyes
peeled for a little something extra in
your RSS feed but that is all for now I
will catch you back here next Friday
same time same podcast and with that
same unwavering commitment to helping
you fine tune the performance of your
own brain have a great week and stay
smart you've been listening to the smart
drug smart podcast visit us online at
www.oneonone.org and and guy nothing you
hear on this podcast or reddit smart
drugs Mark's calm should be considered
medical advice consult your doctor and
use some damn common sense before doing
anything you think might have a lasting
impact on your brain