[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
every human on this planet enslaved
whether they know it or not this is not
the crude and primitive slavery of
ancient time it does not rely on wits
and shackles to keep the oppressed in
their place these tools have been
rendered obsolete by much more
sophisticated methods that most of the
enslaved are unaware of their condition
and would in fact argue fiercely that
they are free the testament to the
effectiveness speed and visible change
you heard the expression money makes the
world go around there's truth in that
money in the prime motive for human
labor in modern civilization if you want
food shelter and clothing
you must have money and unless you're
part of that tiny minority that has more
money than they could ever spend in
their lifetime and you must work beg or
steal for that money that's why you get
up in the morning go to work even if you
hate your job and then quite a specter
bun oil is more terrifying for most
people and the process is spending 50
years there by performing menial tasks
within the confines of a fluorescent-lit
queue force in Western countries some
are fortunate enough to pull the way
from the brink and not visited fear that
their basic needs will be met least for
now and yet they keep spinning the
hamster wheel why is that good because
money and the blame that buyer become
symbols of status and prestige money
offers an illusory form of social
validation but even those who are not
caught up in distinguishing themselves
by how much they accumulate still must
acknowledge the social stigma that comes
with poverty the combination of these
primal motivators the need for food
shelter clothing and social validation
is a very powerful force it's enough to
drive humans to engage in all forms of
activity even to the point of harming
themselves or others in the process the
accumulation of money is therefore an
accumulation of Social and psychological
power and those who control the creation
of money control this power at its
source
so who controls the creation of money
moving the case of the US dollar not the
government this shouldn't be an
earth-shattering revelation fact the
Federal Reserve is a private institution
owned by a cartel the world's most
powerful banks quickly becoming common
knowledge even the mainstream media
doesn't deny it
however the full extent of what this
means is only clear when you understand
how the banking system really works and
unfortunately this isn't something we're
talking to school once you have
explained to you in simple terms you'll
understand why every dollar in
circulation is loaned into existence by
bank
the process begins the Federal Reserve
when they will not money to the US
government and to other entities he's
probably heard this talked about before
especially in regards to the interest
rate on those loans which Federal
Reserve raises and lowers depending on
the economic condition what's never
talked about in the mainstream that the
fact the Fed isn't actually loaning out
money that they have they are merely
typing those dollars into existence on a
computer you may be inclined to believe
this mind is based on some physical
backing like gold but you need to say
Federal Reserve has a known any gold
since the nineteen thirty three do the
distant researchers know how many gold
and all we had not owned gold since 1934
so we have not engaged any gold spots
when the Federal Reserve loans money to
the US government US government gives
the Federal Reserve government bond in
exchange these bonds are simply written
promises to pay back the money that was
loaned to them with interest through
taxation it's going to be clear here the
government is taking out a loan from a
bank that's creating that money out of
thin air and their second use of the
taxpayer to cover that loan the
absurdity of this arrangement is even
more obvious when you realize it up
until 1913 the US government created its
own money it had no need for a bank to
play the part of a middleman that moved
money loaned down by the Federal Reserve
entered circulation through the banks
accumulates in the bank and any in the
base end up holding all the car not
necessarily for the reasons you may
imagine
contrary to popular belief the majority
of money in circulation isn't actually
created by the Federal Reserve but
rather by the ordinary banks that
businesses and individuals use for their
checking savings and mortgages how is it
possible
but like the Federal Reserve ordinary
banks are allowed to loan out money that
they don't have there are course
restrictions banks are only allowed to
loan out ten times the amount of money
they actually have so if Wells Fargo has
a thousand dollars they can loan you ten
thousand dollars and they expect you to
pay back that ten thousand dollars plus
interest this is called fractional
reserve banking seventy five percent of
all money in circulation is created in
as men
now as bad as this may seem this is
really only the tip of the iceberg most
banks structured payment plans so that
for many years you're paying almost
nothing but interest and only start
paying down the principal gradually the
results of this strategy is that in most
cases you pay far more intentions when
you purchase a house and the house
itself is work so here's a real question
if all money is created through loans
where does the money come from to pay
for the interest let's say we reset the
system to zero own a thousand dollars
into existence and charge seven percent
Interest we now have a total of $1,000
in the system but we owe $1,000 plus
interest and that's more the interest is
sure that there's always more debt than
money in circulation because the money
to pay the interest doesn't exist never
has never will this is the obvious if
there was only one loan being issued to
one person in this manner but when
performed on a global scale
the reality is his is transformed into a
game of musical chairs with a person
ending up without a feet things of
bankruptcy and financial run because
every dollar in existence is tied to a
debt this creates an unseen force that
draws those dollars back to the bank
Emelec grab the attractive physical
object earth
[Applause]
[Music]
[Music]
0:01
chaos
I hate whee
[Music]
Mina
and will
[Music]
[Applause]
and cashier is that it's the labor of
the people that moves that money every
hour that you work at payback alone or
to keep the government from throwing you
in jail or income taxes as an hour works
for the bank the total receipts and
personal income taxes just barely covers
the interest on the national debt and
even the principal for that debt all
ends up back in the hands of the bank
remember that they created that money
had a nothing once you understand that
the money that banks loan out isn't
actually an asset but it is back a piece
of legal fiction it should be clear that
you're working for these banks for free
this is a cleverly disguised form of
slavery if you manage to pay your
monthly payments then you are a
successful slave and you were allowed to
keep the material comforts to come with
that status but if for some reason you
fail to make those monthly payments in
the bank where the IRS comes to take
your house your car and anything else
you have about it and it's somehow even
with this enormous financial advantage
banks still get themselves into trouble
use the taxpayer we force bailed them
out no matter what the bank's win see
the game is rigged is it understating
the dollars both the world reserve
currency and the only currency in which
oil is sold on global markets this is
often referred to as the petrodollar
fast
this means that wherever you live
whether your country is a well exporter
or oil importer you are affected your
country not oil importers and you are
affected by the fact that in order to
keep your country running you have to
acquire dollars to acquire those dollars
you have to send goods and services to
the United States or to someone else you
did likewise is your countries and well
exporter you are affected by the fact
that you send your oil us and change the
debt based money you're exchanging
something a real and tangible value for
digits on the screen and if for some
reason the leadership of your country
grows tired of this arrangement and
tries to pull off the dollar you quickly
find the United States military at your
doorstep ready to open up a can of
democracy on you Iraq learned this the
hard way when they push the oil tails to
euros in 2000 and Lizzie when they tried
to organize a gold beige currency for
Africa this base money is a mask
social engineering the ultimate tool the
ruling elite get in reality the whole
thing is nothing more than a construct
of belief our chains of the chains of
the mind in the past that freedom was
also begin in the mind if we want a
better future for our children and
grandchildren and we must work right now
to reach critical mass awaken so in case
you missed it the Federal Reserve's only
job was to issue paper currency and back
up that money with gold making each
dollar refundable for gold but what they
did was they stole the gold then printed
a bunch of fake money out of thin air
backed by nothing and loaned it out at
high interest they collected around $3
for every one fake dollar they produced
and they did the scum with every dollar
ever made in the US you never knew about
it because they collected the interest
through taxes it was an invisible scam
this can put you and your children in a
19 trillion dollar debt making your
children debt slaves forever the
following video will demonstrate how
much these banksters stole from the
world we are considered the 99% in the
video they the banksters are considered
the one present in the video pay
attention there's a chart I saw recently
that I can't get out of my head a
Harvard Business professor and economist
asked more than 5,000 Americans how they
thought wealth was distributed in the
United States this is what they said
they thought it was let's reduce the 311
million Americans to just a
representative 100 people make it simple
here they are teachers coaches
firefighters construction workers
engineers doctors lawyers some
investment bankers a CEO maybe a
celebrity or two now let's line them up
according to their wealth poorest people
on the Left wealthiest on the right just
a steady row of folks based on their net
worth will colour-code them like we did
before based on which 20 percent
quintile they fall into now let's reduce
the total wealth of the United States
which was roughly 54 trillion dollars in
2009 to this symbolic pile of cash
and let's distribute it among our 100
Americans well here socialism all the
wealth of the country distributed
equally we all know that won't work we
need to encourage people to work and
work hard to achieve that good ol
American Dream keep our country moving
forward so here's that ideal we asked
everyone about something like this curve
this isn't too bad we've got some
incentive as the wealthiest folks are
now about 10 to 20 times better off than
the poorest Americans but hey even the
poor folks aren't actually poor since
the poverty line has stayed almost
entirely off the chart we have a super
healthy middle class with a smooth
transition into wealth and yes
Republicans and Democrats alike chose
this curve nine out of ten people 92
percent said this was a nice ideal
distribution of America's wealth but
let's move on this is what people think
America's wealth distribution actually
looks like not as equitable clearly but
for me even this still looks pretty
great yes the poorest twenty to thirty
percent are starting to suffer quite a
lot compared to the ideal and the middle
class is certainly struggling more than
they were while the rich and wealthy are
making roughly a hundred times that of
the poorest Americans then about ten
times that of the still healthy middle
class sadly this isn't even close to the
reality here is the actual distribution
of wealth in America the poorest
Americans don't even register they're
down to pocket change and the middle
class is barely distinguishable from the
poor in fact even the rich between the
top ten and twenty percentile are worse
off only the top ten percent are better
off and how much better off so much
better off that the top two to five
percent are actually off the chart
at this scale and the top one percent
this guy
well his stack of money stretches ten
times higher than we can show here's his
stack of cash REE stacked all by itself
this is the top 1% we've been hearing so
much about so much green in his pockets
that I have to give him a whole new
column of his own because he won't fit
on my chart 1% of America has 40% of all
the nation's wealth the bottom 80% 8 out
of every 10 people or 80 out of these
hundred only has 7 percent between them
and this has only gotten worse in the
last 20 to 30 years while the richest 1%
take home almost a quarter of the
national income today in 1976 they took
home only 9 percent meaning their share
of income has nearly tripled in the last
30 years the top 1% own half the country
stocks bonds and mutual funds the bottom
50% of Americans own only half a percent
of these investments which means they
aren't investing they're just scraping
by I'm sure many of these wealthy people
have worked very hard for their money
but do you really believe that the CEO
is working 380 times harder than his
average employee not his lowest paid
employee not the janitor but the average
earner in his company the average worker
needs to work more than a month to earn
what the CEO makes in 1 hour we
certainly don't have to go all the way
to socialism to find something that is
fair for hardworking Americans we don't
even have to achieve what most of us
consider might be ideal all we need to
do is wake up and realize that the
reality in this country is not at all
what we think it is