[Music]
so welcome guys I'm I used to work for
Channel 4 News for many years lyonell
used to be a regular guest on Channel 4
News and it's it's really interesting I
was sort of thinking and I we didn't get
to this point
lyonell but we were talking before about
kind of our political leanings and I I
don't necessarily define myself on the
political spectrum at the moment much
because I'm not really sure where I am
but I sort of feel I've always I would
always have defined myself as left-wing
and certainly over the last five years
or so would probably describe myself as
politically homeless and I know Tim has
appeared quite a few times on our
channel we've done a few events together
and I know that you define yourselves on
the left as well but you also feel very
strongly about this topic about this
sort of sense that there is an
ideological frame that is very uni
dimensional and you're worried about how
that effects how that can affect art and
affect literature in particular but I
didn't get to the point so I'm
interested to ask well how would you
consider your political views or your
yeah where would you place yourself in
the political spectrum well in
desperation a few years ago I came out
as a libertarian out of not my inability
to find any other word that quite
describes where I come from I am
frustrated by the whole categories of
left and right right now if they were
ever useful they're certainly no longer
when you've got on the on the Left
censorious authoritarianism and on the
right pounding on about freedom of
speech something's got quite confused so
the main principle of libertarianism is
just that we should be able to do
whatever we want as long as it doesn't
hurt other people I think that's a
pretty good principle it's certainly the
founding Prince
full of the United States it's not one
that the US adheres to very well right
now I don't think any any country in the
West really believes that you should be
able to do whatever you want if unless
you hurt someone else but that means
that I'm not big on state control
and I'm not big on censorship and I
believe in freedom of speech even if it
means letting people say atrocities
so just to lay out the how we're gonna
run the event tonight we're going to
talk until about 8:30 we're gonna take a
break of about 20 minutes 25 minutes and
then I'm gonna come back for an audience
Q&A so anything that comes to mind while
we're talking just file it away and
there'll be an opportunity after the
break to to ask questions to anyone of
us
and I'm also going to encourage Tim and
Lionel if you want to pick up on each
other's points and I'll take myself out
completely of the of the conversation
but i when when thinking about this I
I'm kind of a very aware with my as a
journalist that we're we're in quite
increasingly sort of dicey territory and
increasingly controversial territory so
there was some thought about in the back
of my mind whether we should have
someone from the other side as it were
and and then I sort of I was very aware
of that process in myself of this is the
kind of topic that we need to have both
sides represented and so I'll do that
I've got some of the the criticisms that
are made especially of your views on
cultural appropriation so I'll I'll
place up a devil's advocate at some
point in the in the evening just just to
put those two you have insults read to
me sorry I think one of the points to
start on is so we called this the war on
art and obviously we want people to come
to our event so we choose a kind of
slightly kind of inflammatory title a
little bit click Beatty and that's often
one of the big
comments made about this that these
these views are pretty much just limited
to a few college campuses in America
it's it's a it's kind of straw Manning
the opposition this is not a mainstream
view so it's a lot of people getting
excited about nothing what do you make
of that I think there's some truth to
the observation that there's a shrill
minority that is getting control the
public conversation and that's why we I
assume we do events like this to give a
little pushback I think for example that
the so-called Millennial Generation has
been broadly misrepresented because in
my experience I meet a lot of younger
people who are quite reasonable and as
you were asked to be at the beginning of
this event open-minded they don't they
don't have opinions like look some kind
of subscription and they're thinking
people and this authoritarianism I
mentioned is coming from a minority
which is really all about bullying and
it's all this all this calling out all
the shaming all the name-calling all the
labeling is combative aggressive that's
one of the ironies of their being so
concerned with microaggression what
you're really dealing with serious major
MACUL aggression sometimes with the
express intent of losing people their
jobs and making them roundly
unemployable thereafter so I don't think
it's fair to represent a whole
generation this way but I on the other
hand I would also say that it is spread
far beyond the college campus because we
were just talking about that before this
event that started the fact that both
the Guardian in the New York Times have
changed in character drastically in the
last five years especially in the last
two with
with the whole Trump phenomenon and have
given over to much more activist
indignant quarter and have lost a lot of
integrity in the process so any any
pretense of neutrality of fairness and
and and any awareness of the fact that
you have that in straight reporting
you're not supposed having an if there
paragraph so I've watched you know
that's these are people who have
graduated from college and and and I do
feel that there's a whole larger
cultural set of attitudes that are now
becoming commonplace and have spilled
into the mainstream and they do it it
did start out from college campuses but
it's not that little anymore
cuz I guess this is one of the the big
point if you sort of take a big-picture
view that the left a lot of the freedoms
of speech that we have now were fought
for by the left in the 60s there was of
the obscenity trials there was the sense
of pushing back against a very stifling
conformity in the in the 50s and early
60s and the left by the Free State the
Free Speech Movement in Berkeley was a
left-wing movement for quite a while and
now we we sort of through the
looking-glass in some way where the left
seems to be the the cultural force
that's pushing for saying you can't say
certain things you can't have certain
attitude you can't wear certain clothes
what do you make that Tim it's kind of
confusing and put you on the back foot I
think that's part of the way it's
designed it's certainly true that like
line I like to grow up at a time when I
don't know if I would use the word
libertarian because it's become
associated with an economic view of the
world as well the materialism and I
don't think that's what Lionel means
bias and maybe she does but I mean it's
not what I mean by it but I said oh you
know okay
thank you for proving me up today on
that but I think the idea of individual
liberty is very deep within me both as a
writer because the novelist mainly and
like Lionel and if I don't have the
freedom to to experiment with my
thoughts on the page then I don't see
the point of doing my job at all there's
no point and if I can't put that stuff
out there and have it received into a
climate that will give it a chance I
won't try and force it into a particular
ghetto then I you know that really
worries me let me just talk to that
point that you said about you know
whether it's just a cup there's a small
number of left-wing activists that in
fact it's a straw man there's no real
problem with that you know I really
really can't agree with us I think it's
getting worse and worse and worse and
once T's every day and it's a process
has been going for a long time and it
goes back to the Satanic Verses which is
the first time I remember thinking Jesus
Christ what is going on here and why
aren't liberals defending it why are so
many liberals turning against Salman
Rushdie on who's being pursued after
something for some excitonic versus
essentially thing happened amongst
writers in America after the Charlie
Hebdo slaughters in which something like
icon of the terrifying number of writers
so-called free speech writers that that
refused to turn up to the award ceremony
for Charlie at being award 200 writers
you know that Penn Awards I mean that
Shopper hell out mean and depressed they
have I mean because what are we talking
about the bravery of those those people
and Charlie Hebdo was staggering
whatever you think there you know and
they were scurrilous but that's that's
good I approve this goddesses I was
really shocked by that I was very
shocked by the sort of concern
motive strand that has developed within
what used to be thought is the kind of
left liberal strand and I'm not more you
know I am left liberal by inclined water
the liberal them to the left and I think
it's really seeing only today there was
a story about I I couldn't quite get my
head around just sort of sort before I
came out served in digesting time as a
story about a museum in Northumberland
it was having a person of the wife of an
industrialist there or or and he was the
father of not modern modern artillery if
I remember correctly and they wanted to
do something to celebrate his wife at
this stately home but they couldn't find
anything that would celebrate his wife
so in order to acknowledge her they
simply denied him and they went away
around and put pillowcases over out over
all the busts of men and sheets over the
paintings that were about men or by men
basically they covered everything up it
looked as if they were moving out and it
backfired surprisingly so families paid
forty nine ninety five to go look at a
bunch of sheets yeah I mean that's just
one you know that's today you know and
that's that's just one aspect and it's
it's just it's going on all the time and
the effect of it has I mean that's
that's an effect that it has on museums
but the effect it has on artists
generally I think is very very
pernicious in so many ways
some of them formal some of them informs
on the moon tiara so on next area I
think they're the main enemy for artists
is is I mean at being a writer is an
incredibly insecure profession anyway
but the the temptation now to try and
fit yourself into
some preordained markets which you could
substitute the word ideological position
because that's what sells and that's
what's acceptable and that's what you
know publishers crucially are going to
be interested in because publishers are
very very influenced by this climate at
the moment and that I have to now
something I believe called sensitivity
readers belong we know about them yeah
this started out in the children's
literature and young literature and it's
actually the publisher that hires the
sensitivity readers so you send your
book in and before they publish it they
send it to somebody if you've included
any characters that are I know people of
color or disabled or all of all a bunch
of categories they're many more than you
might think of I I got a even have
sensitive River sensitivity readers for
people with terminal illnesses maybe
they don't last long I have no taste and
and these readers are paid to comb
through your manuscript and find a fence
that is that they're paid to be offended
and and point out where you might be
stereotyping or where this is going to
be upsetting to this group and this is
you know and you know I find the whole
thing obnoxious it hasn't spread a unit
to any considerable degree to adult
literature that I know of yet but it
seems to me that it's only a matter of
time and the day that HarperCollins
sends my novels to a sensitivity reader
is the day I switch houses because I
think this is a really important point
is like a
I hear from both of you what your
specific concerns are I remember reading
that you one of your recent some of your
recent writing your agent questioned the
fact that you'd you'd one of your
characters was black is that right and
the the book wasn't picked up oh it was
actually just a short story but you know
I I've taken on the cause of freedom of
speech out of self-interest it's not
because I'm a nice person I'm not a nice
person but I this identity politics
movement has started to hit me where it
hurts and that's not just in my
journalism but especially in my novels
and that's when I say enough is enough
now white writers have been put in a
very awkward position where they can't
win because on the one hand there's this
new cultural appropriation nonsense
where you're told that people people's
experiences outside your own you know if
they're black or disabled or even and I
suppose the other gender doesn't belong
to you and so you have to keep your
hands off that's a kind of stealing so
that means I suppose that your whole
caste has to be set as if it's in the
still in the 1950s and everybody's white
and it's a kind of literary apartheid
but then you get criticized for not
reflecting diversity so this is a losing
proposition and I would say one of the
most important things we need to
emphasize here is that these rules
coming down from on high we don't have
to obey them they only they only have
force if we comply so shortly after I
gave a speech on cultural appropriation
decrying the concept in Brisbane
Australia I submitted a short story to
my agent and asked her to send it to the
New Yorker and she said well I just want
to warn you you've included a black
character here and so much on the heels
of that speech which got a lot of
blowback you're gonna have a much better
chance of being accepted if you changed
this girlfriend you've increased was
just a secondary character make her
white but I wouldn't there were reasons
in terms of the story and the characters
that it did it added something that that
she was black and and the odd thing is
you know it's a fun character somebody
who's portrayed is very smart and lively
and appealing and and even you know
economically not stereotypical she's
from an upper-middle class background
she's definitely got the wealthiest
background of anybody in the story it
was sent in Atlanta so that's actually
quite credible has won one of the
largest black wealthy communities in the
United States well of course the New
Yorker rejected it and it's entirely
possible that it was rejected because
the story sucked it's in my new
collection property since I can plug new
collection and it's called domestic
terrorism and you're welcome to judge
for yourself whether it sucks but I
don't like this new self-consciousness
about including characters who are
different from me I don't want to have
to look at them twice you know I'm fine
and I am I'm looking at the northern
twice the book I'm writing now includes
a couple of black characters and I know
they're going to be scrutinized to a
minut degree because that story when it
came out was indeed examined on a line
by line basis when it had to do with
anything to do with this one black
character by the way if there's anything
in this regard wrong with that
collection is that it is too white you
know it is too much people by people
like me so
I find I I don't like the
self-consciousness I don't like the stay
in your lane nonsense I don't like to be
told that you know I am not allowed to
use what we are now supposed to call
aave or african-american vernacular
English which would mean by the way that
we would not have the series the wire we
wouldn't have the movie or the book
Clockers both of which are brilliant we
wouldn't have home assigned life on the
street when you want to start making a
list of the number of books and and and
television and movie that we would not
have allow writers to use the vernacular
of other groups of people it's it would
be huge and who wants to live in this
restricted universe who wants to write
this way if joyless it's boring it's
boring for the reader so I just think we
should push back and I think writers
have to push back and not because one of
the things that's going on right now is
a lot of self-censorship and I think
there are I feel that if I'm the one who
suddenly felt conscious someone like me
who is pretty bulky if I'm anxious about
having a diverse cast then a lot of
other writers they know who are a little
more timid are are controlling what they
write to an even greater degree and I
think that's where the danger with this
movement is we're not dealing with laws
we're not dealing with legislation which
is telling novelists what they can and
cannot write but when you comply with
rules they have effect Tim are you more
timid than one this just to pick up them
yeah just to pick up on one thing this
this is very paradoxical that the
outcome of this kind of this worldview
is that there may be fewer
as Lionel separates almost like like a
kind of literary apartheid like if you
can only write about your experience
then suddenly you filled your books up
with with with only white characters or
only characters who look exactly like
you I mean it goes beyond though it goes
on it goes on to how the characters
arbitrate are portrayed not just about
he betray portray not betray I mean I've
just written a novel which is got it's
got a number of gay characters in it so
I'm representing in some sense nominally
gay experience and of course it's one of
the main characters it's to the main
characters of women so I'm representing
the female experience and the temptation
of the for the fear is that you you have
to though you're going to be required to
represent these characters that save the
gay guys on in previous books I've been
black characters in a positive light
that they have to be shown as the good
guys or the good women you know and I
really kick against that because
everyone's an asshole you know that's my
fundamental statement about human nature
you know there are no virtuous people
you know ultimately everyone's capable
of all kinds of aggression hypocrisy
foolishness fear ugliness nd this at
least this is part of this order and and
to sort of dress up characters as being
artificially virtuous you know it just
doesn't ring true for this because
that's not the way people are and
whatever group they belong to so there's
always a certain area of nervousness for
instance I you know that ended with the
woman in my new novel is well you could
say she was abusive to the man um which
is not something you often see in books
one of the gay guys is just tracked
it's not certainly not a likeable guy
toys a horrible old Queen you know and
and you know all I can do in trying to
get that stuff rise is talk to people
you know I you know in order to portray
young as portraying the gay scene in the
early noughties it's just I want to
speak to as many people I knew who were
gay who've been around that time just so
what was it like what's the vibe what's
what's what do you go through as a gay
man I research it you know and I think
that's what writers do if they're good
or they don't just have to make it up
just difference between somebody with
prejudices they go out to try and find
out what it is about that particular
group that makes them particular and I
think that's what you should do if
you're just writing from an laziness
then then I can see that there would be
some weight to the argument that you
were just lazily portraying stereotypes
but so long as you're going in there
from either personal experience or from
proper research then after you've got
every right to portray any so-called
groove as if you know I'm not really
even believed in groups you know I mean
this is seems to be the modern idea that
you know as a black woman has a
transgender activist eyelid luckiness
like I don't get that as an an I'm not
you know I don't think myself as a man
anymore like I was essentially define
herself as a woman you know it's just a
purse and and this fundamental humanism
which I grew up with for me you you
would have the the apogee that was
something like James Baldwin who's a you
know someone who wrote about Brittany
about being black or a brilliantly about
being gay but it wasn't just an amazing
writer
and a human being first and foremost who
wanted to write about his experience of
being human being first through those
venzas you know and he was incredibly
sympathetic to the human condition
he wasn't near to you know he drank a
man he was very angry I had every right
to be angry but always the anger is
channeled through a kind of fundamental
love
for people you know and I think that's
just that that tenderness towards people
at large and their floors rather than
raising yourself above them and looking
down on and on making yourself somehow
their loss appear while simultaneously
their victim I just don't find it
believable as a stance so you mentioned
before about the Brisbane speech we're
on cultural appropriation that kind of
caused a big reaction and Yasmin Abdul
Majeed wrote in the in The Guardian I'm
gonna read a little bit of what she yeah
she this is a piece from the from her
article in The Guardian she said the
reality is that those from marginalized
groups even today do not get the luxury
of defining their own place in a norm
that is profoundly white straight and
often patriarchal and in demanding that
the right to identity should be given up
Shriver epitomizes the kind of attitude
that led to the normalization of
imperialist colonial rule I want this
and therefore I shall take it so my my
question is if we can agree that some
groups in society about harder time than
others is there any responsibility for
the writer in representing those those
groups accurately and is there any truth
to to her response to your speech well
first of all I think that woman should
put me on the payroll
she's been done out me and walking out
on my speech for the last two years we
have a fundamental difference of opinion
about what the word identity means and
that was indeed one of the points I made
in that lecture
I grew up with an understanding of
identity is something that you forged
for yourself perhaps with a lot of false
starts and a lot of effort and it was a
developing project over the course of
your life to understand what you
particularly cared about what you loved
what you were reviled how you saw the
world how you saw your place in it
what you are good at whom you liked so
it's a very you notice nowhere in that
list is what group do you belong in and
so I am NOT interested in understanding
my own identity in terms of the groups
into which I was born through no choice
of my own now we're all born into a set
of groups some of them intersecting and
we all have to live with that and make
our peace with that and some of us have
more trouble as a consequence of being
born into those groups than others and
that's where I would agree right I'm not
naive about certain group membership but
I don't think the answer is to seize on
group membership as greater than you are
and as fully defining of who you are
after all if I went around saying you
know the most important thing about me
to myself is that I'm white
I'd have my head cut off and rightly so
I don't go around saying that I'm the
most important thing about me is that
I'm female I I find the category of
having been foreign born female rather
constraining and you know I like when I
was growing up I like playing with
trucks and getting dirty and I hated
wearing dresses so I was always wanting
to push the boundaries of the categories
into which I was born
and in fact my presence here today is a
testimony to having pushed literal
boundaries in my life because obviously
you can tell from
accent that I was born in the United
States but what did I do
I moved to Britain I've been in the UK
for the last 30-some years so I got out
and I think my life has been a great
deal more interesting as a consequence
so if that's the way that I have found
my identity to break boundaries instead
of recognizing them and and and
protecting them then why on earth would
I urge other people to find themselves
through through that route
I think it's misguided and I and I I
think that it doesn't just in my
experience I don't I think it's unlikely
to lead to a happy and centered
personally located life because I don't
think going around saying well the most
important thing to me to me is that I'm
black is is ultimately any more fruitful
than for me to say the most important
thing about me for to me is that I want
I don't think these kinds of big baggy
identities are a help in in a large
world with many people in it where you
have to have some sense of who you are
when you wake up in the morning and so
you know this young woman in Australia
you know for all I know her intentions
are good but I think this whole identity
politics thing is wrongheaded because
the the message is consistent that what
you are is more important than who you
are and I I reject that utterly and I
think who you are is more important than
what you are and that's what pushing
back against racism and sexism and all
the isms is all about is seeing the
person and not the category
I yeah we've we've talked about this
before Tim and the sense that these are
good but weeds from your primary axiom
and they can lead to madness but the
idea of like diversity and inclusivity
there they're good values but if you
make them your primary mode of being in
the world rather than say the truth for
example or or your own or personal
growth personal identity striving for
example to better oneself then it
becomes yeah you start you go down a
very difficult road I mean I would say
as well as someone on the left obviously
you would have thought racism or you
would you would have seen racism problem
how do you swear that sort of holding on
to some of those values of the left but
not going down the route of identity
politics and and this kind of ideology
that we're talking about I'm having a
few heretical thoughts as I sit here
about the whole idea of identity
politics because I was just trying to
think just answer your question but if
it interests me anyway but um I was it
was I come from a working-class
background and so Devon and I mean the
you know and at a time when the working
class were ascendant as a voice to some
extent in film and TV and there were
people like the angry young men in the
50s but that was that was younger me but
I mean older than me rather and then it
but then there were the kitchen sink
dramas of the sixties and seventies and
there Ken Loach's cares was a film I
remember I remember the white working
class which I suppose is my identity
originally it's not really much anymore
but it's where I came from sorry and you
know I also remember times and get the
gut to date today even where I think of
the depictions of working-class people
by an increasingly loved more today than
before actually the depictions of
working-class people by middle-class
and how kind of unconvincing I find them
and how annoying I find that the fact is
that they're not actually using the
authentic item most remarkable things
about most portrayals of working-class
people in television and radio consider
some of our EastEnders is they don't
swear was where I came from every other
 word was a swear word it was
almost a defining nature and also their
nature the word to us is to be extremely
offensive that was kind of rebellious
attitude towards everything it was just
like you we don't buy into your
middle-class values anyway I just sort
of thought that makes me see more and
more the kind of identity politics side
of the coin but perhaps it's a bit like
blackface you know I mean like that that
they how obscene it would be to see oh
and of course we have lost Olivia do you
know a fellow not so many decades ago
and the idea that you know that that
love you can look at cultural
appropriation go well you know there is
a point there but as with all these
things you were saying you know it
depends where you root your absolute
values do you rule them in say truth or
do you root them in identity politics
and the beauty of course identity
politics is it's a lot simpler once you
sort of adopt it as a worldview you
don't really have to think anymore
you really don't because you know you've
got it's a very religious way of
thinking and I think that in reality
human beings are very religious
creatures they think religiously they
think tribally and they think
religiously I think in groups and they
like to think in groups because the kind
of idea of my generation which was
individual autonomy and working out for
yourself
is a hell of a challenge it really is
you know to try and work out your own
values take on the burden of saying I
don't know what the hell's going on but
I'm gonna try and work it out I'm not
gonna do it I will tell us me and I'm
not going to do what Marxism today tells
me I'm not going to do what the Guardian
tells me I'm not gonna do the spectator
tells me and I'll work it out and that's
a really tough call for most people for
everybody
in fact but to have the courage to stand
there and to be honest in my mind that
is what distinguishes a proper novelist
or a proper write or a proper artist is
there people who are not set and say
that's true just because you told me is
true I will not accept that I've got to
work it out for myself and ask a lot of
very very awkward questions and that's
an uncomfortable place to be because
you're constantly only on the boundary
of uncertainty and therefore on the
boundary of chaos and confusion and
that's it that's a place human beings
find very very difficult so the
temptation for nearly everybody is to
just join the group whatever that group
is and that can lead in my mind best to
a kind of lobotomizing of your worldview
and at worst to the death camps so you
know we have to cleave to the ideal even
if it's not really a chill for most
people we have to cleave their ideal of
individual autonomy individual
conscience individual understanding
individually working out what's right or
wrong for us and that's a lifelong task
test you to the limit but and too many
people will just hide in the group and I
find that deplorable and that's what I
see is happening today
[Applause]
Tim mentioned it before but the sense of
that there are good and bad
representations of people and literature
do you like there is something about a
disrespectful representation of someone
that seems qualitatively different from
a respectful representation do you think
that's a fair distinction to make mean
that Tim was talking about working-class
characters as if if it fear there is a
sense that it could feel exploitative or
it could feel tokenistic in some way
well people have been writing badly ever
since that respects so sure there's
there's such things bad dialogue and bad
you know unpersuasive portrayal
portrayals that's what Tim was talking
about characters that don't ring true
and there's nothing wrong with saying
that that's what that's what reviewing
is has traditionally been for so this
this doesn't wash this person doesn't
seem real I don't buy it
after all that but what I'm carving out
is the right to try you know to make an
effort and that it doesn't think that
that that the fruits of your efforts
can't be criticized so we're we all want
we all have the right to write whatever
fiction say that that we like but then
we should also have the right to say you
know that that character is ridiculous
that accent is rendered badly that
character from that particular place
would never I think say that you know
it's and I don't think it's a matter of
respect I think I I don't recognize that
as respect it has to do with a kind of
professionalism or or an ability to get
away with things I mean
fiction
of every form is really sleight of hand
it's a form of fakery and so it's a
matter of persuading people that these
these characters you've made up after
they're not real that they are real that
they they form a the achieve a kind of
integrity in in the audience's head that
they don't really deserve so there's a
skill there's a sneaky little skill to
making people seem real and I don't
think it means respecting them exactly
and it and if you're going to make a
character work then it needs to be a
very individual character and not just
be some character that that seems like a
plausible representative of their of
their people you know needs to be
someone in particular that's one things
that's so great about the wire just
because that came up good example those
characters are very individual and
they're great and they're memorable and
they're not just a bunch of black people
being black and so yes there's such a
thing as being good at your job and
those are those are the writers that
basically get away with murder because
their characters no more exists than
anyone else's but they they perform a
con job on the audience that is
effective and I want to sort of just
just end you've got about five minutes
before we take a break by saying where
where does this all go and what are you
concerned about where it might go
because it seemed that this - there's
two different attitudes that you can
take - for example someone writing a
novel as a character one which is to say
you've got or you didn't you open it
better
tential to learn more about someone else
experience all there's the perspective
of you should not even attempt this in
the first place
it seems to me that that perspective is
profoundly anti-human like it denies the
possibility of empathy or of genuine
communication I what I fear is that it
ends up with us completely sido for each
other and that that's very concerning I
think it may start with sort of good
intentions but what it the place that it
ends up is almost guaranteeing some form
of conflict because it denies the
possibility of true connection across
whatever boundaries so slightly sidestep
that points though I think it's going to
touch on it because while you're talking
I was thinking about something important
about a kind of direct now that I'm
saying what you and I'm sorry I didn't
mean that about a concrete example of
how censorship or not even central
climate is invidious to us I just just
popped into my head I will try
continental name of the program as a
drama mother was on a year or two back
about a about a man and a woman showing
from both the men and the woman's point
of view about who had been telling the
truth about whether she was raped or not
liar liar I think it was called no it's
called like in school though I noticed
not some another anyway in the end it
turned out the guy was lying and there
was a piece of the spectator which I
thought was absolutely right said of
course the guy was right they could not
have ended it any other way it would not
have been allowed and that's what was
because once you start having that
thread in the culture that
you know it just becomes boring there
was a kind of time when black characters
are represented in movies as pimps and
gangsters you know we had to move beyond
that then they became represented always
good guys and so okay which is kind of
where we've somewhat stayed you know I
think we need to get a point where we
say these are all people you know and
you can get you know there are bad
people in every single there are
disabled bad people you know incredibly
I'll make a fascinating transgender
point I have no opinion about
transgender matters
he says self-defense abide was doing a
fascinating piece I've not done anything
with this piece of information I haven't
and I probably be scared too but I was
when I was I also did got a column for
The Guardian until recently and about my
family in one of the things that came up
I was bullied and there was a survey
that so I found a big survey on bullying
you know they didn't take a piece of
year's economy around the Pacific server
and you know they then they broke it
down so are you male are you female are
you gay I'm trans you know and and you
know and they asked some questions like
have you been bullied and they would
also ask questions like have you bullied
anybody and that was the interesting
question because and this is what I
haven't seen followed up anywhere and
anyone used a journalist who may feel
free to do so is that they found out
that you know boys were slightly more
likely to bully in girls something like
you know quite high I'm just like
something about you know twenty thirty
percent of boys and girls admitted
privately they had bullied another
person and and gay people were roughly
the same trans kids were like seventy
five percent of them said that they had
bullied which I thought was absolutely
remarkable you know and I thought that
was not what I expected at all in that
survey there also
said that huge number have been bullied
but they're also bullied and that just
made me think you know what with every
group you find is full of people who are
have a dark side you know and if you
can't betray that dark side in the
interest of some airbrushed view of
reality and you are selling our art you
are selling out truth you are selling
out literature you're selling out drama
you're selling out TV or selling out
films you're selling out what is the
most important thing we've got in this
culture which is a love of the truth and
love of reality so I hope
[Laughter]
so if Tim won't answer my question do
you answer my question of where where
does this go are you concerned about
what the kind of the natural end point
of this way of thinking is well
obviously it's getting worse so I have
no reason to believe that it's not going
to continue to get worse though
cheerfully
I sometimes theorize that the way out of
this is catastrophe because look this is
petty right it's definitely what
they call first world problems it's a
product of prosperity in fact if you
take a look at most of the people with
these identity politics of movement it's
they're pretty well-off the kids have
middle to the middle class or middle
class this is not actually a working
class movement at all so these are a
bunch of people who are dare I say it
privileged ok so what we need to shut
them up is something like a nuclear bomb
going off or climate change taking out a
whole time something really crap to put
things in perspective and then I dare
say that's the last you ever hear of
microaggressions
so thank you
Lionel thank you Tim we're gonna take
about a 20 minute break and then we'll
come back for a QA
[Applause]
actually managed to get the live stream
working so there were a hundred or so
people watching and commenting and etc
and also clapping with the Mota cons at
the same time you guys were copying but
with the delay so that was good so we're
gonna start with actually one of the
livestream questions from Tonga and the
question is and any I suppose anyone can
answer it feels call - question is
should the people who are thought
policing be engaged with argued with or
should they just be completely ignored
and left in their own bubbles to kind of
fizzle out I I find it very difficult to
talk to these people they don't tend to
be inclined toward listening they're
very shouty and I think that's why we're
probably best off not having someone
from the quote other side at this event
tonight
I mean I do think these conversations
are worth having but there's a there is
this women this whole safe spaces
mentality is has to do with an inability
to listen to a position that is
obnoxious to them they can't there they
that is regarded as a form of assault
someone else's opinion with which they
don't agree you know if they calm down I
think we should invite them over
yeah I mean I'm sort of with Lionel I
mean I just you know it's a very
despairing thing for somebody who
believes in free discourse to say but
you know I have sort of slightly sad
personal experience to this in some ways
because my daughter who's now 25 went to
university quite a good university Leeds
and I was you know very excited that she
would come out with us an amazing
critical mind and open thinking and I
was so depressed when she came back it's
just her mind it closed completely and
you know she had no concept whatsoever
that there might be anything yeah I'm
perhaps this being true of students
forever I don't know but I mean I've
found it very depressing you know that
there was all the channels of
communication had closed down and and it
was just you know maybe there's a
father-daughter thing
I don't know but I don't think so you
know and I found it terrifying if that's
what universities are doing to people
and I ain't paying their tuition fees
anymore that's for sure so we'll take
some questions from people in the
audience very first hand to go up so I'm
just going to repeat part of the
question for the viewers on the
livestream and John your point was Jo
sorry Jo Jo your point was that there's
a different there seems to be a
difference between cultural
appropriation and racial appropriation
racial appropriation is what seems to
really create a big big reaction I
actually think it's pretty well observed
that's it does seem to be much more
about race than anything else after all
when men dress up as women or women
dress up as men we're thinking supposed
to think that's great I guess that's the
kind of gender cultural appropriation
right so it is quite specific to race
the trouble is if we're going to
[Music]
if we're going to establish this idea
that you own your racial culture let's
call it for what it is your racial
culture first off of course we have the
trial problem of mixed-race people I
mean what did they own
where did they belong what is theirs and
furthermore if you own your racial
culture then why can't I turn around and
say well then black people can't use an
iPhone right invented by white people
you can't play Beethoven you know you
can't read Dickens it's mine it belongs
to me it's white people's culture now
turn that around I hope you could hear
how utterly absurd that sounds and also
ungenerous ugly you know I don't want to
own my culture and you know what I
didn't invent my culture it doesn't
belong to me because I just inherited it
I didn't earn it you know it came to me
and I will try to honor it by reading
Dickens you know or listening to
Beethoven or using my iPhone but but I
don't want to limit myself to that
culture because it isn't supposed to be
a prison and in fact my culture belongs
to everyone and there is no such thing
as one culture and in another culture
they blend all together that borders are
completely fluid that's the way it ought
to be and one of the reasons that major
cities in in around the world are such
dynamic places to be is that those
cultures are furiously interacting so we
do not thrive even economically by
putting a fence around ourselves and
protecting our intellectual cultural
artistic property none of this stuff
believe belongs to us it's all borrowed
we came into it and we're gonna have to
give it up when we leave
so I think that we need to encourage a
sense of generosity you know I'm not a
you know I have some problems with the
whole concept of multiculturalism just
because it comes with mass migration
which I don't want to get into that but
it it's associated with master migration
in a way that hasn't always had a
positive impact but at core the concept
of multiculturalism is sound that is
it's this big interaction we run into
each other we share ideas we share the
things we make and where both of us you
know we're all enriched as a consequence
and that's what's so utterly wrongheaded
about this cultural appropriation
nonsense and I honestly do believe you
know whether or not we get our our
upcoming catastrophe that cures us of
all ills this is an example of something
that is not going to survive and and
will later be held up as an example of
the ludicrous excesses of our era
[Applause]
so first I think it's it's it's it is
unlike unlike we're talking about some
how the whole idea of of the war and art
might be a bit of a fringe activity the
obsession of a small group of sociology
students and people in academia and I
think we rejected the idea that was much
more serious than that
cultural probation on the other hand I
think Germany is quite a fringe issue I
don't think anybody really worries that
much about it except quite a small
number of people in the universities
having said that I think there was a
time when it was at quite a valid
concept and when I think of Elvis
Presley coming on and you know taking
basically black music and making a
fortune out of it while all the people
who were Chuck Berry and so forth were
just scrubbing in on the pennies because
all the white record executives were
just taking their money and and the same
with blues men you know ripping them off
and leaving them with no I take your
point I just think that firstly I can
speak louder than you cuz I have the mic
which I think I see
and has to be taken to account and also
I think it's in some ways a fine point
because the people you know that you
know the faxes that why people had the
economic power in the 1950s and they had
the means of production if you like and
they had the means of dissemination and
black people didn't have that
possibility and you know there is quite
a to resist the feeling they were ripped
off big time and you can call that an
economic argument if you'd like but you
could also call it a cultural argument
you can also call it a matter of
cultural appropriation but I think those
times have really passed you know and I
don't think I think now the idea of you
know world since world music has Carmen
the whole idea of us borrowing from
other cultures universally is pretty
widely accepted as a positive thing I
think it's quite a small group I just
want to note the fact that during the
break I was talking to somebody who is
in a litter EA j'en C and is constantly
having to deal with this whole cultural
appropriation all the time so it seems
to me that maybe it's not as small and
confined to a tiny group as you may
think so
we'll take question there so Charlie
Brown's question is is this is this a
unique time or is this just it always
feels like this that there are always
these taboos and our culture it's just
that they just sort of shifted into
different places is this a particular
salem witch trial kind of moment well i
think we are obviously dealing with the
results of secularism of which i am a
big proponent but i'm afraid that we're
you know the group we're talking about
is in the grip of a kind of evangelical
fervor and you know to be fair we're
dealing with the
mostly younger people who are thirsty
for purpose and and faith you know and
you know as a reason to be in the world
a guiding principle to tell them what to
do I mean I'm not a I am profoundly
secular and therefore I don't tend to
subscribe to a catechism of any kind and
my general answer to that thirst is well
you know I'm I think you're you're on an
individual journey and that to subscribe
to a catechism is it is a shortcut that
cheats you but it is very seductive and
you know religion offers a lot of things
it Wofford offers community and this
particular religion also offers an enemy
and it you know far be it for me to
decry people's eagerness to believe in
something but my biggest problem with
this on any politics movement is that it
is too negative it's too fired by if you
will a word I read 50 to 100 times a day
hatred okay it has too much of a need to
demonize it is a very predatory movement
and it thrives on taking people down and
I don't like the generational element
either you know it's become young people
versus old people and a creepy way I
grew up with some of that stuff that old
don't trust people under 30 nonsense and
we got over it yeah don't you yeah
actually that's interestingly
misremembered
that's that's someone over 30
remembering that phrase yeah I don't I
don't I don't like the hostility I don't
like the venom and the need for anger
and righteous indignation it is you know
Tim may talk about how we're all awful
I'm sure we are but some of us are more
awful than others and and you know this
religious movement is capable of
bringing out elements that might
otherwise be ameliorated if the ideal
ideology were otherwise but the I just I
really don't like this viciousness and
you see it on Twitter all the time and
and it's the people who are the most
vicious you get the most attention and
it's one of the reasons I I'm not on
Twitter because why would I want to but
as a religion I find it wanting and the
other the other thing that that it's
wanting is that it's calling people to
embrace their own weakness this it's
become totally trite to talk about the
exultation of victimhood so that's taken
as a given but it means that you
incentivize people to to identify with
their own degradation that they're their
own oppression and to embrace that
oppression unless they become
powerlessness it's become this weird
flipped thing so that the most people
who have the most depression or the the
most exalted and I you know I just don't
think that's the answer that has not
been the answered in my life for exam
well I mean the only thing I might cling
to the victimhood front is being female
on it is not you know that has not made
my wife being treated like because
I'm a woman and being underestimated
because of a woman
I'm a woman it's been you know I want to
be remembered for my books and maybe for
events like this one but not because my
father never expected me to become very
important you know I got over that so
yeah it's interesting it's taken sort of
this long before the word religion has
kind of been brought up because it's a
very interesting part of this kind of
this this ideology that it does seem
very religious in tone I know you
mentioned something like that when we
did our interview a few months ago yeah
I mentioned earlier this evening as well
but and that question it's beautiful the
gentleman mentioned Salem of course
which is which trial conducted by the
church and Arthur Miller wrote of course
the crucible based on the sin in which
Charles which is a kind of and he wrote
obviously as a rejoinder to what was
happening in McCarthyism in America at
the time and it's all really there's two
kinds of religion there's the declared
religions and the undeclared of
religions secularism is another kind of
declared undeclared religion in some
ways and certainly the social justice
warriors and radical left have always
been a kind of undeclared religion
whether it's now or Stalin or you know
Nietzsche pointed out in the 19th
century that once God died that you know
what was going to rise up to fill the
void was
was more terrible than religion ever
came up with and that was true it was
religion without God and that's still
what we're seeing we're seeing that
we're seeing people scrambling around to
find faith in something only they don't
call it faith they call it justice they
call it equity they call its identity
but it's religion it's quite simply a
religion it's a religion because and
that's why as Lionel said when you try
to debate with these people
you won't get any further debating with
the Reverend Ian Paisley you know
because you're debating with people
who've already made up their mind you
know and I spend all my life not making
my mind why the hell can't other people
you know I mean it's just do you know
why are people so arrogant as to think
they know the hell's going on he knows
what the hell's going on certainly not
me you know and um and these people
swaggering around going about how they
know this is right and this is wrong and
this is right this is wrong oh off
[Applause]
so Bianca had her hand up earlier so if
your anchors question is about quotas
within the TV industry for example 20%
of all leading roles going to be a any
characters for example well it it
troubles me I can sort of see the
principle that one should try and make
the figures stack up though they seem to
be going quite a long way beyond
stacking up as far as I can make out but
I mean you know if there are 12% ethnic
minorities in the country then in a fair
society there will be 12% of mainstream
actors it's I think I think it's way
beyond that actually now but I mean and
it seems to be a sort of kind of counter
reaction to the idea
of the domination of white a majority
culture for so many years so I can see
their argument what worries me I suppose
is the is is that it's replacing
something ineffable and unquantifiable
with something quantifiable and
measurable and ask isn't quantifiable
and measurable the trouble is in other
words it's threatening quality and who
can say what quality is I don't know
what quality is I know when I see it but
I don't know what it is and there was
once a culture at say the BBC where
there's a kind of a group of producers
often Mavericks and you know some of
them are Mavericks some of them weren't
but there was a bunch of interesting
people who had the license disco hmm
that's an interesting piece of work we
should now you can't defend what an
interesting piece of work is it's this
like saying you know proved to me that
Picasso was a great artist I'm not gonna
prove it to you say you know how's the
house how's the bane representation
going so I could show you statistics on
that you know and that's becomes
measurable and its enormous ly
comforting to people of a bureaucratic
mindset to have something measurable so
that's that's my more general and
high-minded reason for posing the other
one is that when they're out trying to
sell the screenplay of my new novel it's
like we're not interested in anybody who
is a white middle-aged man and no one's
no one wants to look at it they're
interested in paying writers they're
interested in women but if you think
you're going to get your adapted you
know it's just not going to happen now
that's my selfish reason it's I seems a
bit unfair could be a book I don't
know but then Mike could be it could be
expressive but but the idea that that
putting myself aside and not something I
like to do but if I if I did
come back to me again I would I would
really worried that this idea of this
very intangible idea that is lodged in a
in a culture impossible to quantify that
there's a kind of and it's very elitist
that's the problem it's very elitist
because it relies on certain people with
what we also can't quantify called taste
you know and and and artistic
sensitivity and and cultural insights
can't measure any of these things you
know there was it was just it's just
once upon a time people take a crack at
it just because it was interesting now
in a place where we can we you know it's
part of the box ticking culture where we
can say the following characteristics
and I can you know why you asked me if
it's any good I mean that's not the
point is it you know yeah it is the
 point
so I think we've got time for two more
questions so I think you had your hand
up before so I mean thank you for this
really interesting and I agree with a
lot of what you say I agree when he you
aren't Sweeney truth all of that and we
need complexity and openness but I think
the concern I have is sometimes we're
talking about this we're ignoring the
real dangers that there are in the world
right now of for example when you talk
about arts you're both artists that come
to it from a place of good faith you'll
hear you're trying to write and to
create art in a way that's getting to a
greater truth but there are people who
use art in a very different way and one
example of that obviously is you know
the thing we've just seen about grenfell
that's arguably piece of arts which is
done in order to incite hatred and
that's something that we're seeing it's
growing and it's dangerous and if you
come from a background that because it
creates hatred and we've seen in the
past okay fine
why is that dangerous okay if you're if
you come from a community which is going
which is which is gonna be the subject
of hate because it helps repel someone
else in Trump's case for example a
populist you can become demonized and we
know in other countries what happens
when you demonize people if you look at
Rwanda the use of demonizing certain
groups was used to strengthen other
groups and that ultimately led to
violence that's the lesson of history so
I mean for me seeing that kind of thing
happened without recognizing the dangers
inherent in that it's problematic okay
let me just get this straight you don't
think that burning a paper
representation of a building is going to
lead to our machete in each other in the
streets respect I'm speaking to you with
respect and I'm listening to everything
you're saying I believe in a lot of what
you're saying but you know that it's not
as simple as that right you know that
that you start off by mocking people by
making them less by making them the
target of hate in some way and yeah a
burning burning a piece of art is a way
of minimizing them of making them of
making them some it demonstrates them
being less than other parts of the
community it's it's an easy way of
transferring kind of distracting people
from what you're doing by demonizing
this other group and that an art can be
used in that way and you can laugh at
that you can you can laugh right but
that's the problem isn't it isn't isn't
yeah but that's your perception but
that's your perception that's your
perception
all right I'm gonna go out on a limb
here unusually um I found that case very
interesting now it isn't really a piece
of art but let's see it was you know
what's called a piece of art I mean
maybe they think of it as art it's an
arbitrary category the question is
whether or not those I think it was
mostly kids wasn't it because with some
adults - okay alright uh yeah I don't
even care who did it
interestingly though interestingly the
cops are unable to pin any crime on
these people it's not a hate crime
because it that that disaster did not
belong to one of those specific
protected categories of people so it's
an interesting it's an interesting case
now look I am the first person to admit
that was an excruciating ly poor taste
but I think it should be legal I don't
think those people should be in jail and
we could call it a piece of art we could
call it just an act of demonstrating how
thick and crass you are but it's not
illegal to be thick god most of Britain
would be in jail and it's not illegal to
be crass it's not believe it or not
illegal to be racist and I think that's
one of the things we have to get our
heads around because you know we all
have prejudices we all we all approach
each other with little categories in our
minds and little preconceived notions
sometimes they're they're too positive
oh you know the Asian over there he's so
good at math and that's the kind of
prejudice but prejudice is not against
the law and I think we are we are losing
a distinction between social
decency which we would all like each
other to display and therefore social
indecency and criminality and it's not
the places the state to enforce social
decency we we all have a right to have
an opinion about these people who put
together that model and thought it was
so hilarious and so I'm not saying that
we shouldn't decry it it was not funny
it was a very poor joke it was ugly so
I'm not defending it but I don't want
them arrested I mean it's it's a it's a
really good question I think any date so
it goes to the heart of a lot of things
that make me uneasy and I don't know
simple because one can remember back to
the thirties and dished in the Nazi
press who were publishing articles that
vilified Jews they're sending burning
down Grenfell is not the same thing but
I can it's part of the spectrum of the
argument that if one allows hate out
there it's going to have some terrible
consequences and it's always a question
of balancing these rights I have to say
I'm a hundred percent behind Lionel in
in the idea that this is this is you
know Varnum pathetic but when I heard
that six people have been arrested over
it it really sent chills up my spine you
know this is this is you can't have the
police going around some stupid guy
who's it's it's also part of the the
what you might call the shift in the
definition of hurt you know and I'm sure
if I had a relative at grenfell who died
and fly be extremely hurt by what they
had done and offended and upset but I
just can't live with that definition
I can't live with it and anything we can
live with as a society because once we
go down that road of psychological hurt
amounting to a crime I just don't see
where that ends you know now I I just
think you're on a terrifying Road I mean
I really sympathize anyone who lost
someone in that building to having to
watch that but as Lionel says there are
there are crude stupid and and wicked
people out there and we can't lock them
all up and and and that that that whole
you know I I mean if they they were you
know and it's it's not an easy answer I
mean I there was that story about
countdown kilo and his dog that did the
Nazi salute and and you know I don't
know there was something about that man
made me uneasy as well I don't mean the
uneasy because he was a he was arrested
I mean I was definitely uneasy about
that but I was also very uneasy about
what he was doing
not so much teaching a dog or nicely
salute but it was what he was said he
said gas the Jews and it was like
something about that phrase that I found
it wasn't even I hate the Jews it was
gas the Jews you know it seems such an
extreme it doesn't sit now I'm sure but
I'm sure it's better than gas the Jews
somehow you know keeping out keep an eye
on him yeah I mean the trouble is you do
you do have to you do have to put up
with a lot of as Lionel said a lot of
assholes in the world you know and you
can't lock them all up and and I think
once you start looking there and also
there's always the problem of who's an
asshole you know who defines an asshole
you know and and once you've got you
know you at the moment we've got a
political climate it was quiet
stringently I would say you know
left-wing in terms of social positioning
but if you switch that and and it was
the right-wing who were defining what
was exception and what wasn't I think
you would be you know in dangerous
ground if you if you had someone like if
you had someone like Donald Trump
you know who's America is protected by
free speech laws which were not saying
you know what I find it offensive that
you
you presume that you present these
left-wing opinions against abortion for
instance or in favor of abortion and I
want to suppress that because I consider
it to be wrong and immoral and in favor
of murdering people even though they're
very small
you know incipient people who's doing
the defining you know and I think that's
that's the real danger but I take your
point completely and I you know I it's a
horrible thing but between justice in
the law there's quite a big gap I think
but thank you for your question
so we are at quarter to ten so I think
we're gonna have to end the Q&A here but
there's been yeah there's a lot of
energy in the room and I think we
definitely should do more of these
events so I'm gonna finish by saying
thank you very much to Lionel Shriver
[Applause]
and also to Tim isn't it 92
[Applause]
and and we have we have another event
here in exactly two weeks time which is
within McGilchrist the writer of the
master is emissary and that will also be
live-streamed if we can get it working
is it working now
great and good bye to everyone on the
livestream Tamron I'll say wave goodbye
to on the livestream thank you very much
for coming it's been great thank you
you