[Music]
wanna start with evolutionary psychology
I don't know a huge amount about it but
I know it's a relatively new discipline
compared to many other disciplines could
you just give the sort of potted history
explainer of what evolutionary
psychology is conceptually evolutionary
psychology is just trying to understand
human nature human nature in terms of
what challenges our ancestors faced in
prehistory how did they survive how did
they find mates how did they reproduce
raise kids find food all of that so we
try to understand a lot of that from
archaeology anthropology hunter-gatherer
studies behavior genetics etc
emotionally though evolutionary
psychology I think is basically respect
for our ancestors it's realizing that
we're descended from a long line of
successful people and pre people you
know hominids and animals and it's
paying attention to what did they do
that worked and what strategies would
have succeeded or failed and kind of
thinking really hard about that so for
me it's been partly a scientific journey
of figuring out human nature but
emotionally and maybe even politically
it's been a process of kind of
reconnecting with my ancestors and I
think everybody who works in the field
for more than you know a decade or two
has both of those components to it
and you mentioned politically then it's
really interesting because you're you've
written for couette you're kind of in
this car I've seen you on Twitter you're
kind of in this intellectual dark web
conversation and is that somewhere that
you've always been or is that partly
because of what you've the journey
you've been on through your work I think
it's partly a scientific journey partly
it's a sort of personal experiences of
running
with social justice activists or certain
kinds of trouble partly it's just
maturing and having certain experiences
as a man as a dad you know and as a
partner I mean I started out college
pretty standard lefty I actually joined
the men's feminist union freshman year
at Columbia and I had pretty standard
liberal / libertarian views like I was
in the era of Reagan being president in
America and I was completely appalled
that he got re-elected in 84 when I was
in college like how could anybody vote
for this actor right and then my journey
since then has been partly kind of being
radicalized as a libertarian in grad
school and then getting just kind of
increasingly appreciative of certain
kinds of traditionalist and conservative
views but also getting kind of
radicalized even farther left on other
issues so it's a kind of complicated
patchwork and
it does seem that in this sort of
network around Colet around this kind of
conversation there are quite a lot of
evolutionary biologists evolutionary
psychologists is this because of the
nature of the discipline you think I
think the discipline makes you very wary
of certain kinds of claims that come out
of the left like the mind is a blank
slate and we can completely re-engineer
men and women according to whatever
happens to be politically correct we get
very skeptical about that I think partly
at the moment it's the people who are
actually willing to do evolutionary
psychology have to have extremely thick
skins and have to be prepared to really
battle for their ideas in an academic
environment that's largely hostile to
them and really punishes and stigmatizes
them so I think it kind of selects for
certain ornery personality types
evolutionary psychology can you just
summarize what it is for people who
don't know because I
understands the relatively new
discipline yeah it's mostly just an
excuse to go back to the 1950s gender
roles to keep women barefooted pregnant
ya know it's a lens with which to view
human psychology so it's a way of
generating hypotheses and predictions
based on what would have been adaptive
so we think about things in a variety of
different ways and so if you saw a robot
in the desert and you saw that it was
moving around and you saw that it had
survived there for some years you would
know that it had certain features you
would know that it was resistant to sand
erosion you would know that it was able
to actually use the Sun potentially at
power itself you would know it had
certain characteristics and we know just
on the basis that humans have survived
on earth for many millions of years in
our current form in and other forms and
have reproduced that we have certain
characteristics and that we lived in
groups and that we lived you know for
some period of time on the African
savannah and all of these different
things lead us to have some idea about
how human psychology might function if
you were going to design a program in
order to survive and reproduce to
attract mates to increase your status to
engage socially to help get other people
to help you and to help others what
kinds of programs would you implement in
order to make those things happen
and evolutionary psychology thinks about
things from that perspective but also
from a biological and ecological
perspective looking at humans kind of as
animals I think that one of the main
things that happened and people was you
know diverse as you know BF Skinner and
ecologists and evolutionary
psychologists think that in some sense
we're too close to our own lines to have
a good idea of what we really think and
many of the people who have come up with
these amazing insights into human
condition
were people who were like we know what
Oliver Sacks called anthropologist on
Mars people who felt alienated from
other humans they were trying to figure
them out and they were able to think
about things in a novel way in a
foreigner kind of way because they
didn't actually feel entirely human and
I think that evolutionary psychology
tries to have an objective perspective
on human minds in that way as well yeah
because he you mentioned at the
beginning
kind of joking about kind of wondering
we're going to return to the kitchen but
there is an like when there is suspicion
around maybe eeveelution arey biology as
well but evolutionary biology
evolutionary psychology it is that by
looking at differences between men and
women what we're actually doing is
wanting to go back to the 1950s for
example why how do you sort of respond
to that criticism I just think you when
you look at most evolutionary
psychologists they talk about things
yeah like hunter-gatherer life like
non-human animals there's really no
moralizing at all around it now there's
some people who are kind of
neo-traditionalist
who talk about evolutionary psychology
as a way to bolster some claims but
certainly human beings were not
monogamous at all and there was certain
you know men mostly had at least some
high status men had multiple mates and
that's not anything that people are
arguing for even though that's what you
might argue from an evolutionary
perspective because 80% of all societies
have been polygynous so how I respond to
that claim is yes some people use
evolutionary psychology to bolster the
traditionalist view but then you also
have people like Christopher Ryan trying
to use evolutionary psychology to
bolster the view that we should all have
multiple lovers and that we should all
be polyamorous and a little bit like the
Bible in that sense you can kind of use
it to bolster what claims you want but I
think all of these people get certain
things wrong I think Christopher Ryan
gets a lot of things wrong I think
Jordan Peterson gets things wrong
Brett Weinstein about evolution and how
humans have evolved especially in terms
of romantic relationships and I remember
on the Rubin report you talked about
that there are certain topics that
you're wary about teaching
what are those topics and are they ones
that you don't teach anymore you're just
a lot more cautious about the way you
teach them some of them I don't really
touch at all because there's almost no
right way to approach them so for
example trans issues transsexuality I've
taught a human sexuality class for about
20 years I know a reasonable amount
about trans issues but you know if you
have a class of a hundred students and
there's even one or two been radicalized
and
certain view of trans issues and trans
rights and I give a lecture about it and
it's not pitch perfect in terms of what
I say I can get into big trouble about
that on the other hand if I talk about
things like the history of gay rights
I'm totally comfortable with that
because I can say things that are
factually correct I was actually you
know in New York as an undergrad when
act up and the AIDS crisis hit and I'm
very familiar with what a challenge that
was to to gay people I'm totally
comfortable talking about polyamory open
relationships BDSM kink lots of that
stuff but then when you get into things
like sex differences and personality
traits or cognitive strengths then I
have to tread quite carefully again
there seems to be an all-out attack on
on gender per se in some areas of of the
left at the moment and I guess if you're
studying in a gender differences than
you're in the in the process it's a
really weird moment in relations between
the sexes where on the one hand you get
a kind of wholesale denial of sex
differences by a lot of the left on the
other hand you get a demonization of men
right like everything that's wrong in
history is due to men and patriarchy and
it's almost like on the other hand on
the one hand there's no essential sex
differences on the other hand the core
essential sex difference is men are evil
and I don't know how we're going to
reconcile those views but it makes very
very difficult kind of intellectual
landscape to navigate at the moment and
you mentioned masculinity and some
people called a war on masculinity at
the very least we have a war about
masculinity I think you could kind of
safely say and a big part of that
recently seems to have been I mean the
Gillette I have caused a lot of response
but in a way the APA guidelines the
came close to pathologizing traditional
masculinity were in some ways more
concerning would you what what did you
make of those at the time
yeah the Gillette ad at the end of the
day is just an ad it's just a consumer
campaign that sort of woke capital it's
just taking social justice concerns and
trying to monetize them and trying to
reposition the Gillette brand given that
it's being challenged by kind of new
rising hipster brands like Harry's on
the other hand the APA division 51
guidelines that they published a couple
months ago are concerning because APA
has the power to tell every clinical
psych grad program in America how to
teach certain issues like we actually
face APA accreditation in my department
we train most of the clinical
psychologists who practice in the state
of New Mexico in the US and so whatever
APA says is kind of a as a top-down
ideological you know mandate and if they
have a view of here's how to treat male
clients when they come to you
that's how clinicians will be trained to
deal with men and I think what they've
done is appalling disgraceful anti
masculine and outrageous and when they
got the blowback they didn't say oh my
gosh we should be a little humbler about
this we should rethink this no they
double down and they said we know best
we know the research I was like have you
guys read any evolutionary psychology or
animal behavior anything about evolved
sex differences no they don't make any
reference to that because it's not in
their world worldview so I think that's
where you get the danger that there
might be you know millions of American
men going to individual therapy couples
therapy marital
therapy family therapy most
psychotherapists are women who don't
have a very deep understanding of
masculinity and these guys are going to
be kind of hung out to dry by this
therapy industry couldíve the people who
maybe weren't familiar with the with the
furore ii when it exploded could you
explain what happened and why it was so
dangerous in your view I think the short
answer is basically APA Division 51
guidelines said for a man to succeed in
psychotherapy he basically has to become
more like a woman he has to get more in
touch with his feelings share more of
his secrets be more empathic he has to
get away from any historical archetypes
of masculinity right he can't act like a
hunter a warrior anything Jordan
Peterson would advocate guys should be
like and he basically has to purge
himself of any hint of traditional
masculinity and adopt what 21st century
femininity or some as-yet-undiscovered
form of masculinity that nobody even
knows how to do therapy about so I think
that's the danger that it basically deal
Ajith amaizing the kinds of masculinity
that I think are actually most helpful
particularly to young men and what are
those types of masculinity I think
getting in touch with and getting in
touch with your sexuality your sexual
desires your the ways that you view
women trying to make those both
consistent with your evolved desires but
also kind of find your ethical path
towards being open honest respectful
towards women I think it means finding a
way to reconnect with other men
through friendship through groups
through sports particularly combat
sports it means yeah getting in touch
with the the inner under warrior
husband/father all of that and of course
we have to reinvent that to some degree
for the 21st century but I think it's
really useful to start with a fairly
traditionalist view of a lot of those
roles and that's what a PA was was
rejecting so does traditional therapy
not work so well for men is it more
oriented towards a woman's way of being
in the world yeah I mean Freud invented
psychotherapy mostly to deal with female
patients to deal with fairly neurotic
unhappy depressed and anxious Viennese
bourgeois women and to talk with them
about their issues and I think for women
talking about your issues particularly
with your female friends or your
sometimes your male mate can be good
therapy I think for a lot of men in a
way the last thing they want to do is
talk about their vulnerabilities and
their neuroses particularly with a woman
I think it's often humiliating I think
it's often counterproductive it seems
like if a guy is going to do individual
psychotherapy on the one hand it might
be more productive to do it with a guy
who actually understands you on the
other hand most guys now are actually
more comfortable sharing their secrets
with a woman because women are like
better listeners and they're more used
to that so the whole therapy industry I
think is deeply dysfunctional when it
comes to dealing with male clients I
think it's often pretty good at dealing
with female clients so how does
evolutionary psychology influence what
your view of masculinity was what what
lessons can we learn from evolutionary
psychology about this
topic I think a lot I mean to me the the
more you understand evolution and
biology and animal behavior and ancestry
and hunter-gatherer lifestyles the
better you can connect with your your
true nature as a man and the better you
can understand your sort of path from
puberty through young adulthood to
maturity and fatherhood and becoming a
mentor and and so forth I think to
understand your sexuality when you're an
adolescent male it's it's virtually
impossible if you don't know some animal
behavior and you don't understand how
sexual selection shapes males and
females differently and how it's done
that for at least you know four thousand
species of mammals and three hundred
species of primates and that this is
really deep stuff and it's kind of
programmed into us to do things like
seek sexual variety sexual novelty it's
not necessarily about you know spreading
or seeing in kind of a simple-minded way
like every man wants to be an alpha
Genghis Khan it's not that simple but to
a first approximation that's closer to
the truth than what most young men are
taught right which is that all of your
sexual desires are basically ethically
illegitimate and you should act more
like girls in high school and
what else helps I think understanding
status seeking and how male status works
and how like there's different kinds of
status that you can seek this formidable
'ti which is are you physically capable
of fighting and sort of overcoming then
there's dominance which is more about
your attitude and how you carry yourself
how you talk to other people
particularly other men there's status
which is how respected are you people
heard of you there's prestige which is
what do you know do people want to hear
from you and learn from you all these
different things young men confuse them
like they don't know they don't know the
difference between formidable 'ti in
terms of like winning a jiu-jitsu match
versus prestige which is people seeking
you out for advice so I think
understanding sexuality understanding
status seeking that's just two examples
where an evolutionary viewpoint really
buys buys you a lot and obviously you're
looking a lot at the differences between
men and women and what do you make of
the way that conversation looks at the
moment in so the media and the culture
yeah well obviously there's a lot of
very adversarial kinds of conversations
happening in different kinds of
subcultures so there is a sort of
radical feminist movement that has a
view of men as being yet really bad and
that actors generally but this
impression that they have is that men
are bad actors and they're toxic
their starts with toxic masculinity
masculinity can't even say it because of
the way that men have been socialized
and men are superficial eyes by women so
I usually don't understand in that whole
you know how that all would work and
then there's also you know pickup
artists and red pill kinds of
communities which also have a kind of
adversarial relationship to women which
in some sense they're talking about
trying to get one over on women so if
men are trying to maximize the amount of
sex they can have a
as investment when they're trying to
maximize investment and give away as
little sex as possible and if you look
at rap music which is one of my favorite
sources for thinking about evolutionary
psychology you see this kind of
interaction a lot this kind of battle of
the sexes interaction and if you look at
those kinds of men they're kind of
trying to get one over on women and in
some sense they're radical feminists are
trying to get one over on men but by
saying that they are bad actors and that
there's toxic masculinity so that's all
happening and then I think the average
person who's trying to engage with the
opposite sex they don't know how much of
their desires how much of what they're
trying to do with one another is
socialized how much they should reinvent
things or how much they should go along
with how they've been socialized or how
they feel most naturally to act and you
have some friends who have been in
radical leftist communities and they
tried to forge a new relationship kind
of from the ground up try to negotiate
who was going to do each task tried to
really challenge sex differences in
their own relationship and it
constitutes a tremendous amount of
strain and argument and sex roles you
know whoever you think they come from
actually very valuable for saving time
and reducing the amount of stuff that
you have to negotiate about they get a
really bad rap so I think there's a lot
of confusion and there's also this
adversarial dynamic that really doesn't
need to be there and you mentioned the
idea of toxic masculinity was a huge
discussion around toxic masculinity in
the culture and there's very little
discussion of toxic femininity and maybe
we need to ditch both of those terms but
we didn't it really interesting
interview with Heather
high end where she talked about that and
it's been one of the most popular pieces
we've put out so there's clearly a
hunger for at least a discussion of the
other side of the coin what do you think
the other side of the coin is there is I
think I mean toxic masculinity is a
little bit easier to pick up because I
think that men have tried to achieve
status and dominance in a more narrow
way so they've had to achieve that with
physical strength with aggression and
also yeah subjugation so all of that is
ways that men have made a living for
millions of years whereas I think the
way that women have made
living is more through psychological
means you could call it manipulation or
you could call it yeah you could just
call inflation and so when I saw that
piece she was saying it's toxic
femininity to say that to tell a man
that he shouldn't look at an attractive
woman or to tell men that they shouldn't
engage in shows of strength or shows of
dominance that they shouldn't kind of do
what's coming naturalism
I would think of toxic femininity in
another way which is the same way that
men are sometimes driven to manipulate
others through strength dominance and
aggression women are often inclined to
manipulate others through psychological
means through manipulation through
insults and carrots and sticks and
engaging in reputational damage and
women have some women more than others
obviously there's huge individual
differences in this respect have a role
map of everybody's relationship to them
who owes them what and you see this kind
of thing I would call that maybe the
other side of the coin of toxic
femininity which is this desire to
control others and you could see some
ideological changes for example this
desire that there would be parity in
every different scientific domain as a
way of actually engaging a manipulation
that will improve the law of women so
that's what I think maybe the other side
of the coin toxic femininity this you
know desire to manipulate things to
one's own end especially in close social
relationships and it seems that that
like even that definition that kind of
discussion feels quite countercultural
at the moment but there isn't much of a
discussion about it in the media or in
in the culture at large why do you think
that is well you can it's very hard to
spin I'm engaging in dominance against
you and aggressiveness against you as in
this is for your own good but obviously
there's a lot of ways to spend other
kinds of psychological manipulation as
this is actually the best thing for the
culture this is the best thing for the
in-group this is the best thing for
people's relationships with it on
another so if you look at therapy
culture in that men should be more
revealing of their weakness and
vulnerability
and they should talk out their problems
more often for example that is a way of
saying men you could be better and
happier and more psychologically healthy
if you engaged in this thing another way
of thinking about it is actually a way
of trying to whittle away at the ways
that men feel most comfortable engaging
with the world and engaging socially
right you've had there's a very easy way
to put a positive spin on it and if you
had a very cynical view about what's
actually happening in the culture then
it's obviously easy to turn that on you
and say that you're misogynist or that's
your anti-feminist in a way that it's
not easy to turn on somebody who says
aggressiveness is bad which people tend
to agree with have you been described
designs like feminists i've been
described as an as a feminist yeah and i
think i've even described as engaging in
casual misogyny which I like better than
formal misogyny you know can wear your
sweatpants I'm what did you make of that
when it happened why why did it happen
and what did you make of it yeah I've
been called an anti-feminist I don't I
mean the kinds of things that people
hurl at you and then having him in an ad
hominem way I don't really think about
them very much they're not very
sophisticated criticisms so I I think
that as an evolutionary psychologist
generally because it's such a
controversial field and because I've
worked on some controversial problems I
have a fairly thick skin anyway and it's
very easy for me to ignore somebody's
unsophisticated commentary but also I
grew up in a culture and in a family
where we were constantly arguing we're
constantly engaging in light-hearted
ribbing and salting each other and I
think that that has possibly also been
very good preparation even though I
didn't know at the time for the world of
you know the internet and Twitter where
people say awful things all the time but
it can be very funny if that's all they
have to say I guess the issue is that
when especially people on the left hear
people talk about an evolutionary
viewpoint what they hear is we have to
go back to pre 1950s gender relations
[Music]
I think that's a willfulness reading of
what evolutionary psychologists are
talking about so there's the stereotype
that says oh me and David boss and Bob
rivers and whoever else tells
evolutionary psychology just wants to
recreate fifties gender roles no serious
evolutionist I know sort of advocates
that that's like the default because we
know hunter-gatherer societies are
really really different from suburban
America right we lived in tribal groups
we had multiple friends we did shared
childcare people didn't do monogamous
marriage for life they did form pair
bonds but you know sexual relations more
were more fluid the men didn't go off
like 40 hours a week hunting they were
around quite a bit and then they would
go off on multi-day hunting trips and
then come back and the women would not
stay like in a cave they would go off
foraging and some of them would stay
back and look after kids so nobody's
advocating fifties suburban America as
some evolutionary default that is a
fiction of the left that is created
purely to diss evolutionary psychology
and you were one of the people who wrote
in defense of James d'amour
I think that was quill let's kind of
break through article back in 2017 would
it have been
sounds right sounds about then and James
d'amour was a really very interesting
moment because it was I'm sure it kind
of put a huge fear of God into just
about everyone inside the tech industry
and I think still is a really important
cultural moment what did you what did he
make of that and what do you think it
shows about kind of the media and
cultural landscape that we're that we're
in at the moment so I wrote sort of a
very short thing for quill at that
basically said James d'amore is
factually correct about most of his
claims about sex too
it says and then I wrote a longer piece
called the neurodiversity case for free
speech that pointed out look James the
Moors kind of ass be like he's got some
Asperger's syndrome traits which is like
he loved systematizing information he's
not naturally that empathic with people
of other views he can be a bit blunt in
how he says things I'm a speii I totally
relate to that and I basically said we
as a society have to choose do we censor
every aspeed person from saying what
they really think and making them super
cautious or do we give them a little
slack to say what they really think and
to expect sometimes they will get it
wrong or there'll be a little tone deaf
or you know maybe they'll be a little
bit over systematizing in terms of like
well this is what the facts say so these
are policy implications the response to
temor I think from the left from the
social justice activist was basically a
speech out to fuck off we don't want to
hear from you if you can't tow the line
about what we consider appropriate
ideologies then you are not welcome in
the public sphere and I think all the
you know all the ass because in the tech
industry heard that message loud and
clear and some of them were like to hell
with you we're gonna say we want anyway
but most of them buckled and like okay I
guess that's
professional landscape we face and what
do you make of the kind of the media
what you might call the media consensus
around sex differences around these kind
of topics I think what you see in the
media consensus is a generation of
journalists who are denied any access to
any understanding of evolution or
biology or animal behavior I what to
journalists major in communications and
journalism who is teaching them people
who don't know anything about biology so
they're getting indoctrinated into a
certain view of the world that they
think is natural that they think is the
correct default way to understand
everything and when they encounter
someone who has not been socialized into
the same beliefs they're kind of shocked
yeah you know and the irony is what
these people learn in communications and
journalism is concepts like hegemony
where like here's how you run a society
you instill certain ideological beliefs
and the elites and then those take over
and those are the unquestioned wisdom
and they're enacting exactly that theory
of social control without even realizing
that they're this sort of witless
accomplices to that and how do you train
your boyfriend
easily know how do i train my boyfriend
well but kind of how to turn your
boyfriend idea is the idea that women
actually have this faculty
psychologically with figuring out what
other people find reinforcing and
punishing and doling out those rewards
and punishments in a way that works in
their own best self-interest both of
women and with men and the idea there is
that men have actually been less
inclined to develop the sophisticated
psychological means with which to
control others and control their
relationships because they had a simpler
mechanism at their disposal which was
basically physical force and so yeah my
idea is essentially that women find this
very easy to do to use rewards and
punishments to control others but that
they actually should be thinking more
consciously about what they're trying to
get out of their relationships with
other people and if you're unwilling to
admit to yourself that you're
manipulative then you're going to meet
even you're going to be manipulating
others in ways that you don't want and
towards ends that you don't want and
even in ways that are kind of productive
to good and healthy relationships and
what do you think if what we're seeing
at the moment in the culture looks a lot
like a kind of dysfunctional
relationship between men and women what
does a healthy relationship look like I
think a good healthy relationship not
just romantic relationships but other
kinds of relationships including between
mothers and children and between friends
is one where we can actually be
skeptical about our own psychology so
for me I sometimes have an instinct or a
desire to punish somebody I will feel
angry with somebody and I will try and
figure out why from an evolutionary
perspective what they did was abrasive
to me and try and figure out actually
what I want and whether I can get there
through an argument or through being
angry or through talking it out
sometimes even talking things out is not
going to be especially helpful and so in
I think good romantic heterosexual
relationships do involve some
understanding about male and female
evolved psychology so for example men
and women tend to have
different kinds of jealousy women are
more emotionally jealous on average men
are more sexually jealous on average and
if I expected my partner to exhibit
exactly the same kinds of stress and
anxiety when it came to our relationship
if I was saying why can't she be more
like me and I thought that everything
was socialized I actually would be
trying to manipulate him much more to be
like me and I would have a much more
difficult time understanding where he
was coming from than I do currently
another thing is you know for example
just speaking personally I've been in a
long-distance relationship for some time
and when we get back together it's
always difficult because I don't
understand that we had to be a part
because our careers in different places
I treat him as if he chose to be away
from me and as if he abandoned me and
then came back there's part of me that's
treating him that way that wants to
punish him even though he's just been
reintroduced back into my life and so by
thinking about parts of my mind as
programs or thinking about actually
myself as an animal that has trying to
maximize for example the investment of
my partner it actually helps me be
skeptical of my own motivations and my
own feelings in a way that you know I
can be gentle with myself I understand
where I'm coming from but I can also be
skeptical of myself that I don't have to
express everything that I feel because I
know it doesn't always come from a place
that's trying to maximize the benefit to
the relationship and the stability of
that relationship and we've talked a
little bit about the when you could call
that kind of ideological capture in the
media and there are certain topics that
we've seen with Jordan Peterson for
example just even trying to talk about
unique differences between men and women
creates a huge backlash have a sense
especially running a YouTube channel and
being kind of increasingly exposed to
the online world and what you might call
the manosphere that that conversation
seemed to go toxic very quickly what
have you experienced much of it and why
do you think it goes so toxic and what
what what genuine
in science do you think our being held
in that kind of red pill manosphere
culture yeah it's really sad because on
the one hand you have this sort of a
process of political correctness that
says these topics are all out of bounds
or at least you can't talk about them in
certain ways
okay so then young man go fuck you we're
gonna talk about them anyway and we're
gonna go and read it and over share
everything about our lives and we are
young and angry and pissed off and we
don't trust the dominant culture and we
don't trust what we're being told and we
don't even trust scientists anymore
because most of them have been captured
ideologically so you get these kind of
online gangs who think that like we are
the righteous rebels who are like
challenging the feminized culture and
there's sort of 50 percent correct about
that but then they're 50 percent
delusional because they go down these
weird rabbit holes where for example
I'll often see in the manosphere
explanations of sexual selection that I
kind of recognized as like fourth hand
echoes of my mating mind book from 20
years ago that's been sort of circuitous
leary interpreted by various red pill
guys and pickup artists and whatever and
then if i wade into those debates and i
say you know actually this comes from
dissing this source and this is from
darwin and this but this other thing is
wrong then you get dog piles by these
angry young men or like you don't know
anything man you're like you're not in
the master so it's a very weird moment
what are the most dangerous
are there any specifics that you can
think about that they misinterpret and
it it doesn't no good to do so I think
there's a lot of sexual shame
particularly around masturbation
pornography
you know there's the no-fat movement
that says like young men should never
masturbate that's like every juvenile
male primate masturbates and how it's
done for millions of years like
teenagers masturbate 99% of male
teenager like that's totally normal and
if you deny that and you impose shame on
young men for that you're totally
playing into the hands of far left
feminists who are basically taking male
sexuality and saying this is entirely
toxic and that the anti-porn movement
like yeah you shouldn't watch porn like
more than 20 hours a week that seems
reasonable like that might interfere
with your job but the idea that like
it's more dangerous than crack or heroin
and that it will create this like it'll
drive you insane and it's incredibly
habit-forming like the scientific
research says no that's wrong that's not
what happens
but if you argue with these guys about
that they are so invested in in not
believing anything the mainstream
science says and I totally understand
why they're skeptical that they'll kind
of jump at you and that's terrible
because it means you they're not in a
position to distinguish between what is
actually evidence-based and real versus
what pretends to be evidence-based and
real but is actually ideologically
captured and the the kind of stuff that
you study and teach is right at the
center of the culture war at the moment
what do you have a sense of what a place
of integration looks like is it kind of
accepting that we have differences but
also knowing that we can change them or
that we have the ability to repurpose
the hardware what's the what's the
integration beyond the culture wall I
think before we get to a point of
integration there has to be a period of
radical experiment
it's 2019 nobody has any idea what the
hell we're doing in terms of what a
viable relationship will look like that
could last until 2050 or 2070 or however
long we'll live if we get regenerative
medicine nobody has any idea we know
lifelong monogamous marriage probably
works okay for some people but not
everybody right we know polyamory works
for some people but not everybody we
know whatever hot wifing and swinging
works for some people but not everybody
I think we need to just cut everybody a
lot of slack and sort of say let's let's
allow eat each of these little
subcultures to flourish and each of them
needs to be like radically honest about
what are the pros and cons of what
they're doing how generalizable is it to
everybody else what can we what are the
lessons learned from these different
things and so I guess I'm quite humble
about I don't know what's gonna work in
the 21st century but nobody else does
either and I think we just have to
experiment we don't know how human
nature is actually going to interact
with social media and smartphones and
contraception and modern education and
modern careers and you know vast cities
and all that stuff so I think everybody
should be pretty cautious about like
preaching to others like I love Jordan
Peterson huge respect to him but I don't
think he should be going around saying
well we should all be monogamous geez
just because it worked for a few
thousand years well yeah it worked under
conditions that are radically different
from today some aspects that will still
work some of it might not some of it
might need minor tweaking some of it
might need complete rethinking we
actually don't really pay that much
attention to other polyamorous people
because we
think that a lot of what other
polyamorous people endorse is actively I
actually don't understand how people do
polyamory without an evolutionary
perspective for example and that is
something that we're planning on
exploring more and writing and videos
yeah
[Music]
you
[Music]