I say I'm slightly annoyed by the sound
if my neighbor I'm just working on his
motorcycle his vehicle maintenance I
never grew up knowing both vehicle
minions my dad doesn't really know about
it and therefore doesn't teach his sons
or his daughters about it and I only got
my license three years ago and got my
first car three years ago so I don't
know how to do basically change royal
and YouTube's available it's not like I
don't I can't look it up and learn but
having a more structured way of those
types of videos of how to change a tire
based on your exact I mean I the tires
are different I should have used oil
change but that one how to change oil
because that you have to do I mean when
I looked at how to change though it was
oil change so an online database of how
to or don't like let's you have a high
degree of mechanical expertise do not
intend to do it on this make and model
to be able to and then also you can
still you can use that same information
that data base to also see what your
neighbors are driving how people how
many times do you have to change not do
you have to change the how many times do
you have to change the tires on a
certain maker model had compared to your
neighbors we can compare actual what our
vehicles actually do so in online
collection for mechanics and vehicle
information and online you database is
74