the so hi everybody so we're just mid
mid conversation we've been talking for
a couple of hours already but um we're
talking about philosophy and dialogue
O's and making this bridge between the
personal and the philosophical like what
what is that bridge right like and
because but most of the times like when
you and I get on we I'm like I do it
like how are you doing you start talking
about whatever it is going on in your
life and then and then I get interested
or you get interested and you start to
describe it and then some new thing kind
of opens up and then the what we've been
talking about all together for the last
year starts to you start to bring it
into the phenomenological you start
describing that thing that just in your
concrete light in those terms and it
becomes so that's where time starts to
disappear yeah it's kind of connection
between the like that these like
intensely high abstract I mean the
highest levels of abstraction that you
could imagine right in working those out
into your life like that there's a
connection that's made with that and and
I think that's actually the thing that's
actually essential this is why
philosophy via maybe some it may be
something that isn't just one option of
something we can do but like that if
it's missing we become six in some way
great of this kind of I mean especially
now because it's like with with
everything flattening out so much right
no sense of real clear your key that it
seems viable for anybody um that holds
any weight
it does seem it does seem like people
need to do they need to they need to do
the scaffolding and in in height the
depth right themselves and we're kind of
in that time I think that's the sense of
necessity that I'm I
getting about wanting wanting people who
aren't have no interest in philosophy to
start to ignite this fire because I
think it's I think it's one of the ways
that well well this is this is what I
was saying about this is like why that
matters is because like you were saying
if you can't if these conversations and
what you're reading and doesn't make any
difference in your actual life like then
you're just doing something else right
it's like the point is is that when you
get these things to to to get what's
what Hager is talking about what Plato's
talking about what like these these
these people that just really like went
into the depth of being and with the
logos is that when you really get it you
actually the world shows itself to you
differently and all of your as Nora
Bateson would say in her and your father
would definitely say that like all of
our actions are in correlation with our
perception and philosophy for me has
been an experience of when it when it
when it really is alive I turn around
and the same group of people there's so
many more options available like with
that same situation than before that
because I can see more dimensions of
what's going on and thus I can start to
respond to it and that's where that's
where I think it integrates and the
where there's almost no difference
between philosophy and and the way that
you live your life you can hold concrete
yeah yeah absolutely and I think we've
been talking a lot about how this
process the dialogic process is
sequenced and how it seems to naturally
sequence itself when it's when it's when
it becomes when it becomes autopoietic
and we were talking earlier one of the
many threads we weave our converse
to this point was about was about
warming up conversation and it seems to
me that the interpersonal relationship
beginning with the interpersonal
relationship that could otherwise under
different circumstances lapse into a
therapeutic exercise that beginning with
the interpersonal dynamic warms the air
of the conversation such that you then
become able to breathe it more deeply
because then the marriage of the
personal and the philosophic allows the
personal domains of experience to become
analogized right to become analogues for
the Ilocos that can then appreciate the
levels of intelligibility right like
like the domains of personal experience
become analogic hosts for philosophic
insight yeah so that they're actually
few they're interfused right the
personal and the philosophic because the
personal becomes the living analog for
that that that makes the logos of
conversation into an implement for
uncovering intelligibility right right
and so then the analogize ation of
personal personal experience becomes a
kind of philosophic instrument to then
play deeper and more resonant tunes if
we're using that metaphor of musicality
for day logos right and so then it
becomes the body of rhythm that that
that begins the philosophic gesture when
that's why it comes back to it
repeatedly is because it continually
uses that the analogy of that experience
continually refocuses and retuns the
conversation so that it doesn't drift
away into abstraction and remains
embodied huh and and and then actually
you know can can convert into something
like an actionable wisdom yeah Oh
totally because you're exercising you
know it's interesting because Kairos
like the notion of time not as not as
linear successions right but the time is
is timing right like the opportunity
opens up sites of
phenomena itself right it's not
something that the phenomena is in its
like way things time character of time
which was I think Heidegger's key thing
he brought to the conversation around it
that reveals all you know being in time
and all that stuff but the but like if
you think about that this how much of
your life is about timing right of like
knowing knowing when to make a phone
call and what way to make it with how
much pressure like how what you should
be doing at what point like what project
to take on like how much time to spend
here when I should do it like all of the
it's very all the machinery that that
presents you know in John's language
like the the agent and arena in the way
that it occurs right I think is
something like dialog owes is like a
concentration of that right yeah yeah
well because in conversation there's so
many opportunities there's so many like
different openings that you could take
and and you could become skilled at
knowing that was not quite ready right
and then and then letting it emerge
somewhere else and then forgetting about
it and then seeing it again and all of
those sensibilities I think on one level
is it's a it's an a TA race an analogy
for I think the way we just
phenomenologically conceive of our life
and how we lived right well not how we
conceive of it but how we
phenomenologically comport it right so
yeah yeah yeah that's right
mm-hmm that's right that's right yeah
because then somehow like in having to
speak like the logos and having to speak
itself to thou and be heard by thou you
know something happens to the logos the
intelligible discourse right or
intelligibility writ large how what at
whatever level of resolution we figure
the definition of logos that's a really
tough one
Yeah right precisely because it can be
so scaled that I'd like at what level
intelligibility do do we mean the term
but but even at its most basic perhaps
that is most at its most analogically
minut at the level of basic discourse
basic basic speech yeah that speech in
being spoken to our vow takes on a
valence and meaning that supercedes is
it's a stance of content right and so I
think that the presence and witness of
vow allows for the logos of
intelligibility at the basic level of
speech or discourse to then analogize
intelligibility that is otherwise
inaccessible so that embodied experience
it's as though when spoken to thou the
syllables of speech become articulated
such that the silence can can can emerge
between them and that the silence that
emerges between the syllables as spoken
to thou as heard by thou then every
instance of logos every unit of
intelligible discourse becomes an
analogy for its own insufficiency so
that the conversation seems to orient
itself to deeper levels of
intelligibility simply because it is
being spoken by the presence of a vow
that hears it yeah right and so there's
and that's and that's how I think the
personal becomes becomes transpersonal
right I guess if we can put it that way
is because in speaking of the personal
we end up we end up embodying a gesture
to what is ultimately beyond it yeah and
the level at which one learns what that
gesture exposes right the
intelligibility is so well if you think
about this is like imagine if I you were
sitting by a fire right and
somebody came up right and set right
next to you that you've never met and
you were silent for the whole hour
imagine that and then imagine same
situation person comes up that you've
never met and they they start by saying
Amen that's a completely different hour
yes right like that's but that kept like
how to know to say that right you can't
deduce in into propositional rules you
actually have to just like to sit down
and go like be able to read whether or
not like you were friendly or foe
how much how far oh like distance to be
a part whether to say anything whether
or not to say anything you can't really
like deduce that into some kind of like
mental understanding at all like it's so
much more because it's so complex it's
so deep in one's being but it comes
through I think all that all that kind
of intelligibility that Lisa is also if
language starts through mimicry yes
right yes the role of mimicry and the K
the cadence that you take on and yeah
yeah do you think about this a lot of
it's like I as I get older I noticed my
father a lot more and I noticed myself
saying stuff that I've never heard him
say but he would say like and there's
something I can feel it like I can feel
how what it is but there's some deep
stylistic embodied thing that makes him
a sense talking to me a sink stop that
has to say that kind of joke in that
kind of way that's probably like
connected to the Midwest that's you
can't there's this but it how did how
did it arise well look it arose through
like being thrown into a world and
coping with it and style
and styles and contexts of contexts of
social interactions and embedded
practices that go into that timing and
so so yeah just engaging and how we even
engage in a conversation at all is just
a bloody miracle I don't think anyone
could explain but like yeah start to
have conversations philosophical
conversations at really high levels of
abstraction but that are deeply personal
right and that start to have a cadence
of their own there's so much in the
mimicking in the play of that cadence
that I think is going on that's so so
much deeper than the propositional level
yes right yeah oh yeah absolutely yeah
that's even if what you're mimicking is
simply the silence of an auditing
presence have you ever thought to
yourself like either inwardly or
actually an outward conversation have
you ever thought made a statement and
then cycled through I see a menu of
different listeners that could have
changed the intimations of that
statement based on their presence right
but the same phrase as spoken to guy is
a different phase as a different phrase
as spoken to any any number of different
friends or interlocutors and that the
company the chosen company or the
figured company of presence that is
witness to hear the logos of a
particular unit of speech can affect the
opening in that speech that will allow
it to bear its that will allow how it to
bear its meaning in directions that have
yet to be explored and so then the
choice of interlocutor or the simulation
of the interlocutor becomes so important
to inflect the logos with a particular
attention
in a particular direction right I so if
I'm you know if I say if I make a
statement and I say it to you it's very
different than I'm if I make the same
statement and say to my mother right and
so and so then the the internalization
of the avatar of guising stock into my
interior via logos is very important
because something said said to guy is
then inflected in such a way that it may
avail it may avail it may open a
typography of meaning in the interstices
of that logos statement that were not
otherwise present to it or present to me
right the silence of vow is something
I've been thinking a lot about right
speaking into the science cuz I've been
thinking of it interiorly right we
talked a lot about exterior social deal
logos in which now is like vow is
manifest I was there they're present
they're listening but then but then a
vow of silence that allows a particular
that allows the logos to resound right
to resound and return to itself right
it's as though in the silence it's truly
laid bare yeah its capacity or
possibility is truly laid bare as
witnessed by the howl of silence and the
importance of that silence so I mean you
were talking you talked about someone
coming to sit beside you when you're
staring into a campfire right think of
how that silence use I mean you're right
silent it the conversation changes
immeasurably depending on whether the
person comes and sits wordlessly with
you or comes and sits and says hey man
but it also the the what is intimated by
the silence before that fire also
changes if someone comes and sits down
and is there to witness it even if
nothing is said mmm right yeah so the
the presence of silence and its role in
deal logos is something I yeah I also
find myself
thinking about a lot and how what we're
really trying to do in some ways when
we're dialoguing and silence is to try
strange as it sounds is to actually try
and presents the silence to presents its
infinite depth in the spoken logos of of
discourse right but perfect silence yeah
yeah what you're saying is just it's
that's that's really rich stuff I've
thought about for a lot but you're
you're saying it in a way that's having
me we figure we figure a lot of things
but like the thing about just well what
one I mean I definitely noticed that
that that who I'm talking to
seems to be the locus of what I say like
it's in fact it it doesn't make any
sense if you think about well in order
for it's kind of a chicken the egg
problem but you can kind of get the
logic of it of like well like how did
speech arise right it seemed like it
needed to be in response to somebody
calling like a listener if there wasn't
a listener there couldn't be a speaker
right and so it's like yeah and that's
that thing about like listening yeah and
listening because my my speech can have
a listening attentiveness to it right
and then there is a quality I think
oftentimes like in the in some of the
dialogue OSes that we've done like
there's certain moments where you could
just tell that you don't know no one
really knows what they're gonna say but
rather they're kind of like there's this
quality of like you're hearing something
right before they say say what they're
hearing but there's a listening or a
tuning into something right and so
thinking about that is the logos in the
mode
of listening I think really good yeah
good yeah that's I mean that's the
source of the communication is listening
ready right right and there's something
that happens in the logos whereby the
speaking voice in the listening ear can
join become become part of the same
conjunctive identity alright we've
talked about the emergence of the third
factor the production of the Geist that
then turns to govern the relation and
that the identities of the participants
are outsourced they are offloaded to
that emergent entity and I think that
what in some sense what's happening
there is the kind of telescoping
together of the speaking voice the
speaking nine the listening vow that
become coextensive as part of the same
the same entity of logos and that in
becoming coextensive that's when the dia
logos becomes properly autopoietic when
the speaking voice in the listening year
are then conjoined and can auto-tune if
I can use that metaphor right that the
harmony then becomes it becomes a
self-organizing harmony precisely
because we can now listen to ourselves
we can now be heard as though from a
transcendent perspective within the
dynamic that's imminent to us it's the
bridge right it's the symbol on its the
bridge that connects our speech that
connects the logos of speech to the
logos in silence that has yet to bear
its deeper intelligibility yeah yeah but
yeah who are we who like who is
listening who are we speaking to is the
question that it's a it's a it's a
really enigmatic question but it
increasingly in my thinking at least it
takes on it takes on deeper and deeper
proportions yeah it's also kind of
coming back into this like little
dialogues
yeah there's so many levels going on in
what we're reading here right like and I
think the diet the dynamic different
interpretations about what Plato was
doing and who sacrifice was and what all
the dialogues meant the dynamic right
like a spousal of arguments and you know
conflicts and about what the dialogues
are I think kind of speak to this right
but there's so much in the in in alkyl
bodies that Socrates is demonstrating
right while he's saying I don't know
either right that there's so much going
on that's not he can't say it's like
that it's almost like it's almost as if
the dialogue is is necessitating the
conditions I don't know the conditions
that make something beyond what could be
spoken heard but that's a commissioning
to think is likely you know what is it
that can only be known through it not
being able to be said exactly sense of
just kind of reading it this you called
it last time I think I've used this word
a lot it's like I just get the sense of
review walked around this hollow hollow
yeah yeah the irony - yeah I think it's
one again it's a way of understanding
the irony and play the irony is that the
that the that the irony of the Socratic
dialogue and the irony of our speech in
this exact moment is that the deepest
intelligibility the deepest logos of our
speech is absent from our speech but its
absence is precisely what we're
gesturing toward it's the silence
beneath the note of music it's the
silence between the syllables of speech
that is actually the meaning of the
speech it's the meaning of the speech
because the speech has analogized the
presence of that silence just as every
sound contains within it presence of
silence
well right and that's the irony that's
the irony whether cultivated or
uncultivated witting or unwitting that's
the irony of dia logos irony is that the
deepest intelligibility is yes is absent
yeah from the logos of discourse and the
logos of discourse the end the analogic
function of the dialogue is to turn the
logos of discourse into a symbol for its
own insufficiency yeah right for its own
feeble comparison to the logos that's
yet unrevealed yeah it's like that the
illumination right that necessarily like
withdrawals itself so that it can
illuminate what you're seeing it there's
the what we're trying like what these I
think the dialogues and philosophies
trying to illuminate is that
illumination right it's exactly and in
one level you think about it's like this
exalted thing right but actually we're
talking about and know it's what we're
talking about is the thing that like
it's the intelligibility that everything
normal in ordinary and everyday speaks
already but the illumination in which
you find that that that makes it
intelligible necessarily hides in its
intelligibility yes there's this kind of
to kind of see intelligibility itself
which is I think you know it is
I think Plato I think would say I know
platonist talks about that he says the
big is intelligibility right like that's
what being is it's it's yes it's that by
virtue of which everything at all is
anything that is all that is
intelligible right so fricking that's
right that's right
closure it's on one level like what why
is it it's kind of like it's interesting
it's so much about this is why it's so
interesting being a human because
there's so much there's so much
potential that opens up in
as far as I can tell anyways like beings
like globs of stuff whether they be
atoms or waves or any of that kind of
stuff kind of seems like I think I can
get the sense that that doesn't need
that doesn't need you human beings at
all to be there but the sense of being
right at which the being of all those
beings for it to be disclosed seems
innately it's like it seemed it
discloses as human but it does this
trick show right where it's like so it's
so to be human is to be just fucking
stupid at the same time and to be
foolish and to be sure feels that way
right and give me self-deceptive and not
know it and like yeah like it's so much
folly right but there's this way there
that that kind of our ability for
absurdity and blindness is just
absolutely atrocious yeah yeah right yet
but whatever it is that allow that
allows for that level of self-deception
and folly right is also the same
openness that allows for something like
this to happen
ray salutely absolutely because irony
but in that you know that's right
because then when when the irony becomes
a knowing irony rather than an unwitting
irony when the joke becomes possessed
when when we when we become knowingly
possessed of the joke yeah or rather mmm
that's not quite right when we when we
pause when with our knowing we possess
the joke of that irony
instead of being unwittingly possessed
by the joke of the irony yeah right
being it's teller as opposed to being
it's but as it were then our gross
ineptitudes and insufficiencies then
knowledge eyes the more nests huh that
they lack right and then we get into a
region I think that August and cause
learned ignorant right which is that the
appreciation of our ignorant becomes
becomes the knowing gesture that
interrupts that ignorance with genuine
knowing or that turns that ignorance
into a form of genuine knowing knowing
being a process of disclosure the
process of alifair right that that that
the knowing is the active on concealment
does not whatever it is that is
unconcealed yeah yeah and and and for a
number of reasons some of which we've
just said dia logos this particular
format this particular form of being in
relation seems to be a pronunciation 'l
vessel for that learned ignorant in a
way that very very few things are
precisely because of the acute presence
of the listening thou that here's the
ignorance yeah
thou the listening thou here even if
that listening Dow is interiorized and
imagined from a template in the actual
world yeah the listening thou keenly
aware hears ignorant senses ignorance in
a way that the in a way the blathering
speech doesn't right the listening thou
here's this here's the ignorance within
the speech and that's why the conjoining
of the listening thou to the speaking I
in the in this circularly any dialogic
process becomes that mechanism for self
tuning precisely because we can then
hear and begin to appreciate the
ignorance in the logos of our own speech
and and then possess it
rather than being possessed by it yeah
totally
this it's a that's a really interesting
I've never quite caught it like that so
that the the listening now here's here's
the ignorance or the or or in in the
other or in the self the ignorance in
which it she uses itself within the
dialogue
so it's interesting because it's like
what is it that like a it's so
interesting so what is ignorance to the
one that moves towards it in that way it
seems that it apprehends it's like it I
get the sense it's like ignorant isn't
like the absence of knowledge right but
it seems that there's a potential in
ignorance that is something about that
thing that you walk around the hollow
that you walk around right yeah yeah
yeah I see it seems like that's what's
what's realized in the ignorance is like
that the potential I'm drawn towards in
the other right is like a slope yes
right yes yes and it's it's in
completion yeah it's in the incompletion
of logos is sort of what I'm when I
think of ignorance I think of the
incomplete logos and then because what
the listening though does is thou
consents and I use the silence as an
analogy it's an embodied analogy for
this but I find it a very powerful
embodied analogy is that the listening
thou can hear all that is unsaid right
by the logos everything that is not
present everything that is incomplete
yeah becomes becomes more apparent to
the listener
hmm right listener hears everything
not in a sense of precisely identifying
it
but in appreciating its presence the
listener hears all that is not manifest
in the logos of speech
everything the specter of everything
that is outside of its boundaries yeah
so it's like it's that I'm thinking
about that distinction about something
sensing something that's intelligible
but not comprehensible right yeah yeah
well that's right there's this core core
you you use that you use to turn a
phrase in it before we started recording
that I loved which is its intelligible
but inconceivable yes and conceive which
I thought was great
yeah and then in that like but in
especially in the sense that we were
actually talking about it right were
you're talking about like a relationship
and that you were like your
retrospective like we were reflecting on
what had just happened in the
relationship that was really cool and
then there was a lot I watched you start
to conceive of something that was
intelligible that you were responding to
in the musicality right retrospectively
right right you conceived of it right
but yet there was a way that it was
present in an intelligible way in a
musical way in a way that you found
yourself inside out right without
knowing in advance that that's what you
were doing but in retrospect you
realized that you were in relationship
with it right that's right so I'm just
kind of thinking about this sense of
just it never quite thought about
ignorance right in in the way like the
logo yes the logos moves toward in
ignorance
as a in a wick yeah just that it's a job
through it's ignorant that the ignorance
be no it's it's a bit of a it's a bit of
a mind bender it's like just thinking
about it but it's as though the igner
the insufficiency of logos what we
otherwise call it's ignorant yeah
analogizes the morning
that it has not been able to gather
around right do you know what I mean
it's like right yeah yes I and and and I
and I think of that in terms of a Wilf
not willful is not quite right in terms
of a knowing irony I'm just thinking
about so this is I think I experienced
more and more of this when I teach
courses like and there is a sense in
which there's a sense in which we're
talking about this before where I mean
so much of like for example what it what
it means to be learn how to leave
circles has it's so it's it it's got a
it's got to come through through such an
embodied sense right that there's a you
can't like literally give you a
step-by-step play-by-play that's not
learning it right but everyone wants to
understand it like that gets frustrated
as they don't right and then they'll
turn up you know and and then I'll just
be sitting there just having just this
sense of like a knowingness it's not
like it's deeply attuned to them but
also a sense of like just having gone
through this so many times just aware of
the nonlinear like linear in this of it
and it's a process and that like this
all of that's necessary right no matter
how much they're freaking out or
frustrated or related or whatever it is
right and and at some point they'll look
at me and they'll go like you you knew
that all along right or you know like
you know something you're not telling me
it's so interesting as I get what
they're saying good I actually don't
know I don't there's nothing I could
tell them yeah yeah don't be it great
yeah alone right yeah that's right like
I even don't even know what I know
exactly but there's a way of holding it
which i think is but you have a relation
ship with the unknown yes for you there
you have a you have a relationship with
the known unknowns yes that we might
call faith incidentally right you have a
continuity between your ignorant knowing
right and the unknowns right because the
unknowns are present knowingly in your
particular disposition of ignorance yes
right exactly
ignorant is ironic because you're
ignorant is knowing of its insufficiency
and presence presence is it right and
and that's why people are making those
accusations of you because they're right
and then and yet they're not right at
the same time exactly exactly yeah it's
so interesting because I think there is
that thing about it where it's from from
some people's vantage point it looks
like oh he's concealing something or
there's something but actually there
isn't anything there's just a sense of
like yeah we're on the right track
like he just seems like you're aiming in
the right place and the lay up okay so
you know yeah like you know your
eyebrows are melting off but that's I've
never seen that before but I'm sure
that's normal to like just keep the
sense of like an unperturbed baldness
about it's right over time right with me
I've noticed oh right but it isn't
propositional but it is no no and it's
even eyes right so people yes
keeping people people are there they're
there it's not as though you're
concealing something it's simply that
you're appreciating the fact that much
is still concealed yeah totally yes
totally yes absolutely and you have you
have faith in its own concealment
because you've because you've cultivated
it because you've practiced it you've
practiced it's rhythms enough that you
understand the pattern but but it's
again that's your faith that's your
your cunt your the continuity of your
identification with all that remains
concealed from you and from your
students at any given moment in time so
what they're detecting as something you
are withholding is merely something you
understand as withheld right right so
funny I'm just thinking about this I
think is that is it is it Aristotle who
talks about the virtue under all virtues
like that all virtues requires courage
hmm I think that's actually the thing
that I don't I'm not aware of knowing at
that time haha is there's a sense of
like well like is a scary do you not
know what you're doing it's like are you
getting it's like there's a sense in
which I think that is that that is the
disposition or what that's come to is
through truly like myself in situation I
don't know what the hell I'm doing right
like yes yes and then it turns out my
intuition was kind of on but opened up a
whole other world and then I had like
that whole enactment of aiming in the
right place to be courageous at right
now the Kairos of courage doesn't work
yeah right that no that's that's a
really good point that's a really
bringing courage into it in that way I
guess that's because that also that's a
way of distinguishing virtue the virtue
of courage and what we might otherwise
call recklessness right because the
virtuous courage detects the Kairos in
the possibility of
by virtue of action having having that
revelation take place in the throws of
the action taken right so that the
courage the the courageous act has the
courageous act into its that whatever
resources the person currently lacks
whatever knowledge whatever knowing the
person currently lacks will will I want
to say likely but that sounds like it's
a matter of probabilities and that's not
what I mean but it that that that that
that the knowing required to be equal to
the task emerges in the course of
undertaking it yeah and so the courage I
think is is in some sense preceded by
some intuition that yeah that the
ignorant action is nonetheless is
nonetheless a just one right like
because otherwise because otherwise the
you know like if the act of courage is
fruitless then yeah then it's I suppose
then what we're talking about is really
the equilibrate of virtues not just the
virtue into itself I'm thinking
something like you know courage like the
four cardinal virtues together that that
that that only only only concentred only
cohered in relation to one another
yeah do they constitute yeah proper
virtue right his current courage
undertaken without the presence of the
other virtues is tantamount to
foolishness and and I suppose that that
they'll curried like that the courageous
act the courageous ignorant is
undertaken with with a certain for
knowing that the undertaking of the
courageous act will yield yeah the
disclosure of intelligibility required
to make that act
eh-eh-eh-eh will require - to affect
something just or or or or wise you know
and that for knowing in the ignorance
like you're right they something about
like something about that like the
relationship of the logos to ignorant or
it's it's it's not yet having completed
itself that just to bring that back to
it as well of yeah it's interesting like
what is it okay yeah cuz it does seem to
me that it's courageous in that in that
there was something like that I by
virtue of not knowing how to do it not
knowing exactly what it was not having
it really really clear if I had all that
stuff right then it would to be courage
she wouldn't take courage may take
something else to do it right right
exactly but precisely that it it was
some glimmer on the horizon they're like
no okay like maybe that wasn't all the
way on but there's something important
here that we haven't named like we may
have like blowing up eight thousand
pounds and yeah yeah yeah he's
everywhere but like there's something
there's something there that I write it
keep feeling itself that's right yeah
it's interesting and then that's that
shaping of the shaping of the self in
relationship to that right yes on the
disposition that's right yeah that's
right that's right because then the but
the proleptic relationship you then have
in that act to the aspect of self that
that exceeds you then than the that
understanding that and there's a I guess
there's a realism a good reason why why
Tillich associated faith with courage oh
right because
because then yeah because the the act of
faith the courage of the act of faith is
that kind of is the kind of symbolic
consummation of one's own ignorance into
the prolepsis of one's self that is ever
beyond the horizon of his
intelligibility in thus because it's get
on the horizon the metaphorically
hearing makes the most sense because you
can't see it yeah that's right it's that
but you can hear beyond the horizon
right like in fact sound makes it's it
communicates interior t and distance
immediately right right which is an
interesting that you think about you
can't you can't completely fill
acoustical space like there's something
infinite you can be infinitely loud
right exactly exactly exactly so
generous about it its distinctive
exactly exactly which is why which is
why in the space of silence the speech
of logos can be infinitely appreciated
infinitely distributed infinitely
spatialized and so it becomes a way of
conceiving its infinitude in the
unending miss of silence the bottomless
nosov it and the bottomless nosov the
perspective that listens with it
there's something about to be
interesting well go and do a little bit
of reading well since this is what was
but like interesting just kind of like
since like all the stuff that we're
elucidating here just like thinking
about Socrates it just keeps he keeps
being such a symbol for me of on so many
levels how not to know right yeah yeah
well how not to know that's exactly
right exactly right how not to have it
all before you and like yeah but but the
disposition to draw forth that happens
and all the in this spot the other thing
about the dialogue is so interesting as
dialogues are the essence of spontaneity
yeah right it's like it's like they're
just not there this is why I think
people people are really surprised about
like how much you can do in in zoo right
and how much of like a genuine
connection that you could have when
you're not there in person and I think
that that displays the temporal
dimension right that's at play in all of
this right and at that timing the Kairat
ik sense of all those things that like
it actually yeah yeah yeah because the
temporality of the deal logos is
continuous is is continuous with what is
X temporal I think that's what makes it
right I mean that's the guy Ross right
the opening of the Kairos is the is the
is is the is the continuity between
between between time and eternity right
it's that the point of that the point
where they touch is precisely the cot ik
opening and dialogue and that one of the
one of the one of the the excellence of
dialogue goes is such that it
reciprocally opens on that continuity
between the temporal and the X temporal
and allows us to retrieve and recover
our
cells from the X temporal and be
restored Oh be be restored to our
ignorant such that the ignorance is now
known and knowing because of that
chaotic opening so that's what he
communicated when he sits down is's amen
amen
[Laughter]
it's no wonder that Socrates lapses into
those famous trances right those famous
reveries where he just stopped them goes
for like hours right that they described
of him that his interlocutors described
with him that he just stops and listens
thinks he's just he's just hearing yeah
he's just listening Yeah right so it's
just listening slowly the diamond comes
from the South Islands right diamond
comes from within the folds of the
silence as it bespeaks its infinitude
yeah that's what we hear that's what we
hear in our diello gose is the same
diamond right okay I'll stop blathering
let's so should we read no nope well I
have I have a guess
I think it was 584 but I couldn't tell
you where on the page and I'm not even
100% sure that that's right I just know
that I had it bookmarked at that page so
that's a good clue yeah so but I admit
that I've kind of lost the plot a little
bit here okay I'll tell you what you be
Socrates this time and then I'll just
start on them okay let's stir it on at
the top of 584 okay cool and now Kabaddi
says to Socrates of course doesn't it
make both cities doesn't it make both
cities and private citizens agree yes
and isn't it the same with weighing it
is well this agreement you're talking
about what is it what's it about
what skill
is it doesn't the same skill make both a
city and a private citizen agree both
with themselves and with others that
does seem quite likely what is it then
don't give up try your best to tell me I
suppose I mean the sort of friendship
and agreement
you find when a mother and father agree
with a son they love and when a brother
agrees with his brother and a woman
agrees with her husband actually what
I'm wondering what's that what are they
talking about exactly what's the subject
of the conversation if we go back here
well then what about he says well no
what about City what is it that's
present or absent when they're talking
about the knowledge that enables that
enables the earth that enables the
excellence yeah yeah yeah I think that's
that's what's meant by it oh cool well
I'll Spidey's do you think that a
husband is able to agree with his wife
about will working when he doesn't
understand it and she does of course
doubt nor does he have any need to
because that's for a woman to know about
that's right and as a woman able to
agree with our husband about military
tactics without having learned about it
of course that I suppose you'd say
that's for a man to know about I would
so according to your argument some
subjects are women subjects and some are
men's subjects of course
so in these areas at least there's no
agreement between men and women no nor
is there any friendship since friendship
was agreement apparently not so women
are not loved by men insofar as they do
their own work it seems none nor are men
loved by women and so far as they do
there's no so now there are cities well
governed when the different groups each
do their own work but I think they are
Socrates what do you mean
in that case there's no friendship in
cities but we said friendship was
present when cities are well governed
and not otherwise I think it's when each
person does his own work that needs your
friendship results you've just changed
your mind what do you mean now can there
be friendship without agreement
can there be any agreement when some
know about the matter and others don't
there can't possibly but when everyone
does his own work is everyone being just
or unjust just of course so when the
citizens do what is just in the city
there's no friendship between them again
Socrates I think there must be then what
do you mean by this friendship and
agreement that we must be wise and good
advisors in if we're to be good men I
can't figure out what it is or who's got
it according to your argument it seems
that sometimes certain people have it
and sometimes they don't
well Socrates I swear by the gods that I
don't even know what I mean I think all
must have been in an appalling state for
a long time without being aware of it
but don't lose heart if you were 50 when
you realized it that would be hard for
you to cultivate yourself but now you're
just the right age to see it now that
I've seen it Socrates what should I do
about it answer my questions
Alcibiades if you do that then God
willing if we are to trust in my
divination you and I will be in a better
state then we will be if it depends on
my answering well then what does it mean
to cultivate oneself I'm afraid we often
think we're cultivating ourselves when
we're not when does a man do that is he
cultivating himself when he cultivates
what he has I think so
anyway really when does a man cultivate
her care for his feet is that when he's
caring for what belongs to his feet I
don't understand
is there anything is there anything
you'd say belonged to a hand take a ring
for example could it belong anywhere
else on a man but on his finger of
course not similarly a shoe belongs
nowhere but on the feet yes
likewise cloaks and bedclothes belong to
the rest of the body yes so when we
cultivate or care for our shoes are we
caring for our feet I don't really
understand Socrates surely Alcibiades
you talk about proper you talk about
taking proper care of one thing or
another don't you yes I do and when you
make something better you say you're
taking proper care of it yes
what skill is it that makes shoes better
shoe making so shoe making is the skill
by which we take care of our shoes yes
do we use shoe making to take care of
our feet too or do we use the skill that
makes our feet better
the latter isn't the skill that makes
our feet better the same as what makes
the rest of the body better I think so
isn't the skill athletics yes absolutely
so I'll be take care of our feet with
athletics we take care of what belongs
to our feet was to making certainly and
while we take care of our hands with
athletics we take care of what belongs
to our hands with ring making yes and we
and while we cultivate our bodies with
athletics we keep we take
care of what belongs to our bodies with
weaving and other skills that's
absolutely right
so while we cultivate each thing with
one skill we cultivate what belongs to
it with another skill apparently so
and so when you're cultivating what
belongs to you you're not cultivating
yourself not at all for it seems that
cultivating yourself and cultivating
what belongs to you require different
skills apparently well then what sort of
skill could we use to cultivate
ourselves I couldn't say but we've
agreed on this much at least it's a
skill that won't make anything that
belongs to us better but will make us
better you're right now if we don't know
what a shoe was would we have known what
skill makes a shoe better no we couldn't
have nor would we have known what skill
makes a ring better if we didn't know
what a ring was true well then could we
ever know what skill makes us better if
we don't know what we were what didn't
know I'm sorry what we were we couldn't
is it actually such an easy thing to
know oneself was it some simpleton who
inscribed those words on the temple wall
at Delphi or is it difficult and not for
everybody sometimes I think Socrates
that anyone can do it but then sometimes
I think it's extremely difficult but our
societies whether it's easy or not
nevertheless this is the situation we're
in if we know ourselves then we might be
able to know how to cultivate ourselves
but if we don't know ourselves we'll
never know how I agree
tell me how can we find out what itself
is in itself maybe this is the maybe
this is the way to find out what we
ourselves might be maybe it's the only
possible way you're right
hold on by Zeus who are you speaking
with now anybody but me no and I'm
speaking with you yes as Socrates doing
the talking he certainly is and as
Alcibiades doing the listening yes and
isn't Socrates talking with words of
course I suppose you'd say that talking
is the same as using words certainly but
the thing being used and the person
using it they're different aren't they
what do you mean how apropos of our
earlier conversation huh yeah a
shoemaker for example cuts with a knife
and a scraper I think and with other
tools yes he does so it wasn't the
cutter who uses the tools different from
the tools he's cutting with of course
and likewise isn't the lyre player
different from what he's playing with
yes this is what I was just asking
doesn't the user of a thing always seem
to be different from what he's using it
seems so let's think about the shoe
maker again does he cut with his tools
only or does he also cut with his hands
with his hands do so he uses his hands
too yes and doesn't use his eyes too and
shoemaking yes
didn't we agree that the person who uses
something is different from the thing he
uses yes so the shoe maker in the lyre
player are different from the hands and
eyes they use in their work
so it seems doesn't a man use his whole
body to certainly and we agreed that the
user is different from the thing being
used yes so a man is different from his
own body so it
seems than what is a man I don't know
what to say
[Laughter]
[Laughter]
yes you do think apropos you wanted to
go back to the thing that he when you
mention that apropos to what we were
talking about earlier oh just about the
that the techne the use of the use of
instruments yeah in the technique of the
dialogue all right the the use of the
words in the dissociation of the logos
of intelligibility from the words that
are Rick are composing yes the logos
right that the logos of the
intelligibility is also always in excess
of the yeah logos of the discourse and
the speech that's used to contain it
right and support yeah yeah yeah that's
right load up and he's like alright and
what do you think about this isn't it
yeah yeah and the leg Annan and who's
who's doing the speaking who's doing the
listening right Socrates asking him that
yeah yeah right who is it that's doing
the speaking who is it that's doing the
listening it's not the speech that is
doing the speaking yeah yeah right
who is doing the speaking yeah
interesting interesting I have to get
get going for with a client here at
three so I should probably start to it
is just all right sounds good we'll
finish this dialogue someday yeah
absolutely
[Laughter]
see you Chris it's always great to see
you brother thank bye dr. Soong