[Music]
the heart
[Music]
today's topic is idiot compassion and
the devouring mother
first of all idiot compassion is a term
often used in Buddhism it means a kind
of pseudo care you could say which
removes went from real care
it's a posture of care let's say idiot
compassion is care for an abstraction or
for very various pet causes it is to
identify with whatever mm a press group
is in vogue for instance it's a favorite
game especially of the upper classes for
generating a feeling of emotional
solidarity with a particular minority
group the more fringe the better the
solidarity game is a distraction from
actually paying attention to the local
world it is virtual solidarity the
precludes actual involvement
aadya compassion takes us away from the
real world which needs our real presence
in care so how does idiot compassion do
this in multiple ways for instance the
practice of false forgiveness for
someone who hurts us or being nice
rather than forthright diplomatic rather
than brutally honest what an unpleasant
fact needs to be revealed
idiot compassion enables the drunk to
continue drinking the overgrown child to
stay at home idiot compassion has its
origins and cowardliness and
codependence or an inability to say no
to people as well as the hysterical need
to make things okay all the time when
they obviously aren't when we practice
Idiot compassion we trade intelligence
and care for drama and false gestures we
are manipulated through sentimental or
violent images into a state of
bewildering impotence before the horrors
of the world which we feel unable to
address we send our liberal guilt dollar
to faraway places of course there is
nothing wrong with
unless we are unable to practice charity
at home that is all this fake socially
generated care is bolstered by social
media bullying which forces us into
stereotyped attitudes to strangers and
causes idiot compassion is just what
Shakespeare says it is a tale told by an
idiot full of sound and fury signifying
nothing
that is it is compassion practiced by an
unwise or unskilled person with no real
intimate link to his or her object of
compassion and that person ends up doing
more harm than good
idiot compassion also occurs when care
is professionalized to the extreme when
we no longer care for individuals but
only for categories everyone knows what
this kind of bureaucratic care is the
opposite of real care detached from the
nuances and humors of deep human
exchange and everybody knows what it is
like to be treated with benevolence but
not as a human being
conversely we know how helpful and
valuable the real friend is or the
doctor or lawyer or bureaucrat for that
matter who treats us like a real person
sometimes real compassion as opposed to
idiot compassion means don't help people
leave them alone that is unless they
have solicited your help or you are
unable to meet them I too i person to
person if we don't have a merciful
attitude to those in our local world
then what use are we to a homeless
person let alone the suffering
multitudes idiot compassion can also be
described as the devouring mother for
instance the pregnant tiger as opposed
to the tiger mom will attack anyone who
threatened us her precious child any
kind of judgment or criticism of that
over weaned creature is considered taboo
and will be met with blind aggression
the devouring mother protects the weak
and vulnerable but also the codependent
spoiled brat with his unchecked ego add
worst the brat remains attached to the
suckling breast of mother until
adulthood and his robbed of initiation
and the trials of individuation the
little darling is never called to task
for his actions he never leaves the nest
the devouring mother suffocates him with
unconditional love to extend this
analogy to the state the devouring
mother of the state unconsciously hurts
its own citizens by making them
codependent or ideologically possessed
state universities with their so-called
safe spaces also enact the
overprotective mother they rob young
people of the fitness necessary to fight
the demons of the real world
institutions coddled these overgrown
kids to death by monitoring and
surveying all aspects of their learning
including their sexual activity note
this is not a cold libertarian argument
for radical individualism but a plea for
balance we need to go beyond a childish
dependency without an i thou
relationship to the other and Martin
Buber sturms
our care tends to be presumptuous
counterproductive or even dangerous
we might even oppress the ones we
apparently care about through
instrumentalized care or over protection
they're not letting the other just be or
develop or grow or get their hands dirty
or make all the messy and necessary
mistakes required for learning the story
of Prince Siddhartha also known as the
Buddha describes this quite well the
difference between idiot compassion and
the real thing the Buddha was a coddled
spoiled kid in the beginning but after
seeing an old person a sick person a
dead person he was overwhelmed by
and compassion did he leave the palace
and try to save the world yes and no
first he had to save himself and find
some meaning and direction in his life
he knew that he would be a useless clod
until he developed some real wisdom the
Buddha's father on the other hand
practiced idiot compassion sheltering
the Buddha from the real world but the
Buddha was a hero he did not fall victim
to saw ups ism or privilege or unmerited
pleasures similarly if we drown our
young people an idiot compassion they
remain overfed and overstimulated
princes in their cushy basement playing
video games but they will never develop
real character idiot compassion keeps us
comfortable it removes us from real
compassion which as a story of Buddha
illustrates is uncomfortable but is
still boundlessly rich and illuminating
the one who practices idiot compassion
also practices victimology and loves to
define people and themselves especially
as victims they play the game of
identifying and propping up victims
victimhood absolves one from
responsibility and at worst conjures up
the dark power of the mob the greatest
monsters of the world have known this
power of idiot compassion to bend people
to their will and to create a world
defined by oppressors and victims
actually everybody is a victim of
somebody in this perfect age of
victimology one is a victim of God for
being born wearing our victim status is
a badge a form of idiot compassion which
allows a real innocent victims to go
unseen as every psychologist knows the
victim can very quickly become the
persecutor that is because once
victimized we have the perfect motive
for a violent outburst the cycle of
violent accusation and scapegoating
continues to no end
when sylvia path wrote every woman loves
a fascist she was talking about a
certain kind of idiot compassion at its
most primal level she was describing our
most secret taboo the egos love of
dependency and control and a certain
kind of erotic helplessness an
attachment to Big Daddy idiot compassion
has a dark attraction we find a lot of
love in that cesspool of dependency but
we can never grow there we will always
remain a victim of our own idiotic need
for confirmation let us do our best to
leave behind those sickly sweet
dependencies what then is the remedy for
victimology an idiot compassion and
man's search for meaning Viktor Frankl
eloquently wrote about how the inner
choice to act with integrity is possible
even when every kind of external freedom
has been taken away and in the worst of
all circumstances in his case a
concentration camp everything can be
taken from a man but one thing the last
of the human freedoms to choose one's
attitude in any given set of
circumstances to choose one's own way
and that final sentence is a quote from
Viktor Frankl thanks for listening