welcome to today's idea cafe where we
are discussing the third of the five
questions what is my purpose take your
house anywhere and see you in a while an
idea Pepe you're at know and so whoever
would like to start I'm happy always to
started no one else does everyone else
commute for what is my purpose anyone
want to start
thank you sure so she was late she
should stop rolling be I'm sure I can do
that what is my purpose interestingly I
was though suddenly I've been thinking a
lot about in the last 24 hours and you
know I think if I got down to like kind
of the very like fundamental part of it
it's first to not harm and then to try
and engage with the world as wisely as I
can and try and make the world a little
bit better place than when I came into
it and so you know that might be but
like such a huge part of that is
understanding the world and so like
there's all these different components
that go into that of like figuring out
ok what is real what is true so how that
I can know how to take the most
effective action in the world and you
know to be in relationship with other
people because other people are gonna
help me understand the world better
because I don't have the full picture in
my mind and so I have ideas but I need
other people to do that and so like
figuring out how to be in relationship
with other people in order to figure out
how to make the world yeah a little bit
better you know like leave the world a
little bit better
and when I came into it and I guess
that's just you know and I think that's
kind of what I try and take into every
interaction that I have is like can i mi
better and another person a little bit
you know better off before that
interaction yeah it's very impromptu but
but that's kind of what I've been
thinking about in the last 24 hours is
like you know like first not harm and
that's easier said than done and then to
understand the world as best I can
so that I can help make it a little bit
better that's my purpose say during the
beginning part but these questions are
never fully answered it's about you
constantly asking them and they're also
hard questions because your purpose is
not like no not a it's not a simple one
it's a constant one who would like to
share next I'm again willing to go you
were muted sure though wouldn't you say
okay all right I will
Eric do you want to go um yeah I mean I
would be it'd be nice if what Kyra
outlined there was kind of everybody's
sort of grand meta purpose right I mean
I yeah that would be really nice I mean
think I when and when I as an individual
I'm asking myself the question what is
my purpose then I think it's more about
you know what do I particularly bring to
the table in terms of you know leaving
the world a little bit better than it
was when I found it you know what what
what what particularly about me is
suitable to did you know what I mean so
it's about identifying that and I mean I
guess I've always always known that my
Dharma if you like you know what I mean
though that do you know what the word
means do I need to explain it okay
um is is to do with teaching I mean I
was a teacher for the last 15 years of
my career before that I was in the
restaurant business and you know the
reason I rose through ranks and
management was because of my ability to
train staff so I've always kind of had a
both like an impulse and a neck for it
right so I've always known my purpose is
something to do with that now the
greater clarity than that I've not
really cheese but as Kira mentioned it
exists on a multitude of levels
simultaneously right I mean if you ask
my cats what's my purpose my purpose is
to give them food and clean their litter
box for them you know what I mean and
and yeah that is indeed part of my
purpose right and you know and so you
know I live out in the country I've got
chickens I've got land you know part of
my purposes too is to maintain all of
that and be responsible for that and
that kind of thing and so you know it
does exist on multiple levels
simultaneously right down to you know
what is my purpose this morning you know
what I mean and then yeah so yeah it's
it is a big and difficult question it's
an iterative one right it's it's it's
it's one that exists on a multitude of
scales and is always changing and
progressing as you move through your
life so yeah you can't really ask many
bigger questions
Nephi's cool thank you thank you whoever
just tell me I was metre SI then of
course you have a new face who said I'd
tried to attempt your name baby so the
universe didn't want me to be unmuted
for that so clearly I probably got it
wrong
Eric shared Kyra shared so an idea cafe
we all take a turn sharing or you can
pass on answer either question so Shila
would you like to share it I can share
we won't throw Hank into the I'm seating
point yet since I just joined us I'd
have to say I agree with both Eric and
Kyra that it does change and it is
definitely about making a positive
impact in the world but I have to say my
like deepest purpose is really balanced
like finding balance in my life and also
in the world and so part of that for me
is sharing this internal vision I have
of a possible world that we could create
together and kind of helping other
people see that possibility so that's my
so as a creative and an artist that's
kind of money half to do that but it's
really mostly about balance and balance
is really key for me and not
overextending not being overwhelmed by
just game a it's really about finding
balance in the world and having a
positive impact
right I'll go next since no one can go
um my purpose like Shiloh I have a very
big big purpose that I I feel like I've
known since I was a kid I just didn't
know what that purpose was like when I
was a kid it was about you know the
world finding out about Jesus the second
coming of Christ couldn't happen until
everyone had heard and then it took
losing it to find it like losing their
there is no progress there's no making
sense the universe there's no in order
to come to my grand purpose which is
creating a world that works for everyone
and creating the parallel cooperative
system that out competes the tentative
one and even that's not my purpose like
my purpose although I needed that to
truly step in to my purpose my purpose
is to find my Road to joy and my road to
happiness and my road to balance and in
answering these five questions for
myself hoping that other people answer
their five questions and then yeah I
have that vision of a world that works
for everyone but it's like the little
actions to step towards it because I'm
very much here to figure out balance to
figure out surrender and acceptance
because those are the lessons of the
universe keeps there and I think our
purpose is a combination of what comes
easy to us that comes hard to everyone
else so we don't even give ourselves
credit that we're good at it and what is
so hard for us that's easy for other
people like it's the combination of what
we struggle with and what we are good at
and it's just like this is the verb
peace this is everything that you do in
your life so it is about feeding the cat
it is about like being my kids parent
not just a parent but this particular
kid became her parent is very much part
of my purpose and learning what I'm here
to learn by being her parents and having
her as my child meeting all the people
that and coming into the world and
figuring out I know my purpose is partly
to share this that my journey but like
that there is a journey you can follow
there is a a and for me to figure out my
map so I can hopefully help other people
find their map and there even though
that is a very new piece of my purpose
that I'm barely except you know
it's like oh I have to teach them the
path I just want the thing I want the
entity that we're creating together I
want the technology cooperative not how
I became the person to put myself up in
the world but like that's an almost
bigger piece to give so that is a bit of
my purpose and welcome take to your
first you can say what your actual name
is because I'm probably butchering it
you know myself
it is Hank I was my audios okay for you
guys I've been watching a few of your
videos lately and I just got called to
to kind of jump on to this call so I was
sitting in front of the computer setup
completely and I was kind of saying am i
clicking am I going in a Monica but I I
really like the topic of today and the
last one I saw was the one that you guys
did on the 21st and I kind of really
liked Eric C inputs as well so I thought
I had to jump on the call and kind of
talk with you guys in terms of just my
purpose at the moment it's down to one
sentence I want to fundamentally adapt
how people think and that's by
incorporating a certain sense of
mindfulness growth mindsets applying the
right boundaries
self-compassion so there's a few of
those elements and like I was an IT
before this I did about 10 years of IT
and I just found that between teams
people don't really connect as well so I
was a business analyst kind of
connecting up the teams and getting
people to to kind of speak the same
language as to say and there's a lot of
egos that really bashes and I just found
that I'm really good with that so I kind
of left my career in last year and
decided I'm going on this journey and
it's it's been a year now and it's and
it's been intense but I have I think you
know you had I've walked the same Road
in a way if I looked at some of your
videos do you believe
now I don't know if you as much as my
part of my purpose is like helping the
future people who come on board to
struggle less yeah well finding the
balance that like you don't get here
without struggle like I don't know a
single person who's gotten to gain P
who's like oh yeah my childhood check
health check game is totally working for
me and yet I'm here to fix it like it's
like you have to get here through the
 and the muck but hopefully like we
are the pioneers and I mean that in like
not the colonial sense but in like you
come across wilderness that is you right
and you have to like cut it down and
make settlements that's hard
um ignoring the genocide or part of it
like that we are the pioneers we're the
ones that are like paving the way for
the for the next generation and I hope
it's easy for that it's not as lonely
and not as hard but maybe that's just
because it's part of my purpose it's
filling water I'm still a fan of the
meaning that if you're if you're part of
green being and you have experienced an
existential crisis
it's just wait it's coming can I can i
poll the room I'm curious about
something where we all stand sort of
philosophically and so I'm curious do
you its purpose to you a sort of feeling
that you'll always like it's imprinted
in the universe kind of thing you know
like when you find your purpose then
you've aligned perfectly with the
purpose of the universe kind of thing or
is purpose like like the existentialist
say right the universe is pointless and
meaningless which is a wonderful
opportunity for you to write the story
of your own life right and and and so
your purpose is something that you adopt
it's like a sovereignty thing right you
you choose your purpose based on what
you see of the world you adopt a purpose
consciously and and individually where
where do you guys sit on that on that
question okay good question I'm um I'm
yeah I like that question and I'm of the
perspective that you know I am a product
of a whole of
I'm a product of evolution I'm a practic
product of a whole lot of generations
that came before me that I'm a product
of my childhood I am a product of all of
these things I don't make decisions
independent of all of that so learning
how to live in harmony with the universe
like my purpose is figuring out how to
be how to how to how to express
everything that is me within like flow
of the universe because you know sure I
can look around and say oh the world's
supposed to work this way
yeah and then proceed to slam my head
into a wall trying to make it look like
that but if I go with the flow of the
universe then like that's where I find
that you know the balance that was
discussed by Jubilee and Shiloh is like
being in the flow of it and not just
simply like creating a story and saying
this is food this is this is who I'm
supposed to be and this is how I'm gonna
do it and this is what I need to fix
it's looking I mean there is looking
around and figuring out where do I fit
where where do I fit in the flow yeah
for me it's comes I think I chose to be
exactly me before a lot here that I
planned it all out whatever the means
whatever the bigger me is that's in all
of us it's like this is I was exactly in
the family I have to quit I'm supposed
to have every interaction and not in the
life if this because if you don't learn
your lesson the universe just keeps
giving it to you like you just keep
repeating my grade again and again again
and so you get it and so it's not that
everything is orchestrated you don't
have a choice is it like there are
things you're here to learn that you
signed up to learn and now you have to
finish the course like there's no other
option and so there's often this idea of
a like a perfect perfect being we're
trying to be and I don't hold to that
because I think that if there's your
path whenever your path is towards your
purpose and what you're here to do and
what society says verse 3 supposed to
look like and this is supposed to be the
way
that those are two diabolically opposite
it's like I'm trying to be fun something
or I am something and I'm uncovering and
discovering it and but but there's a
balance in that sirs
I'm definitely way too safar on the
other side of leg this is me it takes me
relieve me TMI but that's that's my role
and that's okay and there's people who
are also on the other side it's like a
lot of the conflict to me my sister is
that she's the opposite where it's like
I'm gonna be this CEO female leader and
look like this and they're diabolically
opposed in a way that the you know what
I mean because she's like well why can't
you just change to be better and like
why can't you just be yourself and I
care about the world things and I'm sure
there's balance there but I'm on the far
ends of the I chose this and everyone is
living exactly the life they're supposed
to live but that allows for people
living the opposite life and it's more
allowing for that within my own person I
think for me it's kind of both and I
feel like I came here with a mission of
sorts like I chose ahead of time before
I embodied in this life time and at the
same time I feel like it's constantly my
purpose is constantly being uncovered or
evolving as I go so I'm affected by my
present reality as well as my past my
ancestral past that kind of thing so I
do feel like it's a both/and for me and
trying to live in the moment and hear or
sense the direction it's kind of the
goal for that balance in my life but the
outside world is always kind of taking
me off track and I get overwhelmed then
I have to come back to Center so for me
I think I here for a purpose I think it
was maybe always with me I didn't
discover it until after I had a major
you know trauma in my life and then it
kind of burst open and I discover more
and more of myself which is beautiful I
get rid of that trauma I find more
people like me I don't know how we
didn't answer your question
weirdly mute in silence building natural
silence that comes in it's like um Rob
you did it seems a little weird the
silence what about you Mary I think of
the answers that I've heard I think when
I'm probably closest in alignment with
his Shiloh's the both and kind of thing
III think it's almost actually in a way
a false dichotomy that I've created
there right that yeah is is it yeah in a
sense of meaningless questions so yeah I
I think both and is is probably where I
go yeah you laugh but it is it is a
question that is asked you know I've
been asked a lot through time you know
what I mean and people love themselves
as well yeah I am I mean I'm Jubilee and
I have had this conversation a few times
in a few different rooms I'm personally
not
a believer in you know everything is
unfolding exactly as it should
everything unfolds as it unfolds and
then we retrospectively link things
together and tell ourselves a story
which is meaningful to us yeah that's
that's how I see it but who knows I mean
I'm not saying I'm right I'm just saying
that's how I see it we come from
different standpoints on that so yeah I
guess if I had to choose one of those
positions I guess I would be more in the
existentialist camp but we absolutely
have the power to narrate the story of
our own lives there's not to say we can
in any way control the events of our
lives right but we can be the character
we wish to be you know and you know all
that the Shakespeare Theatre stage and
all the men and women merely players we
can be any player that we want to be
right we can we can absolutely choose to
adopt any thing that we want and so our
values are central to the person that we
mold for ourselves right I mean I I know
we're born with genes and we're born
with certain with you know with
archetypes and certain thing but but
we're to a very large extent a blank
slate when we're born and so we do have
like a massive possibility space open to
us at the table which gradually narrows
and narrows and narrows as we adopt
personas and characteristics and and
start to limit ourselves by telling
ourselves we are a certain way right and
and so that starts to narrow our
possibility space but yeah I think it's
I do think we choose to a very large
degree
not necessarily consciously but how we
narrow that space
sorry we doing something in the kitchen
sets a little bit noisy I'll jump on one
it's a little bit more quiet
that's quite now that there's something
that not brought up in me Eric of like
it was one cup of it so just maybe from
my side what I've learned I mean just
from from the learning part of life is
that you are you go through certain
sense of trauma and it could be it could
be bigger to be small it could be it
could be a elder who maybe develops a
sense of dementia and then you find your
path in life when you try to cure
dementia or move into so we very much
structure our life around that and I and
I do you think that is a quite quite a
powerful force as well and then I do
resonate quite well with the essence of
I've chosen to be here and to bring
something in this life and and and make
change I I think with me I didn't
realize that they is a learning
component to it as well and that's
something that I've discovered much
later you know if there's anything else
I could explain it to you if yeah thank
you
that's saying about what Eric's was
saying it would have brought up with
like if it is a choice right if it's not
necessarily and it probably isn't a
hundred percent predetermined you've got
known saying it now you already chose
before you came here versus like you
have all the choice right now you can
become anything you want to be and put
on any persona um if it truly is a like
I actually pick the no choice like I
it's more empowering for me to know that
everything happens really even if it's
not true then to imagine everyone as a
hundred percent control and they're not
doing it right because they don't look
like this perfect being that isn't
obtainable and is into my world you
wanting to be obtained because I think
our purpose is a combination of our our
shadow and our light our challenges and
our
talans and so if it's that that is the
divert some young I'm seeking the world
and I think it solves everything
then dictating what that diverse that
like okay it's only allowed to be so
diverse it's only allowed to be that
like whatever I'm given whatever I have
here is exactly what's supposed to be
and then I can go from that space to do
my biggest impact it's an easy or truth
to live from for me because I can't be
my sister like I'm tried like I'm trying
to do that part and it kept breaking
down if it works for you it's easier
right if you can be a charismatic
speaker and be a type-a personality then
there's something about that that makes
life easier but then you don't get the
challenges that bring you to your actual
purpose and so that's it's like do you
create your purpose or does it does it
unfold in you and if you think you
create it you might that can be it
unfolding so it's it's it is like it's
mmm I'm sorry to interrupt but the
really interesting question as well is
even if you are consciously choosing
exactly who you're going to be on your
journey through life but then the
question then becomes where do the
proclivities on which you base your
choice why do you gravitate towards
music rather than to the chemistry or
whatever it might be right and so you
know there then you are still guided by
something mysterious even if you are
really consciously taking control of and
mapping out your life the way you map it
out and the things you map it out
towards those those choices are guided
by something something mysterious and
that you were probably born with in some
fashion or another right so it is it is
both and it's a it's a yeah it's it's an
unfolding and the pushing yourself
towards and submitting to and allowing
to happen all at the same time kind of
thing I I can agree with a lot of what
I've heard and you know I've I have been
through periods in my life when I you
know subscribe to the I signed up for
everything or signed up for everything I
you know before I came here I don't know
where I stand with that right at the
moment but
as you were talking one of the things
that came up is like I can't look there
are things I can do to become like
become anything I want but you know one
of my teachers he would say he's like if
I wanted to I could learn how to become
a linebacker but it's not really in my
nature to be a linebacker or it's not
you know or it's not in my nature to be
a ballerina the you know that you know
so I could I could decide to do
something and there you know like it for
me it doesn't feel like it's in my
nature to like to be a loud boisterous
like someone who's like up in you know
like well not in my nature to be
particularly funny either so like I'm
not necessarily gonna become a stand-up
comic because I I don't you know I tend
to have a very a sense of humor that
doesn't work for very many people most
people don't find it funny I mean I
agree you have no it's not in your
nature to be a linebacker and so but
then why would you pursue being a
Lineback that's that's the question I
would then have to ask you right what
what if it's not in your nature why
would you be drawn to it that's kind of
I think is what a guide to what our
nature is is that which we are drawn to
right does that make sense yeah yeah one
of the one of the thoughts that came up
for me was I have a friend he's a male
friend he's quite you know someone who's
who's quite small in stature and he was
drawn towards football in high school
and like ended up causing his body a lot
of damage because he felt like that was
the only way to prove that he was a like
he was drawn to it as a to prove
something yeah so extrinsically drawn
rather than intrinsically drawn right
and I love that distinction of the
extrinsic Lee versus intrinsically like
I think so many people are drawn to
things extrinsic Lee like I there's a
lot of things that I have been pulled to
not because they were something that I
was I was drawn towards but because I
had this voice in me I had this thing in
me saying I should do this and I didn't
know that I was being driven by that
voice this takes is so nicely back to
the actual question right of what is my
purpose because discovering what your
purpose is not the purposes that the
world would have you undertake right but
your purpose that's that's that's a huge
part of it right yeah no absolutely it's
like the intrinsic versus extrinsic
RZA's extrinsic I can't say the other
word at the moment motivation is like
even if it's intrinsic in you if it's
something that is normally externally
motivated you get put in with everybody
else right if your calling is to be a
doctor and you're a doctor for an
intrinsic I want to heal people and and
yet all the people you're in med school
with and doctors with are the ones that
are there because their parents said
they were good at science and this is
what they do you're not gonna stand out
as a healer in that because it's what is
extrinsically there and it's the same
with like the linebacker when I wrote
down like if it was just natural that we
all had to go to into gymnastics and
really young age we would get the best
gymnasts out of it but that doesn't mean
you're gonna be the best gymnast
like we're gonna get the best gold medal
athletes but it doesn't mean that we're
all meant to be gymnast even if it's
something that society says no no this
is just what we did was like everyone
goes into this and figuring those pieces
of society oh am I doing this because
society wants me to do it or because
it's gonna bring power and privilege or
or and money or am i doing it because
this is truly what I want to do and
that's my point of like society's path
versus your own if they lead in the same
direction it's not a problem if they
lead in opposite directions if it's
doctor or you know shaman like you have
to choose and so it's like it's it's
it's on and always shoot your internal
one even if society is saying like
why would you become a shaman there's no
anything in this instead of this one and
so the intrinsic versus extrinsic is
huge it is also incredibly difficult
sometimes to disentangle the external
world's expectations of you from your
own expectations and wishes for yourself
right there they're they're deeply
intertwined been exposed to it all for a
long time well it struck me it's an
interesting example do you believe you
know a doctor and a shaman because
they're both healers thought that was
just an interesting one but yeah that
that thing about having you know it's
like am I am I doing something am i
doing something because it's what I'm
supposed to do person versus something
that is what I want to do and there's
also the am I doing something because
it's what's rewarded by the culture I
live in versus it being something that I
want when those two things are together
like for my husband he has you know he
is deeply intrinsically motivated to do
something that is very highly rewarded
by our culture and so like that's
something that like and it's been very
frustrating for me at times because like
when we when we first got together I you
know he's an engineer and I was an
engineer at the time and he just
naturally like was was drawn towards
solving all those problems and studying
more and I wasn't I went into it because
it was a suggestion because I was good
at it and so I couldn't no matter how
hard I tried motivate myself to do it
and I thought that was that meant there
was something wrong with me because like
I didn't I couldn't distinguish the fact
that it was someone else's purpose
teal swans one of the people that I've
enjoyed listening to and not very gamy
but very okay and one of the things that
that she talks about Mike one of the
conditions I have which is chronic
fatigue her spiritual understanding of
it is that it's a manifestation in your
body
I'm chronically needing to do what you
don't want to do and there was even
though I liked yours after I don't think
I would have been able to handle that
when I first got diagnosed but now I'm
like oh yeah I know that that resonates
like I love it yeah because it's like
what society says you have to do this
right to be a mom you have to do X Y & Z
to be a daughter you have to do X Y & Z
and if it's not internally motivated
it's like there's no energy there for it
and when you're as a woman especially
there's so much of that put on you that
when you don't have any internal
guidance you don't know you're even
supposed to listen to your internal
guide it's like this is why I think
universe gave me it so I had to listen
to my internal goddess there was no less
things outside like until you figure out
your internal and what you're here to do
and what will have energy for don't
spend energy and all that it's a weird
balance to try and fight for me hanging
by what is what is here that is mine to
do what is my purpose what is that
letting go of all the I don't want
to do in a society that very much
propagates on of course you have to do
everything you don't want to do that's
system that's life I think we all have
to do all day all of these I have to
agree with everything I'm hearing just
sounds great and resonates what I what I
think is game a has been very male
dominant male
I don't know set up for that external
motivation and I think that game be or
where we're moving towards you can call
it whatever is mark feminine so I think
we need a balance in both of those
external edge and internal systems that
value being driven in either/or way
because currently most systems or the
way that we raise society children from
the bottom all the way up is externally
driven and so of course we can't figure
out is that my mind or society's mind
that's telling me I should do X Y & Z I
feel like that's why it's so important
for us to
you be creating this new system new way
of being a new way to value our internal
and what drives us internally because I
think that they're both valid and I
think that both men and women need both
parts of this within us to really
fulfill a third largest purpose our best
self in the world needs to have the
understanding of that internal
motivation and also have external agent
I really like that silo and that brought
up something I'm really interested in
John Verve a key and he has a language
around it of the that as a culture we've
confused something having mode versus
being mode and I wouldn't necessarily
say one is masculine once feminine is
just one two different modes of being
and like we've confused being mature
with having a car payment like because I
have a car car payment I'm mature versus
being a mature person and he gives a
couple more examples of that but it's
like yeah it's getting getting back to
kind of okay this difference between
like I have to have a career to be wise
like no like just because somebody has a
career does not mean they're wise by any
stretch of the imagination and so how do
we like and so that's like how do I
recognize when I'm in having mode versus
like being mode let's I just want to
invite Hank thanks I'm listening a lot
of interesting things and I kind of just
taking notes but there's a there's a few
things that jump out at me and a lot of
the time when you look at the the my
dad's a personality and I always kind of
looked up at him and try to follow in
his footsteps the only thing is he is
thirty forty years older than I am and I
always compare back to it so I kind of
struggle with that same internal dynamic
that Jubilee that you mentioned in the
beginning but also what I found is that
he he had a very strong push for me to
genie certain sports and if you look at
TV and adverts yeah you need the new
stick or the new hockey ball or that and
then you'll play ten times better which
then a lot of the time we think a lot of
scrap because I would let's say play
crickets and I say but I'm not good at
it so maybe I need a bat so cricket bad
to look good in a certain way which very
much do the external environment and I
never really enjoyed it myself where I'm
more artistic I like yoga and I did
karate when I was younger and I I was
added a little bit of dancing and a lot
of kids really got into my character at
that point and I and I and I really
stopped doing a lot of that which talks
a little bit to clear us that sense of
shoes and want so what do I want to do
but a lot of people sometimes choose for
you by littling or not allowing you to
really step into that so I think that
there is a component of society that
comes in to say yes you as you are
allowed to do this or that and I think
we do develop some certain props one
might be if I want to talk to someone on
the street I put on sunglasses so it
allows me to be there but not be there
and I can actually walk or I can put up
a headset or something or so or maybe
have a cigarette and I can stand in the
corner in a busy being buzzy remove and
I can smoke my cigarettes and people
would think the sky is very insightful
and he's a deep thinker rather than
saying oh cheesy he's a little bit
awkward at this party and we actually
shouldn't invite him again it's creating
those and and we actually created them
as we go and and it and it happens but
other time with a certain break that
happens within our life like we going
through the coronavirus everyone staying
at home and now we're connecting
via Skype resume or in a different way
going forward we all decided to go ahead
in this way so it's it's very much in
our own lives as well you were
mentioning in terms of we're always
striving towards doing something but I
think I wanted to follow my dad in his
footsteps and I and I keep on failing
consistently and it's very much you get
to insert an existential crisis that
kind of says no this is definitely not
my other way I'm going to and then you
and I think it's sometimes a bit of a
click as well do you say finding that
certain sense of wow this is really neat
and this is really what I want to do and
this is my my path but I I I also think
that there's a certain sense they call
it a divine timing that it will come
across your path it's and you might
suffer for it until that point but being
open to you that makes that time a
little bit shorter as well and I and I
do you think balances are quite
important one internal balance in terms
of what are Qatar am I actually playing
into do I have an internal sense of
balance of am i externally validated am
i internally validating what I'm
actually getting from this this internal
sense of this joy mechanism of I enjoy
what I'm doing and this is this is
really resonating with me so I I think
some way you find your place but it's a
it's a lot of trial and error yeah yeah
it's a lot of introspection and honesty
with self as well right well you were
saying about the following in your
father's footsteps thing it's a it
wasn't for me it wasn't my father as my
mother was the sort of you know the big
figure in my in my childhood that I had
that I had to break free from
psychologically I mean I'm a lot older
than you right so this is that this is a
long time ago for me but it is Jordan
Peterson talks really well about this I
I know that he antagonizes a lot of
women in particular but I think he
speaks really well
this about the death and rebirth that
you know when you do change paths in
your life it is a form of dying and
putting yourself back together again in
a new form right and that it's really so
there's the part of you that dies and
then there's the new you which is reborn
but then there's another part of you
which watches the death and the rebirth
right and it's and it's that part you
need to remember that part right that's
that's what carries you across the
valley you know what I mean as it is
that bit of you yeah and I think we
don't really get introduced to that but
until you go through a few crisis in
your life I kind of get to the point
where you can trust those elements hmm
well it's usually crisis that brings
about transformation is its
transformations that you know that
requires the death and the rebirth but
transformation is almost always prompted
by crisis and so it's easy to conflate
the two we need crisis to motivate us to
change right we don't change when things
when everything's rosy or everything's
kind of okay we you know we're not
motivated to to make the to make the
difficult changes the unknown is always
scary right even if you know it's gonna
be better it's still scary
because it's unknown I might disagree
with you Eric that that crisis is needed
[Laughter]
we have lost connection to ret to rites
of passage and I wonder would would
crises be as not saying that crises
aren't you know aren't an important you
know an important crucible but if we had
rites of passage would that necessarily
necessitate that we had to have the
crises we would have far fewer crises if
we had proper rites of passage
absolutely we would experience far fewer
psychological crises absolutely I
couldn't agree more if I know in my own
life when I've some of the crises I have
encountered have been made up crises
like have been like I'm supposed to find
this a crisis so I'm turning it into a
crisis as opposed to it actually off
being a process thanks you know you
break up with something and I'm
heartbroken I need to eat pints of ice
cream and you're like actually I'm good
actually
I feel better than when I was in the
relationship like looking for the
internal truth as opposed to the
external what this should look like and
just being it like like okay am I trying
to be something or my actually beingness
and what I got out of your sharing hang
can like looking up to people and that
piece of needing to be good at something
to trying it is huge in our society
there's a ton of things that aren't mine
cuz I'm not good at them sports I also
don't enjoy them but there's ones that I
do enjoy that I probably would do if it
was okay to fail at them and it is it is
okay to fail I'm giving myself
permission like that need to yoga fail
and also the internal external part you
have a purpose truly your essential
purpose that requires an external
motivation so like my kid future who she
is in this world it's like she is an
artist
absolutely but she's like I'm a singer
and dancer and I'm a YouTube star I'm
like you have three subscribers I'm
getting the singing right you guys I
can't give you a fans I can't give you
the ability if you need fans in order to
be a celebrity can it be your purpose
right I could be your purpose singing
could be your purpose if it can it be
your purpose to actually need the fans
like like to be a gold medal athlete can
I do that without other people right you
can't do that without a bunch of people
to compete with who are left and you
might be the last time like it's and it
happens also in the not-for-profit
sector like it's likely you ask me what
their purpose it's like to feed the
starving children it's like okay well
what if we're having children
what if we actually fixed that the
external needs to be broken so that you
can fix it
isn't that your purpose cuz yeah I feel
that Figaro's our purpose if it's fixed
by someone else it's like there's some
other need there that person very
interesting question I like that so so
what would
what would be your broader purpose in
the in the children and their that I
want to push back a little bit on the
gold medal thing in a second but before
I do the children the saving starving
children example that you gave if there
are no starving children so the kind of
person that would be driven in this
world where there are starving children
to go and help those starving children
what kind of thing in a world where
there were no starving children what
kind of thing would that sort of
personality do you think be drawn to
that's a really good question I think
it's why are you helping the starving
children is it because you don't want
children to suffer maybe you go into
childcare baby you know what I mean is
it because you want prestige but I mean
like what is the thing you're seeking
here it's like what are you seeking here
if you need adoring fans we can't if
there's only so many adoring fans to go
around one is for your voice to be heard
not just sing you know not you like
nearly anyone can have but you can't
necessarily have 40,000 people watching
you do it unless you're good enough and
that's like that everyone can do
something but only then good enough
people are gonna get the fans and the
accolades and that but if that is one
reason for doing it in the first place
it hurts the very purpose like yeah this
is a really good example of something
you don't have to be good at to really
enjoy having really really excellent
example can I just push back a little
bit on the Sports example though on the
gold medal thing so you know if your
purpose is running or high jump or
whatever it might be right you just love
doing it the whole structure of you know
games and Olympic Games and gold medals
and all of that kind of thing I think if
it's it's not contradictory right your
purpose was never to win a gold medal
your purpose was to run but the gold
medal is by seat by chasing after that
gold medal you are going to be running
against the best other runners that will
push you on to be a the best runner you
could possibly be because only in direct
competition especially in things like
that right only in direct competition
with others can you really push yourself
to your maximum maximum heights and so I
think that they can complement each
other as the point
making you know the reward system can be
actually a really healthy nurturing
thing that furthers everybody's interest
it doesn't have to be an elitist kind of
vibe - it doesn't have to be worthy
athlete you're the person who's running
you happen to be in the 2000 Olympics
where there happens to be those athletes
there would you rather know you gave a
hundred and ten percent you did your
internal best at what you did but you
only got silver or bronze versus I mean
I used to play it on a bat Benson right
and and and the the matches that I
remember the best here are the ones I
remember most fondly a matches that I
lost right there but but but they were
just great games you know they would
they were just brilliant and I play
better than I've ever played and that
that's what that's what stays with you
that's the value so yeah it's it's all
about the lens through which you see it
I think it's not it's not you know it's
not the it's it's the lens and it's how
its use and it is it's the insurer cuz
if you're an athlete who's there to
compete and you want to compete against
the best and you felt like you showed up
or didn't show up you're gonna learn
their lessons whereas if you're there to
be the gold medal like - for the
external motivation I imagine even
winning the gold you feel like the
second after because you've got like
external goals don't necessarily that's
the problem with equation right when you
get the thing now that's one of the one
of the things that Jordan Peterson talks
about is like you know it's like you you
you even thing and then you know it's
then you are end up having you know that
letdown and so like coming up with a
goal that is so bit you know so big that
you know you never there there might be
little bit you know there might be
little littler smaller goals within that
larger goal but that larger goal is
so big you'll never you know it's like
you can always always be going after it
but going back to that wait about you
know the saving the children like ha you
know there's a lot of conversation that
happens around like are you an ally for
a particular oppressed group and is that
you know are you are you are you doing
that because you have the need to rescue
or to be you know they're you know that
part of that victim hero villain
triangle of like I need to be the hero
or I need to be you know for a lot of
people its I want to be the hero I want
to be seen as someone who is you know
helped you know I I want it I'm doing it
because I want to be seen as this I want
to be seen as Mother Teresa
like I am identified as wanting you know
I'm I'm striving towards looking like a
particular thing versus striving towards
being a being something yeah and I think
that would go back to that thing about
having it's like having people direction
rather than the destination having
people see me in a particular way versus
being a particular way there's a test
that you can do that that looks at your
your preferred way of going about life
what is your natural inclination it's
called the cane I test and it and it
breaks your your mind up into you 3
elements it looks at your your left in
your right brain and then it looks at
your prefrontal cortex in your when you
how much behind it and it does a test in
terms of where you lie there but at a
very high level you have people who they
ask the full following questions people
who ask what is very much focused on
what he wants
how do you want to approach that
the there is a very component that's
connected to people who is connected to
you the who so who is part of this who
does what then we have the how so people
want to put structure around things and
then the last one is people ask why why
are we doing this so what is the
application to this and they they very
much look into the future and what I
think is it's quite difficult to you I
think by doing tests like that you kind
of find out what is that natural
inclination within you rather than
looking at other people and trying to
repeat a success I was a thing in a way
that what are you and what do you do for
fun when no one else watching that could
most probably get you very much closer
to that sense of purpose
the only challenge that we have with
life is that some things that we like
doing are paid in some things that we
that we love doing might not be paid and
it's and as that challenge that that
brings it in sometimes I like that I
think I'm probably a wide person but I
wanted to go back to what here I was
saying about saving the children and how
there are a lot of people that maybe are
looking to get that external recognition
but I think also a lot of people would
choose something because I think a lot
of humanity wants to be of service they
want to find ways to be a support in
whatever way they can and that's just
maybe the closest thing to their heart
so they're gonna follow whichever
direction is available and I think
that's actually part of our game be is
really needing to recognize the value in
people being of service and that
everybody can be and not that you're
either just that or you're just
something else I think that we all have
a part of
that want to be of service and sometimes
that's only we can only find a way is
through somebody else that's broken like
oh then I can show you how I don't think
they necessarily need to get the pat on
the back but a lot of people I can do
because our systems are set up that you
have to get that external reward I do
think that that reward also reflects on
your on your personal on your personal
essence in a way who wants to once you
talk to you physically if someone goes I
love you I love you you're amazing you
you have a certain sense of longevity
that comes with it because you you're
doing the right thing and you feel
wanted and needed but I do think it's it
also comes back to that certain sense of
being in that center of your purpose and
if people praise you around that it's it
just it's just so much more worth doing
I know we're almost out of time but
something that came up the very
beginning when Eric was talking about
your purpose I guess when you have heart
you come into the world with it or are
you discovering it all the time and
sometimes you like come across something
and then later you look back and go oh
that was meant to be or whatever that's
I'm not explaining it very well but I
didn't want to say that as an artist
some of like a lot of times I'm focused
I have a goal I'm trying to accomplish
certain things and that's part of
business part of being in the world but
also I found when I totally let go and
I'm not like trying to control anything
and I'm just exploring things come
through and it's very surprising and
then maybe a year two years three years
down the road I'll be working on like
other parts of my purpose my vision that
I'm trying to share and I'll realize oh
my gosh I made all of those things
explaining exactly this three years
later so it's pretty I don't know
and I think we can all understand think
there's a know when I first thought
about it but it wasn't ready I wasn't
ready four years ago like every time it
comes back around it's a different level
and a different flavor yeah I think Jim
Carrey he did a lot of artwork as well
and he shared that with his psychologist
and and there was more answers within
his art than there was actually how he
could explain it so and it all came out
so yeah there's the simpler up on the
screen but we only have three minutes
left he it's fairly well known Venn
diagram with four it's called ACOG II
think it's a Japanese word and it's
where what you love what the world needs
what you're good at and what you can be
paid for all the line and then it gives
you what you're missing if you don't
have those four and I'm good I'm good
with getting rid of one of those one of
those is completely useless to the world
which is like that you need to get paid
for it
and it's if you if what you're missing
when you can't pay for it it's it says
so when you just can't be paid for it
you have excitement you have a delight
and fullness but not wealth we can
figure out wealth together like we can
figure out how we need our food on the
table a roof over our heads and then
have everyone doing what they're good at
what they love the world needs without
them needing to get paid for it because
some of us don't have one that we can
get paid for like it's kind of like the
one that you just throw in there to make
the economics work as opposed to to find
what your purpose is and how you you
bring it to the world and it is kind of
something where you either solve it
collectively or as an individual and
then you have people who can get paid
for their service running making all the
rules so the ones getting paid for their
service whereas those of us who can't
necessarily get paid for a service or
getting paid for it actually undoes it
that's like I don't know why that's part
of the for like I'm like I get it I
understand it at the same time it's the
one that like we like I'm good with not
being wealthy and having a deep sense of
being like the other four are you have a
sense you
you see I cannot see money as a
capacitor so the ability to support you
let's say you're doing what you you like
doing but you maybe break your leg or
you just want to take a break or you
want to so that carries you in a way and
obviously you need to be able to work
with money to do that and I think money
also is a nice added indicator to to
allow people to do things that they
don't like doing so there's a lot of
work that people hate doing I've yet to
find a single job that there is nobody
who likes doing he's my go-to to
cleaning toilets and first person I told
that to it wasn't like I liked it
alright good I don't there is a thing I
do think it's not a silly imbalance
there are necessarily enough people who
like doing the class that work around it
one but there's enough people when we
take away that pristine of society that
you look up to engineers and down on
people who clean toilets
you know like there's that that's a way
you actually have a lot of people who we
do the work like right now would have
good rotting in the fields not people
willing to take it down but there are
people who are willing to take it down
for free because it's soon um as a job
and not volunteer where and I get that
I'm not gonna go work for a
multi-million dollar company not get
paid for it but at the same time it's
like that's the work for those other
people who don't get paid well it's like
they work between if as a high esteem
and we don't have the workers and it's
like so we volunteer and get food or you
don't and it's gonna rot you feel this
as a bird or outside to you I believe I
do think that the environment also plays
into it so if I would only clean to
elect or work in the field I'll be
exposed to a lot of Sun which might
cause cancer or and and that does affect
me on a on a mental level so I can't
really participate on a global level as
others would or some people say up but
that's dirty I don't want to associate
with that so you still have that thing
that by coming to play
which is kind of like V and would be
good if we could throw that away as long
with Li with the many elements of that
as well well the the the the thing is to
remove and remove the coercive element
that currently exists right because at
the moment the person cleaning the
toilets at the person picking the fruit
does not have the option to walk away
from that four bucks an hour or whatever
it is they get paid right if they had
the option to walk away if they know if
their lives did not depend on them doing
this shitty job four bucks an hour and
they could walk away for it then the
market would find an actual price at
which people were willing to do this
work without being coerced into it in
any way right and so in picking fruit
you know it might be twenty or thirty
bucks an hour because that's what that's
what you've got to pay people to do it
when they don't have to do it but are
the reasons you know similarly with
cleaning toilets you know that so a lot
of people just it will clean our
own so yeah the market works if
everybody is free to you know it's
completely freely engaging in the
transactions that they choose to engage
in I mean I think if there's money is to
take away that coercion thing sorry all
right next week for the idea Cafe same
time same channel I will be talking
about what do I need so what are the
needs we need to be able to have our
purpose we've already talked about Who
am I where my people what it's my
purpose what do I need and then the week
after we'll be talking about what am I
willing what am I ready to let go of and
with those five questions I think that's
my purpose is answering them for me and
realizing that it's also my purpose to
bring them to the world in some way have
not figured out how yet
besides three things so join us next
week and everyone stick around it's
gonna say goodbye to YouTube just kind