welcome to voice cub and to the second
part of our mini-series with a
psychedelic philosopher Peter just dead
age I do recommend listening to the
first part but fill this conversation
does stand on its own without that
background but allow me just a few
minutes to introduce things in the first
part we covered some core aspects of
Peters approach to philosophy and thus
cast our psychedelic experience might be
brought to bear on such an approach we
also discussed Bergson's notion of
duration one of those less common
concepts which i think is sensually
important to grapple with we now pick up
the conversation at the close of a
discussion about the relationship
between psychedelic experience and death
Loosli the idea was something like that
psychedelics perhaps offer an insight
into what it is to experience a state in
which your ordinary sense of self is at
least significantly diminished where
such a state might be speculatively
considered analogous to a metaphorical
and perhaps other than just metaphorical
sense of death now this conversation
begins with my transitioning so the link
between this psychedelic state and the
mystical or religious experience but
moreover to the process which seems to
characterize the journey to and from
such a domain the idea I lay out in this
opening is largely central to what
follows we touch on Nietzsche Bergson
Jung Chopin Hauer Whitehead Jordan
Peterson myth Tilos the relation between
left and right and Peters own meta
ethical view namely uh nihilism a
position which denies the existence of
objective values while preserving the
notion of subjective values to this I
try to promote two peter view grounded
on an affirmation of life construed as a
transformative adaptive harmonizing
process
there are of course many questions but a
speculative one might be can
psychedelics experience allowed the
traversal between certain experiential
levels aiding the apprehension of
metaphysical Tilos or purpose hey it's
just a good old chat pizza's well worth
listening to people often talk about
psychedelics as well as and they
commonly do frequently do induce
so-called mystical experiences which
might be synonymously termed with
religious experiences depending on what
you think about it where in some sense
you have what we've spoken about in
death there hmm
sort of seems to be lending itself to
talking about the kind of dissolution in
a sense that the total fragmentation
back into the potential from which
everything comes notions of God are
often contrasted with that where God is
understood as to be that which is fully
actual when everything brought together
somehow perfect and totally actualized
and everywhere and everything and so
people often have this other rapturous
experience - after the death occurs they
are somehow more real than they've ever
been before and I don't know if I can
relate to that precisely I believe I've
certainly held what I can only term a
sort of communion with this source of
divinity and it felt very much at the
time as a fragment heroine as though I
had gone to a place I I bore out a
fragmentary relation very experienced in
a very experientially real way to this
other nurse that became one with me so
unless it hairiness orison that's known
as I think becoming one with God if you
call it good and so-and-so I never
became totally one with it I it was it
was though I it was though in the moment
of arriving at it I realized that the
the next movement then was to was to
return it was to return back as it
happened to the group dynamic that I was
a part of there were other people around
me at the time and there were all sorts
of
you know not disputes exactly going on
there but all people at various
different stages in life and in the
journey of the night and doing whatever
they were and and it seemed like part of
the role then became one of attempting
to find harmony again with the group so
I mention this idea to you before as
well and that and that's something like
this idea that grips me is that is that
life itself to the extent that it is
vital and living and updating and
respond responding appropriately to
anomaly and not over fixing itself it
must participate in a sort of
harmonizing process that can interact
with what is beyond it and then bring
back what is beyond it to adapt itself
but that it can never attain that final
place of perfection or utopia because to
do so lose its movement fundamentally
and to bring it back to the Bergson if
you attain fixation you lose movement
and so to the extent that we continue to
be for life and have it and have it be
on the cusp of what is real and moving
the most we can aim for and what we
should aim for ethically is the
harmonization of the updating of
knowledge structures and not their final
resting place in the way that makes me
think of Schopenhauer more than books on
even because you name for him there's
this ultimate will which is at the
center of all things and fundamentally
that's one thing but in each individual
it's differentiated as such this is why
he's known as pessimist ultimately
really because the will is a striving
constant striving hmm for him to life
for Nietzsche to power but for shop now
once you've attained something it sort
of reduces to ash to dust and you don't
care about it anyway if you don't attend
what you need it's frustration and if
you if you lose any higher goals
it ends in boredom and that's life love
for the successive dance where is that
in Chopin Hauer
how can he retain a love for music then
well because ah because for shopping our
music takes one or what you see art
takes one away from the will it's a it's
a pacifying of the will so that's
interesting partly based on camps notion
of aesthetics from the critic of
judgment but how do you feel about that
yeah
it's it's it's very interesting I mean
Nietzsche disagrees with it he says that
I'm actually real art you know good art
a firm's life
yeah just one into life as a tonic to
life and power Walker's life is power
for him but for shoppin hour yet it
takes away the will another way of doing
that is the Eastern forms of religion
you know they tried to suppress the will
he argues but art is another form it
takes one away from the will because one
contemplates the pure forms and he gets
play tonic here he's got a version of
platonism hmm which is sure
consciousness without will so for
chopping our the wills one thing but
consciousness is another thing
consciousness acts in the service
ultimately of the will that's why he
doesn't believe in free will right
because the will is determined
determines one's actions consciousness
does not determine one's actions but
with art one can as it were elevate
oneself away from the will of practical
needs one enters this eternal state of
fixation on eternal ideas you know the
Platonic forms dangerous can be there's
a paper to be written here about the
relationship between that thought and
psychedelics again because as you
probably know most often in my
experience when one takes psychedelics
once sort of practical will subsides it
goes away you know I mean it's very
difficult to move one's body you know
think you think for example yeah I need
to need to move to that to chair over
there to to get that tea or something
like this but your body doesn't and says
now you know it doesn't respond you know
you will somehow and actually most of
the case time you don't even K just
think you want that tea for like your
aesthetic reasons right not is you're
thirsty or for caffeine or whatever so
here's the interesting thing so it seems
like the real loss of practical will
with psychedelics at the same time a
huge flourishing of consciousness
because suddenly consciousness is not in
the service of the practical will this
is where ill again links to Bergson so
there's a huge flourishing of
consciousness that's the psychedelic
experience and then it seems to me that
well certainly I've had these
experiences now and again of ultimate
forms of beauty
you know like him even seemingly
artificial so not just natural forms you
know plants what not flowers but also
you know spaceships yeah sounds crazy
but I've seen the most beautiful
spaceship you know it looks like it's
made by aliens whatever but it has a
kind of
you know it's sort of surreal beauty and
at one point it just boom it's suddenly
that's perfection mm-hmm and it goes
goes away again also from Whitehead I
don't really believe in the dichotomy
between Natan nature and the artificial
anyway because we are part of nature
right and our cars and our pollution are
thus part of nature as well you know
like a bird's nest as part of nature so
once you sort of break down that organic
inorganic dichotomy and you you really
you know start to see reality in a sort
of non conceptual way yes and you can
appreciate the beauty in anything yes
not just a forest or a flower or whatnot
so yeah interestingly can can
psychedelics break down the will and
thus bring one to a tranquil state of
pure contemplation which is good for
shopping now cuz the will like I say
only leads to despair ultimately in
whatever form I think yeah they can
however at the same time you know the
will as they call it perhaps you could
make that analogy with the ego as well
with the will you know it's not exactly
the same thing in Freud but the egos you
know we need it to have evolved to the
complex organisms we are now we need
each and will and self survival and
power and resources and whatever you
know without it we would have got
nowhere and without even now in a sort
of future state if no-one had it you
know that will there would be much less
if any competition for not necessarily
destructive competition but competition
to attain your name Prater vehicles
whatever or greater forms of art or
whatever you know just the stability of
a society with so many people requires
and as the complexity of the world
requires a sort of um pragmatism
afforded by the ego pragmatism you know
exactly and and you know the great works
of art would not have been possible were
not for the will which you know if you
believe it you know informed evolution
and thus you know within one organism
you know the development of one's
artistic talent which probably there
from the beginning but won't develop so
you know so in order to get oneself out
of the will will is sort of precondition
interestingly yeah this is interesting I
don't often think about so we have on
the one hand will here and what are you
Jacque supposing that with in this case
the sort of a aesthetic possibility for
consciousness well job now calls it
something like willis contemplation you
know ascetic contemplation which is
willis if you accept shopping now which
like I say is controversial issue learn
teach you didn't but yeah it's hard for
me at the moment to grasp on to how to
differentiate these two things or all
that I that I should differentiate them
but think of it this way I mean
consciousness in most cases if it'll
work so-called phenomenal no access
consciousness which is awareness is by
definition awareness or phenomenal
whereas the will in most cases is
subconscious you know it's not something
we're necessarily aware of and in fact
one of the sort of purposes of therapy
often is to become aware of one's
subconscious will and then somehow align
one's consciousness to that becoming
harmony with oneself as it were
absolutely young it might be something
like to become aware of the archetypes
at play in the entirety of your psyche
and doesn't he call that individuation
ultimately yeah so it's something akin
to that and also interestingly with Jung
in relation to the fingers always been
speaking about as the the shadow you
know on the main archetypes yes the dark
side as it were and this is something
that Nietzsche I think gets one in touch
with more than anyone else well no I
think it's so important because of
course to be aware of the possibility
for good in life just very generally I
think you only get there by recognizing
and living with the other side of the
coin to the bad if you only knew the
power yeah yeah of the dark side but
yeah well why do we call it the dark
side though because you know from
Nietzschean point of view well because
our morals have become completely skewed
so you know we we often think of the
sort of you know the morbid of the
Gothic or whatever somehow you know
equivalent to an evil but if you go
beyond good and evil as Nietzsche says
and then you don't see it that way you
see it's another aspect of reality a bit
like the false dichotomy between the
organic and inorganic through Whitehead
and others say if one thinks that way in
advance and then one has an experienced
psychedelic experience of typically
morbid things like skulls and and
whatever then one can accept it and
endorse it you know and bring it into
oneself and let make it in rich one's
life and perhaps that would be an
element of what what Jung calls
individuation yes no absolutely I think
it's it's fundamentally crucial to do so
I'm Jordan Pederson always makes this
point referencing soul Janet's and I've
mentioned it before in the podcast but
that the line between good and evil runs
through every he
and heart and so I wonder if there's an
analogy there to transcending the
recognition that you have the capability
for the most heinous acts of evil as
well as you do for good is perhaps some
some way analogous to going beyond good
and evil I don't know about that so but
the thing for me is that and this is the
idea I keep harping back to here if on
the Nietzschean kind of view where it
sort of looks to reveal the arbitrary
nature of our current value structure of
values of this particular culture that
they might as well just have been
another way or that we may be able to
transcend them in some in some way even
that process needs to be subservient to
should it be for life is the process
that enables that adaptation itself
right because if not if you end up with
a certain fixed morality of particular
beliefs and actions and even a knowledge
structure fixed knowledge structure you
have their stagnation and you have not
there you are not they're ready to go
out into the unknown and it's the in
this is the classic story reference
mythically over and over throughout the
history of of the world really that the
mythologies of the world and this is the
central idea that grounds jordan
Peterson's work and in my view it
grounds at the end of the day his
popularity so ultimately representing a
sort of conflict in the social harmony
to thereby overcome it and keep moving
on does that what it is yeah it's it's
recognizing that there will always be a
that there is always an interplay
between order and chaos and that
structures should they maintain a fixed
nature for too long tend toward
corruption because they don't make use
of the left would say immigrants if we
take you to this really surface level
and the right would say no no let's put
more walls up let's put more borders up
we can't we don't want to take the
unknown things are good as they are we
have the sanctuary here but no the
sanctuary and that and the life is to be
found in the eternal harmonization
mm-hmm and and so the process of logos
then becomes that which can mediate
between order and chaos in in dialogue
and communication and so what one method
though I know of that of course is the
famous Nord
Pantheon and Ragnarok which is that the
gods maintain order the Giants you know
try to maintain chaos and that will come
to a final conflict in Ragnarok whether
Giants will win but that will usher in a
new age and thus it continues well
absolutely in if chaos overwhelms there
is the potential for radically new order
to come of it
this is whitehead you notice ISM in
different ages the notion of importance
ultimate value is sometimes placed into
religion and other times into morality I
think that's what we're living in now
another times logical reason and other
times art but importance transcends all
of those and it can fluctuate and
whatever sort of become settled and
established really you know for the
progress and while it does believe in
progress for the progress of the
universe which is a sort of manifested
within life forms there needs to
constantly be questioning because
ultimately to the question yeah
ultimately questioning and being a
contrarian and criticism because without
it yeah as you say we can never attain
full knowledge mm-hmm so any ideology
which claims it is immediately begins to
stagnate and that's where you get think
then you get the figures in history
which are the sort of the hammers as a
were Nietzsche's one of them Luther
another one you know the interesting
thing it doesn't need to be of any size
you know it's just something contrary to
what is common so if Nietzsche was if
that if you can you know hypothetically
imagine Nietzsche in a different culture
he might have been a massive a Lutheran
criticizing atheism or whatever you know
but he'd bring it his tools to bear the
important thing probably is well this is
arguable but the ultimate aim is then
progress but not in their typical
not in typical meaning of progress of
course you know what is progress well
yeah this is the interesting question
you know what do we mean by I mean again
for Nietzsche's its power and that
that's manifested through complexity but
you know like how do we rescue values
that can sustain life from mere power I
mean that might not be the fairest
question but life from your power so
people like Foucault and Derrida I'm not
familiar with these thinkers Beyond
really introductions you know I
secondary sources I've read some of the
works but there is a
there is a reliance on a notion of power
as that which ultimately is manipulated
by human beings for their own ends
they don't give an end beyond just power
it sort of bottoms out at this kind of
structures just seek power there's no
notion really of a type of aesthetic or
or competence that can stand outside
where is the tea loss where is the
striving if it's just if it's just power
and for me for me it has to be grounded
in in their affirmation or rejection of
life itself and there we start bringing
back in these notions of good and evil
metaphorically to constitute this
decision to be for life or against life
and so what we have then as an
understanding of evil to understand some
of the accident that take place in
inside inside the heart of every human
being can be characterized more as a
resentment for the conditions of life
itself which are the suffering and
tragedy that are endemic to any system
that must continually destroy itself in
order to rebuild itself and deal with
the inherent arbitrariness of them of
this polarity of chaos and order and the
fact that we balance on a nice set
knife's edge and must harmonize at once
it's a wonderfully optimistic view of
life but on another it's not it's not
naively so because because the figure
that binds it together in Christianity
at least is the figure of the cross and
you have the suffering born there by the
individual in the face of this so I
don't know what you what do you think of
that yeah so obviously the roots are as
humans are on in terms of evolution and
general mental advancement technological
advance from now is one that has to
involve suffering in fact not just
humans but but but all beings but humans
of course because we have this the
unfortunate side effect of being very
intelligent and being able to create
medicine and technology and weapons
whatever is also the ability to be
conscious of suffering and always not
just feel it
but you know really suffer because I
love you know mostly I would say because
a loved one has died you know yes more
than oneself I think especially with
children so that it goes hand in hand
that heightened consciousness and
awareness of things
so by that principle if we were to take
the next evolutionary step then
suffering would also take that step with
us the suffering is only going to
increase yeah yes so with it with it but
of course the people like David Pierce
they think that we can eliminate
suffering all together and become more
conscious and whatever I'm very
skeptical about I don't think it's
possible because I think you know
happiness is really the other side of
the coin of suffering you know without
suffering you won't you just be bored
it's a relational duality and them but
what do I think about Christ then being
a sort of a figure too and I sympathize
with when one is suffering I think
there's also dangers there I mean
obviously it's it brings comfort in us
arguably one of its main purposes but at
the same time I mean C D broad who
actually spoke about to bring it back to
him he wrote that one of the real
dangers of Christianity is to stop the
advancement of man through you know
technological or whatever means genetic
means so we're bordering on eugenics
here a bit but there was before the
Second World War those are you know
being a liberal generally was being a
eugenicist and so there is another I'm
promoting eugenics of course but there
is a danger with Christianity and this
is from Nietzsche and point of view as
well of stifling the development of man
because yeah it does bring more
suffering and so on and if we only think
if we focus on suffering as the sort of
ultimate value of humanity then I think
that will then yeah hinder a lot of
potential not only pleasures but other
forms of consciousness of which we can
only touch upon you know so there's a
date but there's a danger either way
there's also a danger that if you have
no consolation well then you know most
most of humanity will be completely
miserable so there's lots to say here I
mean I I don't have the education to
make the case for the continual validity
of the very best we could say about the
Christian picture today what I what I
mean by that is I couldn't say whether
or not they had developed the complete
mythological representation of that
which could ultimately drive us forward
appropriately something like that and as
certainly I as far as I understand
Peterson's explication through you
of Christianity in the symbol of Christ
it's not merely the identification with
the suffering but also the transcendence
that by taking responsibility for
speaking the truth fundamentally that
that is the pathway to transcending or
bearing at the very least that suffering
and so sort of keeps it in balance so I
don't think but regardless I think one
attitude that I think I'm trying to have
here or arguing for as part of this
adaptive revivification of the structure
is at all times to be gracious and to to
take the best and to save the best of
what your of your of what your culture
can give to you and of course then
update it now we have room to add
basically well yeah and one thing that
comes to mind immediately is again from
Whitehead this notion that the
Reformation was bad because it took the
worst from Christianity from his point
of view so the great thing about the
Catholic Church or the church as it was
then more or less excluding the Orthodox
one was the aesthetic side you know
these great cathedrals stained-glass
sunlight coming in these these sublime
music even the mass and Latin the beauty
of it was that one didn't understand it
you know he's arguing and that the value
of the church then was mostly the
evocation of an aesthetic sensibility of
an understanding that there's something
beyond oneself yes and it was
necessarily vague because you know we
can never attain certainty there yeah
and what happened with the Reformation
of course is that them all this
so-called ostentation was lost and there
was more focus on you know the
translation of the Bible into the net
whatever language German English and so
on and you know a sort of purification
of the church so it became very simple
we know white walls whatever like you
still get in Sweden hmm it's kind of
Lutheran Calvinist look and then you
know natural theology
you know rational arguments for why
there's an afterlife why there's a God
and whatever I'm all of which I mean
most philosophers will say that they
fail you know yeah although there's one
it's not an argument but there's one
reason for believing God which is the
argument from experience which actually
is another reason I was brought to
psychedelics through William James you
know right so but you know that was not
a rational argument thus there was no
rational criticisms of it that was an
experience all
right so yeah other things to maintain
from the church absolutely even the
great Antichrist nature's said that you
know the yes and why it certainly was
sympathetic as I say to the evocative
and the aesthetic principles of
Christianity less to the theology
although there's the whole process
theology that as um was born through
whiteheads in America nonetheless I
think that really veered far too it's
just too far away from whiteheads
intention nonetheless you know it was it
was very inspirational so certainly
there can be there are well without
question values in Christianity even
walking into a church and in the middle
of a city as I their necks at a few
weeks ago it was just so tranquil and
calm it's just a pity that it comes with
a lot of this theological baggage you
know but there's a need for I mean like
the Eleusinian mysteries there is a
there is this I dance a spiritual but
there is this need to get outside of
everyday life for all people you know
shopping now again speaks about a
metaphysical need we all have I think
it's there and I think that one of the
sort of um let's say disharmony and
society in Western society today is this
you know we've become so intellectualize
that we can't buy Christianity
you can encapsulate and goddess death
the phrase God is dead however the
metaphysical need I believe is still
there right what replaces that what
replaces that yeah so so then you get um
then you get these sort of New Age
movements and so on and also communism
pet neo-paganism and fascism of a kind
right yeah that is a demonstration of
this fixation of what turned out to be a
very shallow system of values but a
fixation of them as the top god of your
value structure that then cannot be
challenged and Solzhenitsyn explicates
this as right at the individual level
unwillingness of people to tell the
truth to tell the truth of their own
suffering and therefore fundamentally
there's no revivification possible there
and you have millions dead yeah you know
it's fascinating actually Nietzsche says
you know Christianity killed itself in
terms of seeking truth and it's it was
sort of truth away from it
Nietzsche thought nothing interesting
about communism of course and you know
Bertrand Russell said you know there's a
complete match between Christianity and
communism you know so the messiahís Marx
the elect are the proletariat you know
and so on and so forth
Nietzsche although he was concomitant
with Marx he criticized socialism for
being a legacy of Christianity so on the
one side we get the continuation of
Christianity through socialism communism
one could argue and at the same time
that metaphysical need was sort of
brought out in New Age neo-pagan
movements and so on and they were both
in a way the kind of split of
Christianity after after it reached this
this intellectual point where it just
people could not accept it very much
especially with you know higher
criticism from Germany you know the
questioning of who wrote the Bible and
the evolution of court Darwinian
evolution mmm-hmm they reached this
intellectual point where it couldn't be
justified anymore so yeah then you get
the split off which is communism slap
okay we still believe that all are equal
under the eyes of God how we're gonna
create that in a political system yeah
and then if you get the rejection of
that you get well you know there's still
this need to believe in something higher
than us something more important than us
you know it seems to me the New Age
movement didn't know where to place that
at all and of course nihilism is on the
other side of that as well which is
nothing we there's just can't be nothing
there and so you sort of in this in a
different kind of static in the abyss
here in the abyss yeah so and that
ultimately all of that of course led to
existentialism of 20th century you know
this notion of like what the hell no
what's going on here pick up the pieces
yeah and and it seems we're still
dealing with that right I don't think
society is come to any form of harmony
and I if it were to come to any harmony
with it like some new kind of illusion
and mystery then that could easily
stagnate again and you'd need but
nonetheless all of that is I mean I'm
almost certainly Hegelian now you know
thesis antithesis to synthesis but
nonetheless if we believe in I mean I'm
so with nihilism yeah you know I'm a you
know what I call neo analysts so I do
believe that there are no objective
normative values could we call them
fixed values in its sense just to help
me out get on board so yeah fixed
objective values so like there is an
absolute good and absolute evil you know
so you look that takes on a fixed
instantiated form that's codified into a
certain set of epitome avert is the 10
commandments you know so I think I this
god-given but if you don't believe in
God and if you don't believe in platonic
forms then you've got no reason to
believe in that this is interesting
point if god is dead again also if you
don't believe an Altima purpose then of
course you know if you know the purpose
of something then you know whether
that something is good for that or yes
you know the purpose of knives to cut
you know good knife as a sharp one right
but if a man this is existentialism now
if man has no purpose and hacking talk
about good or a bad man you can't
without that now maybe we still have a
purpose we'll come back to that yes but
if you don't believe it you don't
believe in God a god-given purpose if
you believe only in then well first of
all and if you look at the you know
different cultures around time and space
you know you realize that you know
Victorian age it was immoral to for a
woman to show a wrist or something like
this yes today it's immoral to you know
whatever touch woman's knee yeah it is
today and in 50 years is going to be
something else yeah
you become a relativist just from a
historical sense as well very easy to
slip into that
so there's neo nihilism it in the basic
form it's just that yeah there can't be
any prescript if you can't say a person
should do this or should not do this
because according to what yes i'm
believing there's no standard yes
however there are still values
subjective values right and of course
nobody wants just because they don't
believe in an eternal God or a
commandment who says you know you should
respect your mother and father that
doesn't mean therefore if you don't
believe in that you want to kill them of
course not you know there's still
characteristics a person has and there
are objective values is two very
separate things so you can still have
your characteristics which are based on
partly based on your subjective values
and you can still strive to push those
subjective values in society so you can
still maintain a political viewpoint you
know let's say you don't like rubbish
around your village or something like
this yeah that's a personal thing and
you could therefore it instantiate you
know policies which will get rid of that
you know bins and whatever but of course
if someone worth theoretically they
wouldn't happen in this case but it's
theoretically someone today you know
what I like I like rubbish around you
can say well you're wrong yes at that
fundamental point you then you the
nihilism steps in again you and you say
well let I'm just pushing I'm afraid um
this is just a conflict like a fight I'm
going to fight you for this yes but
that's what it comes down to a fight and
okay in that example you know that would
never happen but think about abortion
yes now if here is abortion right so at
the fundamental level it's about whether
you think an embryo has intrinsic value
and there's just unless you are
religious if you're not religious if you
reject that and you have you've rejected
standards as well like an ultimately
secular ostensibly
secular morality is like utilitarianism
do have this absolute standards in other
words pleasure is good pain is bad there
comes a point where you can't argue the
case anymore there's no there's no
fundamental justification either way
right now unless it becomes theological
me because Muni might say well the value
of charts got given so ok so let's then
debate whether God exists you know so
right but also it might be the case that
a trivial argument about whether there
should be rubbish or not so it devolves
into a sort of a fixed moment in
debating such a thing one is sort of
intellectualizing away from the real as
it moves in qualitative duration and
this is a bit of a jump now to bring
Bergson back in here but if we are
committed to the idea that the real is
movement and that what is most real
about being itself is that or perhaps
what characterizes it more than anything
else is its movement then it seems like
in order to preserve what its most real
what we need to hold as our highest
value is the kind of communicative
Reformation behavior fundamentally that
is most aligned to to movement and
adaptation itself and so you see well
there though I bring in pluralism you
know so there are movements there are
directions but they are there are many
and times are not they're not
you know mutually compatible right can
they be entirely disparate I mean that
might be the question or well no they
can't here is whether the grand nodal
structure of being and movement can be
disparate from itself and in such a case
it seems like all one would have there
is power to distinguish but if these
nodes of order and being are connected
and in fact built on this same effective
Tilos listener movement this movement
out of fixation which can which in order
to be for itself is for being is for
life given that we are wrapped up it we
are manifestations of this process at
the highest form we've we know ok so so
I I notice your way yeah ultimately its
concerns this the sort of relationship
between care you know
different harmonies so certain minor
harmonies would be chaotic to a larger
one yes so like a biker gang might in
itself be very harmonious follow laws of
Honor and so on
but in terms of a state it might be very
disharmony as' so then the question is
should that smaller state the gang give
in to harmonize with the larger one or
does the large one actually benefit from
some disharmony absolutely does it sort
of shake its foundations and make make
it sort of question what it really
values and so on could be that depending
couldn't yeah I mean you know there's a
low key isn't the low the trickster
archetype something very common right
you know there needs to be that that
that's shaking up constantly to preserve
harmony perhaps right absolutely it does
so the danger then of course is ultimate
moralism where you say you know you
can't do this you know you have you have
to step in line because then you would
get a total stagnant state and this is
what we see in you know communist Russia
I suppose in North Korea but not and
also in our society in other ways I
should say I don't think you can get rid
of disharmony same within a body as well
you know so we've got um you know
there's the overall what Coast Arthur
Koestler calls you know the whole on
that is our body but within it there are
separate entities you know like um the
bacterial colony in our guts and our
organs and our you know each cell in our
body is it's in a way in autopoietic a
self-sufficient system right and if the
individual if the larger organism the
human person is strong and healthy they
will work in harmony of course cancer is
when that stops working how many or
where like a virus when it can see
disharmony that's chaos but of course
good thing about you notice our
vaccinations work you know you give it a
little bit of chaos and then the whole
the larger hold on becomes stronger yeah
that's beautiful energy Ashley yeah and
so doesn't society itself need its
vaccinations in terms of you know the
criminal absolutely I think
there's better sorts of criminals than
others right I mean there's a certain
type of playing with the boundaries
that's appropriate and certain and
certain kinds that might appear so
initially but ultimately might lead to
the development of our an instantiation
of a different kind of value structure
that is that they're branches off and
becomes incompatible a counselor can
kill and so can I virus you know exactly
and so the thing is is that in this
grand cog like revolving multi nodal
structure that is being it has to in
order to update itself and remain moving
necessarily spawn off elements of it
that can actually evolve to challenge it
and that is why this view is not
inherently optimistic because it
maintains the absolute destructive
potential of ourselves to ourselves in
fact isn't that really the ultimately
the cause of evolution and you know the
cause of us as such in other words the
constant overcoming of obstacles
evolving against them in order to attain
this complexity that we have now right
and so my question when it comes from
taking a conversation like this which is
which has gone into the heart of what
even appears as I say it to myself a
type of esoteric language to action in
the world you sort of recognize that
well people the world over are it are
involved in starting little projects and
then maintaining them and then providing
value to people or not and we sort of
life is this constant collectivizing of
certain values and and activities and
then out there goes that little engine
of production or doing something and
then it does its thing in the world and
it contributes to the grand picture in
some way and and you know we have all we
have so many different life at the
moment is characterized by such a such a
chaotic unknown because of how quickly
technology is moving but also how plus
the lack of God
you know belief in God in the amount of
turmoil our value structure currently
has as a result of this yes it's it's
it's not clear what the what the largest
threats are it's it's not clear whether
the fundamental nature of certain
Islamic sects can be commensurate with
certain other value systems and and then
we have we have cryptocurrency looking
to decentralize how we do transactions
we have potential for viruses we have
various splintering of different
ideological automation of Labor which
automation of Labor and AI which AI
which is absolutely outrageous
overpopulation pollution and then most
presently perhaps is the current rift
between elements of the left and the
right playing out in maybe even
university campuses right now in America
congregate and Canada and the Western
modem that general congregating
coalescing into this agitation and sort
of harsh divide between diversity and
protection on the one side and then free
expression on the other and it's very
clear with to me which side of that
formulation I fall on the side of its
expression and communicative Reformation
and that comes first and we don't need
to overprotect people I think it's it's
a it's a big problem but I don't
necessarily want to be either danger of
consolation of Christianity it's the
same principle yeah any structure that
doesn't allow individuals to go out and
redeem themselves and develop themselves
so that they can become their own
potential their own potential note
fundamentally because they are they
embody the same fundamental principles
that ought to that ought to harmonize
and constant you in the group is that
the morality for all this your relation
to God is within you as well you know
and and so and so the pattern is a meta
pattern that that pervades all but um of
this adaptation is going out coming back
adapting according to in movement
well I began that little segment they're
talking about what could be the the
practical devotion of one's time or the
practical action in the world that might
go about steadying the ship
fundamentally is was the center and and
and this is where I just want to put
this to you very briefly that the
process of communication itself this
honest vulnerable dialogue itself on an
individual level is that unit of is that
unit of adaptation and this is the
central idea at the heart of what Jordan
Pederson is doing and so what then we
might be looking for is technology
somehow that can enable this
communication without an imprint of bias
or too much bias if possible and
protections for this as as being our
bulwark against against degeneration
fundamentally the protection against
degeneration is
providing individuals the avenue for
communicative Reformation vulnerable
truth-seeking in dialogue with others
something like that okay talking about
practical benefits of well let's say
Miami or nihilism it's this that you've
recognized that what you formerly
believed were moral absolutes are
actually not and they can help one
nonetheless they can be helpful to you
but they can be hindrances to oneself as
well with relation let's say a practical
thing like campus conflicts as you're
mentioning I mean sort of neo nihilistic
analysis of that would simply be this
that both sides hold well yeah
ultimately both sides hold unwittingly
hold objective morals so on the Left you
generally get the objective moral that
um number one everyone deserves equal
treatment yet right you can't actually
logically substantiate that you might
subjectively value it you know of course
it might be your preference but there's
an ultimately no way of defending that
on the other side though and I was
reading a Milton Milton wrote an article
defending free speech interestingly this
seems to be the fundamental antithesis
which is yeah free speech you know but
of course ultimately can't substantiate
that as a value either so here like
abortion you get two objective values
that sort of fight each other but
personally I take their Milton's point
of view the freedom of expression
because my subjective value which is you
know ultimately is progress not in
liberal sense by the progress of over
the universe itself through man right
and that will be achieved as Milton
himself argued hundreds of years ago
through yet debate you know let's let's
put our cards on the table and see how
they commensurate I think also with you
know the sort D platforming things you
get today from from today's new left or
whatever yep it's just a it's just very
much power politics anyway right it's um
you know we demand these rights and we
we don't like these old power structures
when you get equality all that means is
that you've got a lower power structure
acquiring an equal power structure to
its then nemesis you know its opposite
as a way but of course it will never I
don't think that will ever lie in
harmony I don't think when equality is
reached that will be it though there
will be
people who then tried to push it right
and so there'll be a tonal conflict
there but the ultimate point is it's
from naio now lism there you know you
can't you can't substantiate why should
everyone be equal you know I mean
ultimately that's what it comes down to
it's harsh right can we distinguish
between equality of opportunity and
outcome here yeah I mean I can totally
get on board from the sense of the
equality of outcome
it's a ridiculous notion in in the ways
you indicate but in terms of opportunity
it seems to me that well I I think
personally yet you should offer
subjectively I believe you should
absolutely offer equality of opportunity
because that's for the benefit again of
my subjective view which is this kind of
a progress of complexity in the universe
through through mankind however yes that
is my personal preference yes okay so I
understand you're saying your personal
preference here but I can also identify
with that as you being for life as you
yeah as you so maybe as I think this is
where we're going to attach maybe there
is and this as we've started with
talking about this drive for knowledge
yeah maybe there is is greater tell us
which I embody we all embody for this
kind of ultimate end of continual a
continual striving not only for power
but powers part of it because if you
don't if you can't control your
environment you're gonna die right how
are you going to evolve away yes so
powers part of it but maybe power is
actually just itself a means to allow
for expanding complexity in terms of
consciousness exact that's right because
I think power ends with fixation well in
some ways yeah it's may perhaps it's
like money you know so money is a great
means to acquire greater levels but it's
if you fixate yourself on money then
that's shallow and a valueless in itself
however I mean that is very I mean you
say talking about this ultimate tell us
there of complexity is very is very
metaphysical and something I can't prove
but but like I said you there's no way
of proving it because it's metaphysics
it's not science this is where James
comes in because he talks about the
sorry to interrupt no he talks about the
like it's not a nice you said I sort of
need that it's like a it's built the
view is built or finally instantiated or
given its force by a faith that in so
pursuing that communicative reform a
vulnerable truth-seeking that that will
bring about the whole project for the
better yeah well an analogy would be
something like this our immune system
right if you look at bacteria virus
whatever entering the body if you look
at white blood cells
you know they will chase a bacteria
until if got it you know and eat it and
they've got this real track now if your
pants I kissed you will believe that
those cells have got their own sentience
their own wills and I do believe that
for logical reasons they don't know
although they've got this it seems at
least the strong drive to eat this
bacterium they don't know that they're
actually acting on behalf of the greater
organism you know I don't believe they
have got this consciousness and perhaps
is the same on us humans you know we
have certain drives which actually are
for our drives honor on a higher level a
higher whole on ik level of which we are
not conscious but that's irrelevant we
still are moved by them and you know one
does you know I do have sympathy for
that but it can only ever be speculative
I believe unless there are some other
good reasons for believing it which
would make sense of something else down
the line this is something I haven't
really looked into but I think actually
most people believe it I mean oK you've
got the collective unconscious of young
but also you've got just in terms of
evolution right like neo-darwinian
Darwinian evolution even you know the
sexual impulse right you know your
attraction to a woman or a man or
whatever not goats to another human
let's say is you don't consciously think
I'm going to ant to the survival of the
species right
that's not your motive of course it's
not you just think about you know
whatever it in the flesh but nonetheless
it seems that we have that lower motive
due to a higher motive so we have the
lower conscious motive but that's really
part and parcel of a broader higher one
and I don't think I think you know you'd
be hard-pressed to find someone who
denied that so in in like in like
fashion there might be other drives
apart from sexual drive that we have
which are part of a larger one of which
we are unconscious yeah that's really
really well put I think there is a real
bridge between what we're thinking
because I can totally get on board with
where we currently sit there is no
innocence there's no proof for it that's
why is a vulnerability and stepping out
and embodying this value
structure and you seem to have a very
similar one yeah but what's very
important is this you have to
distinguish metaphysics from science and
not my metaphysics are handmade them
science you know science can cut well
like I said can't get a proofs anyway if
you believe in falsification ISM you can
own to where proofs and maths and logic
and even that then the connection to
reality is very questionable right so we
have to realize that our knowledge has
to go beyond proof because if you only
relied on proof you're very limited in
what you could know like some you know
axioms of logic math some equations and
you know the cogito I think therefore n
perhaps yeah and that's it you couldn't
even know other people are conscious you
know these are inferences these you
can't prove another person's conscience
even by near occurrence of consciousness
a baby still it's still an inference to
an extent so um yeah you have to
understand metaphysics is a another
means of acquiring knowledge but their
knowledge is not proof knowledge
something else yeah and then you've
you've got the room to speculate and
obviously some speculations are valid or
true and others or not so then you have
to think about well what arguments could
you use in its favor right but we humans
are not you know we don't have the
capability of omniscience right what we
do have the capability of is striding
out into the forest striding out into
the unknown and hopefully coming back
and what that sort of well I had a mind
to bring in psychedelics a little bit
here because it struck me that
psychedelics are a tool that sort of it
can be used in a short doses to sort of
go go between these sort of levels
yes feel the higher level but then also
you reckon might recognize how an
effective pull of of seduction might
relate to you the the larger entity so
interestingly so if there are these
higher Holland's right or systems of
teleology that move one like perhaps
galaxies that move the solar system in a
very subtle way and thus you could
although we're not generally conscious
of it could we acquire consciousness of
it by dismissing our normal
physiological functioning possibly is
the interesting thing and there's a lot
of reports which seem to corroborate
that so for example when we talking
about rhythm a durational Bergson is
yes sir no psychedelics you can see time
slowing down or speeding up in other
words we lose that speed of time that we
have and thus we gain sympathy with
other life forms lower than us perhaps
but also yeah exactly higher with a
higher than us perhaps you know there's
very very common to experience unity
with everything you know so perhaps that
then is rejecting our individual our
individualism and then entering that
larger hole on which has that greater to
Allah gee perhaps or no to you but again
you know the interesting thing is like
you feel it but what kind of knowledge
does that give you yeah I mean William
James as you know spoke Latin the noetic
quality of mystical States in other
words when you're there you just know
it's real but of course after that you
might doubt yourself oh yeah because you
lose the noetic no exorcism but you know
it seems that the notok quality is
talking about something like you know
you know that one plus one is two or you
know modus ponens modus tollens must be
true you know modus ponens is logical
axiom that you know if P then Q P
therefore cute right you know it has
Falls but if I ask you why everyone be
very hard-pressed to to give a
justification but you know it you just
know it and that seems to be an
intuition even at that on the basic
level of logic and maths and whatever so
although I I don't think I personally
have ever really had this but William
James certainly talks about it as a
common theme in mystical States which
you could equate with psychedelic States
that there's this sort of noetic
knowledge in the psychedelic state which
is equivalent to that logical one
so therefore isn't that as valid a
knowledge you know well basically you
can't know if you unless you're in it
yourself yeah I mean there's definitely
and that's why metaphysics has to be
brought to bear upon these experiences
rather than simply just science or
psychology or psychology as we know it
today you know quantitative ways it's
certainly the living of it you know
certainly the experiencing of it and it
changes what yeah I mean the living of
it but for me it's made me appreciate
nature much more than I did
and in fact really I remember writing
after my first one of my first trips
like just got this massive appreciation
for art paintings nature theology even
you know it just somehow riches your
interest in things so it's a valuable
tool for
for certain people yeah well pizza I
could and we'll talk to you for many
more hours to come but I think they're
seen we seem to have arrived at a nice
nice place of closure here yeah
it is there anything you want to say to
people listening about where they can
get in contact with you or what they can
read further of your work okay so well
my book is called númenor ticks as you
mentioned it's available from Amazon but
better to buy it from psychedelic press
directly
my website is philosopher EU I've got a
Facebook philosophy page pull ontology
sticks you make frequent updates on that
it's actually pretty good I recommend I
recommend liking it because it feels
that Facebook feed when you're abject
lis scrolling when you should be doing
something else with with some good stuff
so well you know I because of my PhD I
have to read all the time me to shave oh
my god
yeah well anyway so when I when I read
an interesting line I think I'll shower
the world I I'm gonna start I already
have and I'm gonna start doing that
doing the same thing and they're a bit
cool share the knowledge and yes also
Twitter Peter just @h and here and there
you know but I'm based IX to university
on moment living in and with Komal so
yeah
oh man Bally's put it here
it's been beautiful so there we go then
being a pleasure for me thank you very
much thank you for listening if you'd
like to hear more of these conversations
and to stay in touch about events
planned later this year in Melbourne
please do like the Facebook page follow
voice Club underscore on Twitter
subscribe on YouTube that we videos soon
and most other places you usually listen
to your podcasts best of all sign up to
the mailing list via the connect tab at
voice club calm and if you found this
valuable please consider sharing or
leaving a review the final part of the
series with pieces will be out soon it's
quite short more of an added bonus we
sat down to record after signing off
here alright we'll see you then
[Music]
you