other people joining us we're looking
for to have guests board members who
want to like dip their toe into figuring
out what it is to create together tech
together without um without committing
you know CC how how it works out and so
welcome to fix our world Friday which is
like a slight change on the language
where the graphic kept saying fix our
world but I was saying fix the world
which is quite different it's like fix
that world it has nothing to do with me
versus like our world and only our world
you don't need to fix the whole one just
our lives when we interact with which is
the whole one but you know there's
there's something there this has been
two weeks since I saw you like since we
did this together right been like his
last because I was myself and even since
that week a lot has changed like a lot
has transferred this idea of so today
we're gonna be talking about micro
solidarity and the link is in the
viewing but later replay viewers the
link is in the description too to see
that website as well as I think fractal
democracy and what we talked about at
the very ends of mine Jasper's
conversation is very relevant even
though no one else will be able to hear
it we can kind of recapitulate what what
that was and how do we create this space
into a solutions cooperative which is
the like pivot that I think we were or
discussing is that the pivot is that the
thing that you know focusing on
solutions yes we create through
technology be it the solutions piece as
opposed to the technology piece and is
there a better name than solutions cuz
it comes with a lot of baggage as well
so yeah where do we start do you want to
introduce Microsoft already Bentley or
what would you like - um sure I didn't
look into it that deeply but so a marcus
already dot CC and actually it's been
several days since i put it on there
some say I put it up
I mean it's just very very similar where
we're working on ways to communicate and
you know work together as group and so I
actually I think Marco solidarity may be
one of the options on how we organize
the group and then also there was a
collective one was another thing that
came up last week
which is something I used there at the
very beginning and it was very rough at
that time so I'm sure they've improved
it quite a bit since then so I'd have to
look at it again to see how useful it is
but I think these are kind of tools for
[Music]
tools for us to kind of build this
community but also each group that's
kind of making these tools they are they
seem to have very similar goals as we do
which is you know to facilitate
individual sovereignty and group
cohesiveness so that you know so that
people can kind of work on the things or
make the world a better place rather
than just earning a paycheck also like
in spiral Network which is other
creators of loomio which is another kind
of collaborative software tool so all
these things I guess I wanted to check
that we aren't duplicating what anyone
else is working on right now which is
hard to find sometimes because I was
working on the debate stuff for four
years before I found a group of other
people that were already working on they
were all working in from four years - so
we're all working in parallel all had
websites that still couldn't find each
other and we finally did about a year
ago so in this same sort of vein just
make sure that we'll keep an eye out for
other things and that we're not just
recreating the wheel although I think it
I think and spiral had an option to
where they said they even liked the idea
of having a whole bunch of little
different organizations working on the
same thing and then just kind of
coordinating rather than trying to have
one large organization
that that won't fit so much with our
together tack I think together tech
needs needs you know if you get everyone
kind of together I think you have more
synergy yeah so I guess those are the
just the things that I'm thinking
through is is what you know what what
who else is out there doing some similar
things how can we coordinate collaborate
or subsume their projects there are
projects and stuff like that so you know
I don't have any definite direction on
that so what came up for me this week
with not so much Microsoft already but
with the other one the said collective
ano it was collective one for that the
fact that we hadn't heard about it or
like you had said you you know like I
think I probably just changed what it
looks likes you now registered you were
on at the beginning but that were like
looking in this space and these things
pop up and that is the reason I don't
like the broken up but I get why it's
and that we need it right like we need a
bunch of games a bunch of experiments
going on to see which one works but
they're not working because they're all
broken up and everywhere and it's like
the fact we we knew we had a problem we
need to solve we're looking for these
things and not able to find them what's
the hope and everyone else finding them
that doesn't even know they're looking
for it right and so bringing those
projects together in a way that supports
them kind of like we're doing with the
raising projects on Saturdays we're
figuring out marketing together and
finance together of like right well when
these amazing projects happen whether
they're internally you know game B type
people or externally just really cool
projects or nothing to do with a B but
they meet another need of ours right
what how do we know that they exist how
do we kind of fix marketing for the
world and that's not necessarily what
we're gonna be doing but it is something
that I don't know if anyone is doing
like that's it's this under this idea
that people will find each
and that is what microcell Adara t talks
about is like they don't give you a
system to find the people they're like
you'll find the people and I don't like
that I want there to be tools to find
your people because not everyone can
easily find them and the more that
you're able to coordinate just just the
finding of people and then the running
of a group or like how you then form up
the other ones and that's where like
fractal democracy or something comes in
because there was something about like a
group of eights and a group of seven and
like that that number of its resilience
and yet the problems can get solved but
not really like part of it as sharing
finance is a micro solidarity and so a
bunch of millionaires getting together
and sharing finances and sharing you
know resources is gonna be able to be a
lot more powerful and create something
than a bunch of people in poverty you
can still it's still more powerful to
come together but there's like no
ownership or no one's really talking
about like the that it leaves some it
leaves a lot of people on it even more
so than financially like autistic people
like people who like feel time and time
again that they've been excluded and so
to just say oh you'll find your people
when like there's that deep wound that
keeps repeating itself without giving
people like right maybe you won't maybe
you are the kind of person that 99% of
people don't really resonate with will
help you find the 1% that do and what
comes out of that and so that's there's
something coming out for me and all of
this like the micro solidarity and the
fractal democracy and partly what I put
on the agenda which I don't even want to
get into today of like actually solving
solutions together
which I kind of tried to do with
extinction rebellion and tried it like
to have a mission like something and
it's not an extinction rebellion because
they don't they have concrete goals but
not really concrete goals what Vinnie a
Gupta had said of that the ethical that
would to get to zero slaves and three
tons of carbon is something that is like
measurable to some degree and obtainable
but not in isolation not in groups of
eight not you know maybe and that's what
I mean by like a millionaire's could
solve that for you for themselves and
maybe get to zero slaves and zero and
you know three tons of carbon but not
the rest of us you know like you need to
have a certain amount of power and
privilege to be able to do that or large
numbers of people ten thousand a hundred
thousand a million of us could solve how
to get our food or clothing or shelter
without slavery and without this huge
carbon footprint how when something
helps us have less slaves and less
carbon footprint it actually propagates
and gets out in the world and so there's
something about like creating this to be
a space or creating something similar
like a conference where people are
talking maybe in an idea cafe type
format about that like not necessarily
how do we sell slavery but like food
shelter clothing transportation these
are things we need and they come in and
with externalities that we're passing
off to the rest of the world so to look
at what are we actually doing in those
spaces and then what effect does that
have right so here's what I'm actually
doing for food here's the effect that
has on my health and my lifestyle here's
the effect it has on the planet I think
you know you not necessarily hard
science I know that some of my food
choices are maybe the greatest and then
what effect it has on other people and
through having those conversations um
and then like right before this this
call I was there was like I don't know
like the idea Cafe conference every six
hours and like merges with micro Sol
that arity where you actually a meeting
with the same seven people and answering
this so you're focused
food right because that's something
that's important to you and then you're
electing someone out of that seven to
get to the next level to kind of talk
about the greater food but then maybe
there is like after you kind of a
certain level all of the people are
getting together in touch to talk about
it that's like more complexity and we're
like cats we're figuring out this
scheduling tool or like even just that
piece because that's powerful but
there's something here where when we
turn this or pivot it to be a solutions
cooperative instead of a technology
cooperative there's a way to have this
space already work on solutions and then
technology will merge or emerge yeah
some of those solutions require
technology some won't and those ones
that won't they'll be people there you
know that want to work on those actual
atoms which is not something I do much
what so as look in the market solidarity
and so this sentence kind of keys in
kind of what we're saying I think so he
was saying I intend to start a new
community as a sibling or cousin to
inspire oh so actually I could just get
that so about 30 to 20 people supporting
each other to do more meaningful work so
and that sounds kind of what we're doing
it's another way of phrasing it no it
wasn't as solutions focused but you know
that's the goal it's you and I want to
be providing max value to the world so
it's it's interesting that he's trying
to develop a it's interesting
well it's interesting that he limits it
to don't like 230 people which I think
we're trying to find a pattern and if
necessary technology to facilitate that
exponentially and over the long run
mm-hm would be kind of Michael yeah
absolutely and I think that that is
possible there was a lot in that
proposal I read the whole proposal and
there was a lot in there
spoke to me and there was nothing in
there I was like well that's broke and
it needs to go the only piece is I want
it to be facilitated I want to help
people find their people and then have a
little more coordination behind the
marketing and the finance so that like
that's kind of the vision it's not like
everyone joins together tech and we all
have a new cults and we all become you
know tommy-toms of each other of course
not like it's how do you as an
individual can um remain sovereign and
work in a group towards a common goal
towards the common good without needing
you to give up who you are including
your selfishness right like including
including all of that but there was this
he talked about the dyad and how all
dyads which are just two people right
like you're a single person and then you
get a second person are either in
authority over or in partnership and so
I wrote down this this quote which is
the dyad domination relationship the
domination relationships are the root of
all injustice and partnership
relationships are the root of all
freedom and like once you have that dyad
you then kind of conform groups that are
kind of either domination or or
partnership and so that's part of like
surrendered leadership and what does
that look like yet we still need to move
forward right how do we hold a space
without domination and that is part of
it is like you can't a solutions
cooperative that is Invitational right
it's like come be part of this but also
every product we make is an invitation
it has to be good enough to be a like
natural invitation but it's only an
invitation right we can't force any
individual or group or anything to do
anything we might think they want to we
can only invite them to with knowledge
with connection with without holding a
monopoly on connection right without
being like well if you're not this this
and that you don't get to have this
connection you might not be able to have
connection with me and so that was also
he talked about say empty space yeah so
that can you hear me
yeah yeah yeah so if I can just jump in
here it seems to me it seems a few
remarks a sort of stream of
consciousness remarks I'd like to
based on hearing what I just heard you
guys say what you just said a minute ago
Jubilee it sounds like you're looking
for a technology to facilitate anarchism
the political ideology of anarchism I
don't don't want to go anywhere with
that remark I think that's just a
statement of how I'm perceiving what
when you're proposing and the the
question of how to work together with
different people and first of all to
find your people as you put it the find
you people piece is kind of interesting
and it occurs to me that there's that
the way that one could do that just from
first principles is if a lot of people
were to register themselves on a
database or alternatively if you had
Facebook you know if you if you had
Facebook's data about people and people
already on Facebook and you had their AI
routines you'd be able to characterize
people categorize people and sort them
into different categories so if you
wanted to you could sort through if you
had if you had the data that Facebook
does about people about their the
searches that they've made and the
information they've registered about
themselves online and the remarks that
they that posted online and so on you
have a tremendous amount of information
about people as does for example the
Google Corporation and to some extent so
does for example Amazon now if you if
any one of those corporations wanted to
it could run some AI based routines to
sift people and categorize them into
subcategories and to different
subcategories actually depending on what
the search criteria were so you can for
example to keep it really simple you
could look for everybody who is that say
between the ages of 40 and 50 female
medical doctor and lives in the United
States and then you could go further and
you could say those people who you know
those those women who are doctors
between 40 to 45 live in the United
States who have you know one or more
children and who are republican-leaning
politically you could easily do that
okay now we don't have access to
Facebook's data
if we did and we could run those
searches and we initially would have a
bunch of categories with people who are
demographically similar and we could run
those searches according to different
criteria and have different sub
categories of people and then in
principle we could sort of email those
people or message those people and say
hey would you like to get to know some
people you have a lot in common with
here's a database if you greenlight us
to do so we will put you live on this
database as somebody who could be
contacted by the other people in this
particular sub category in this example
women between 40 and 40
all right and then you could you know if
you if you say yes then you get
green-lighted and so do a bunch of other
people I don't know 30% 40% of the
people might might say yes I'm willing
to be a contact database and then they
could contact each other and they might
have a heck of a lot in common and what
you're doing there of course is
reinforcing an echo chamber just
peripherally but nonetheless it could be
an interesting thing to do and we are
not Facebook and we don't have access to
Facebook's data and unless we you know I
guess came but Cambridge analytical that
was able to buy Facebook's data at one
point a few years ago that led to the
scandal that that did occur because they
use that to help mr. Chuck get elected
but we were unlikely to be able to get
that that data what we would have to do
if we wanted to enable people to quote
find their people we would have to ask
people to register voluntarily on a
database in which they characterized
themselves and now I'm gonna mention
here that people when they characterize
themselves there are two reasons why
they may not characterize themselves
accurately first they may be unaware of
a whole bunch of their characteristics
that may be salient and unaware in ways
that the Facebook algorithms are not
unaware Facebook and companies like that
have so much information about us now
that they can profile us in a way that's
much more accurate than our self
perception in a lot of ways peripherally
secondly they people might be not just
unaware of some of their own
characteristics that that doesn't occur
to them to mention or that they're not
even aware of it all they also may have
an incentive to not be completely honest
about who they are with those two
caveats people could in fact register on
the kind of database and say I'm willing
to be you know contacted by people who
may think I am like them or have
something in common with them in order
to participate in some kind of
conversations and potentially
voluntarily decide to join into some
kind of
of the voluntary Association a group a
small group that maybe has a particular
defined purpose and I will I will I will
therefore fill out a questionnaire maybe
like a Google Form with a whole bunch of
data about myself and I will make that
free to be searchable and I will also
list not only information about myself
may age my gender my political views my
this my that like you know personality
style what-have-you as far as I'm aware
of it I will also list some things that
I'm interested in that I want to be in
contact with people about you know like
dealing with the climate crisis and
making a contribution to that and so far
as as I can and then if you had that
kind of voluntary database and people
started self sorting into smaller groups
then of course it's useful to have some
kind of a an algorithm according which
they self sort that might a pre
predefined structure which again may be
optional you know if you're looking at
this for an anarchistic point of view
may not want to impose a single unique
structure that everybody has to follow
but you might have some kind of a
recommended structure or a choice of
four or five different recommended
structures for how people in that group
might organize themselves and one of
those possible structures for
self-organization would be some kind of
some version some flavor of fractal
democracy where you have you know let's
say groups of seven people teams of
seven people get together and those
seven people would it could be five
people could be seven people but an odd
numbered group of people get together
get to know each other maybe through
online conversations for a while and at
some point elect a spokesperson and that
spokesperson then becomes a delegate to
the next level up of another group of
seven people and interacts with those
people and they choose a spokesperson
and at some point that's you know the
third level spokesperson in a group of
seven people and so on which which
allows you to build a hierarchy of
elected people that you can coordinate
with just a few levels of hierarchy many
millions of people in common cause by
going through this fractal process that
I called fractal democracy that's one
possible model for self-organization so
what it sounds like you guys are trying
to do is create a technology or find a
technology that may already exist maybe
and spiral maybe it's micro Sol adara T
maybe it's another one that would make
it possible for as you put it for people
to find their people first of all and to
also find these people in a way that
becomes effective not only people find
people that I sort of like you in some
way that that makes sense to you and to
them but also people who want to work
together on some particular project that
want to you know create as a solutions
team some kind and and maybe if I
understand you correctly not this is a
question are you thinking you know some
teams to work together on a solution but
also something that allows large numbers
of small teams to work together on a
solution or do you even have an idea
that everybody involved all of this team
of teams like everybody on I don't know
Microsoft CC is then obliged to are
asked to contribute to the same grand
goal what is it you have in mind in that
respect both so the idea I mean
everything we're creating with the other
tech will be from the ground up right
when we have more people of like how do
we fund it how do we but the vision is
that there is a way we fund it and out
of that pool of money we are creating
technology that is better solutions so
getting a bunch of people together to
talk about what they're doing for food
and then recreating a food system not
from how do we get the seeds in the
ground and get this food to people but
like what are you doing and how can we
incrementally improve it how can we both
buy food together how can we have what I
have it in community dinners eco housing
how can so anytime anyone has has a
problem or as
solution they can bring it in workshop
it and and yeah but what is what is that
how many of these people supposing
there's 100 million people network that
you are using this tool like yes
solutions by Christopher Garrity tool is
a hundred million people on that there
are going to be many many different
people with many many different ideas of
problems that they would like to solve
you know there's gonna be somebody
worried about I don't know the famine in
southern Zimbabwe that as a result of
several years of drought and they want
to have solutions that somebody else is
gonna be worried about you know how do
we shut down coal-fired power plants
another person is going to be worried
about how do you you know design a
better electric bicycle I don't know
just lots of different things and I
don't think you can actually grab
everybody's attention on every one of
those questions at the same time I think
absolutely to have specialist groups
that specialize in particular things but
it sounds like you also want to kind of
charge people a fee so that there's a
you know some money collected that then
gets to the top of this hierarchy and
then at the top of how criticized how to
spend it or what do you have in mind
so Bentley jump in if you have answers
to I think I know what you're gonna say
so you you keep going if you get tired
out something just tag so I I know I
forgotten the question right funding it
and then yes so the idea is that there
is a huge number of people right who so
it depends on what number of people and
what we're trying to solve if we are
starting with 10,000 people we don't
have the ability to dissipate that
energy and create 10,000 different
projects but if we add it whatever you
set a hundred million people or 10
million people then maybe we have enough
energy to do 10 different projects right
at a time and so create just creating
the tools to be able to bring people
together to talk about it what
everything you just said right coal
manufacturing and like your local city
if you can bring people together who can
talk about that then through that
conversation you can generate ideas and
with enough people having that you end
the funding model being there then they
already have the
our they already have the money there to
say hey look we have a million dollars
sitting here that we can create
something without requiring we do it
individually and without requiring you
leave it up which is also what I got
from this micro solidarity they're like
big other them right like the government
needs to solve this we need to pass
carbon laws we need to or we
individually need to do straws right
stop using straws to start using bikes
and there's this huge space in between
which is actually where problems can and
should be solved where it's not
demanding people have laws that are
hierarchy down and not demanding we're
all on her own and so creating the tools
to facilitate that process yeah yeah I'm
trying to understand those something
like if you're trying to solve a bunch
of you know a smaller number of problems
if you have a larger number a smaller
number of people a larger number
problems yeah sure sure
but who decides which problems number
one okay and number two is your
financial model here that but yeah that
you have to pay I don't know a monthly
fee or something to be part of this
network and this money is then pooled
and then the question is of course who
decides how the money gets spent it
seems to me that you're interested in
this fact well fractional democracy idea
because you're thinking maybe that the
people at the top of the photo the
fractal democracy representative chain
are the ones who then would decide how
the money is allocated is that correct
when we had the conversation on fractal
democracy when I'd first read the
article the emerging financial structure
was that yes people would pay in $10 a
month which is always kind of a number
that's stuck in my head because it's
around what Netflix is and the ideas
were creating the Netflix of apps we're
creating all this technology you think
it's your life better you come onboard
when ten dollars makes sense to you so
right now ten dollars to make sense the
Bentley and Ikes who want to create a
better world there's no technology we're
not getting anything for it besides
getting to show up and do this which is
awesome but it's the only maybe not
worth it to someone else who needs it to
feed them get their finances or whatever
their their issue is so and I forgot
what answer your question I was
answering my brain is clearly
Jubilee if I could cook them and so I
you know we have these things that we
want to go towards right so we
want everyone to be involved that wants
to be we want them to be free to do what
they want so when you're asking the
specifics we're not to that point yet
and those specifics will change as the
community matures over time so I I
wouldn't even start worrying about how
we're going to vide up you know a
thousand projects to ten thousand people
until we're closer to that point because
whatever we decide to do will be an
experiment and we'll iterate on it so I
can't say what that final solution is
going to be so we're really just kind of
like setting a goal and a path and it's
starting to experiment our goal is not
to have a central group of people
distribute the funds so we'll be looking
at a lot of different ways that that can
be done equitably and and fairly and and
to the you know desires of the
participants but that's that's one
things we need to discuss and that we
would like those people to come in and
help us figure out and decide how we're
going to do that as a community but the
idea is that there would be some sort of
funding model contributed by everybody
and those funds would be distributed in
some sort of fair fashion and there's
lots of options on how to do that yeah
and a big part of it also is like
whatever size for in people are able to
give feedback in what's working and not
working for them
so if $10 so you're paying $10 a month
then we're not focusing on the thing
you're here to solve
you're gonna leave but if you tell us
you're gonna leave and other people like
yeah they're not focusing on food and I
really won't here for food that's kind
of automatically an attractor to be like
oh yeah let's have that be now if your
thing is so fringe that nobody wants to
that's the only reason you're there this
probably isn't an attractor for you and
you might come realize that it leave
it's not like we have to keep everyone
but we also don't want to dissipate the
energies we want to have it be
Invitational I see so it's it really
does sound like you're rigorously trying
to develop a an online platform and
financial aggregator of some kind to
instantiate working
and urk ISM yeah I'd be careful with the
anarchism term because a lot of people
see that as anti-government even though
I I imagine your term you know your use
of it is is more the side of rejecting
hierarchies which you know in the end is
anti-government but I'm not an anarchist
at all personally but I I do know people
who you know are into it and what
they're not talking just they're not
I don't think mostly so much
anti-government as you correctly point
out as they had this idea that nobody
should ever have to be coerced in
anything everything they're actually
like libertarians you know they have
this idea that everything should just be
a voluntary Association and if there is
a decision to be made you know the only
difference maybe between the libertarian
and an anarchist I think is the
libertarian doesn't even seem to really
have anything other than the idea of a
bilateral deal marketplace deal in mind
whereas the anarchist maybe wants to
create kind of some sort of a social
technology which allows participative
decision-making but otherwise is
completely free always of any coercion
whatsoever which is the reason that I'm
thinking that this sounds more like
anarchism in that sense and not like
libertarianism yeah yeah I kind of agree
with that I I think though that a lot of
people would misunderstand the term
anarchy
so I would rather use different language
to describe it kind of like their
cooperative know where everyone does
have a say in it I don't know that we've
kind of worked out that wording
unfortunately there's language is a big
issue in everything it's either like am
a language they are like bringing in or
you to create a new one and then people
need to know what it means and yeah
that's what kind of longer description
than we'd like it to have so we were you
know but I think if we just say you know
like some things were pointing out by
everybody for everybody for tech when
we're focusing on attack more than
solutions and I'm kind of liking the
idea of a solution accelerate alright
that doesn't get to your question about
describing the
describing that that kind of focus but
but yeah I think we need to workshop
those words but I take your meaning
yeah we're not swirling what does one
fit into the whole la crisi realm I
think so yeah
it's kind of a circles and groups of
people that are choosing which projects
to work on right yeah that's fine I
understand that yeah so it's it's
philosophically similar to halakha see
yeah so that does need to be some kind
of a process for people to make
decisions or multiple processes it
sounds like you're being very rigorous
about not making any decisions in
advance without having everybody come
together and make the decision together
but if you don't have a process for
everybody to come together and make the
decision together it's like you know
you're in a vicious circle so how do you
imagine at least the first iteration
works that if you got everybody all not
if you got a whole bunch of people to
get on to a database together describe
themselves describe solutions or
problems that they're interested in
contributing towards the solution of and
you know be able to search the database
maybe to find people of birds of a
feather equally they might share
priorities with interests with
characteristics with supposing you had
all of that do you have any type of idea
so far how these people might decide to
you know how they might make decisions
together about something can I quickly
try to steal man you too or like say my
perspective on whether I understand you
and symptom may be a spa so if I
understand you correctly you would um
try to have groups come come together
people come together and then make the
decisions for themselves so the
differentiation there is you wouldn't
to impose any kind of decisions on two
groups you would always try to just make
them come together let the people who
are involved how many people that will
be beep five ten ten thousand or so try
them to have the decision together
um it's yeah instead of having someone
impose from the top and then from these
circles where those decisions come out
from instead of into you would build up
the project um is that who's the you
that you're I'm just I was asking these
questions because I'm trying to get a
sense of where Jubilee and Bentley are
at and what they imagine and my question
essentially I'm assuming the hypothesis
that there's a database of people that
have volunteered some information about
themselves and has said you know we want
to be part of this in some way and that
have also said you know here are their
sort of grand challenges or problems
that I'm interested in and yes I'm
willing to contribute $10 a month and so
you've got that and the question is
what's the decision procedure for moving
forward from that place and my my claim
would be as sort of a math isolate
applied math and physics as an undergrad
I have a master's in management so I
think I'm a very pragmatic person and
and I think in in terms of you know
useful questions like how do we do this
I think and so I think there has to be
an initial hypothesis that the
organizers will have to initially put in
place that allows people to make a
decision together otherwise you get
Occupy Wall Street that was incapable of
doing anything because they never could
actually make a decision together they
could just have people stand up and rant
into the microphone but they refused
even to create a process for making a
decision a majority decision as far as I
understand it wasn't there I just got
the impression that that that was the
case so if you're too extremist about
this anarchistic principle where you
won't even impose an initial heck
offices about how the group can come to
a decision then I think the whole thing
is destined to fail but that's that's
just so that's my challenging question
yeah you guys can tell me Bentley and
Jubilee whether I'm completely off-base
I mean can I tackle eligibly first thing
Jones I think your description is very
close to one of the options of how we're
doing this and Jasper your point about
not having any solid footing and nothing
could ever come of that is accurate
both Jubilee and I have had concepts on
how to pull something like this together
and we had you know a set I did I think
and I think Jubilee had this to kind of
set of rules and this is how we're going
to do it so we pulled back just a little
bit from that so we still have our ideas
what I and Jubilee wrote we haven't
discussed this point yet so really what
we're getting together is in public
we're discussing this and finding out
how to get there and if it's just
jubilant Jubilee and I come and do and
kind of setting up here's our vision and
invite people in and say okay we can
change it but we both kind of loosened
up on our designs for a little bit and
what I think we would like to do going
forward is actually just get you know a
good usability study tends to have like
you know you know five to ten
participants and after that level when
you go through and do usability study
and how many people there's diminishing
returns on adding additional people in
most cases so one one option that I
don't think we've been discussed is you
know if we can get this little meeting
to five six seven people who just say
hey I want to be more effective in and
the value that are bringing to the world
and I want to help other people do that
then I think Jubilee and I would work
with those people we would and put our
ideas and their ideas and we would kind
of come to a consensus of the group
still keep it loose but or at least
flexible and then then we would have
kind of here's more concrete vision but
both Jubilees and I had very concrete
visions before so I don't think the
problem is going to be
being to anarchist a we're just fighting
against our natural tendencies right now
I understand okay well of course I would
be interested in hearing both of what
you had in mind
insofar as it's still valid or maybe you
change your mind since my me personally
I figured out in my mind all of it how
we finance it how we get people together
every piece of it breaks and you
actually put it in the world and so it's
not about having I had to get to that
point to have enough faith to like step
out into the world and try I was like oh
my god I'm holding the like solution to
the world and so that I could like step
into it to let it all fall apart and be
like oh we need to create this otherwise
you have to sell it and I don't want to
sell it I want to create it I want the
passion to be there I don't want to be
in charge of this idea I want to be Elon
Musk I want to be surrendered leadership
and like how do we create that together
and they'll like personal process of
doing that and the group process of
doing that and that is what we are doing
and I have an answer a answer for almost
all of it but it's one answer and it's
any table that I'm part of it were
discussing it I will bring that answer
to the table and we can improve it or
it's thrown out and someone else's ideas
better right like the idea is that in a
group we are smarter and we have more
ideas and the more willing to do this
process out in public the better is what
I got going so one of the concepts which
I think was mostly Jubilee is what we
have kind of an idea cafe and this one's
very loose still but where we have a
scheduling system that allows people to
just say hey I'm willing to talk about
solving the world's problems solving our
world's problems and the system would
randomly match people in groups they'd
have discussions and then we hadn't
quite figured out how we're gonna roll
up the information there's several
processes where you could then have
representatives meet or just if you have
enough groups meeting together and
enough overlap between the groups over a
period of time then theoretically the
good ideas would kind of float up to the
top and then the group could propose
solutions and there's a whole bunch of
tools for kind of voting on those and
stuff like that I've been working for
less over years on a tool that allows
people to use facts and reasons to make
decisions as opposed to more of an
emotional stance called reason score so
I'm hoping that that tool would be a
value to this group but we'll see how it
goes it's not done yet so I can't really
put it out there too strongly but
there's lots of there's lots of options
to try so I think if we didn't get just
a few more people to brainstorm with us
on those in and then start proposing
some rules and maybe even clearly state
that those use a different word that
rule maybe even aspiration and say yeah
this is what we're proposing to the
world and then we kind of share that
more and then get more feedback and suck
people in through mind control then yeah
I think we're just earlier in the
process than you would like how long
have you guys been talking about this
I've been working on my fitness like
he's been doing it for four years for
about three and a half four years we've
been meeting for a couple months yeah
let's just like once a week for an hour
so you can see we've yeah yeah right
yeah I mean we think about it on the
side and stuff and some of the things
but but it's interesting when you
introduce a new person how much of your
ideas kind of break and you after we
think everything so it's a very it's a
very deep process that takes some time
but yeah we could definitely go faster
but Jubilee has a child and I you know
this part-time job so we're yeah we're
so we're taking it slow it's more of a
hobby at this point and the more people
join like there's also the piece of
their skills that Brentley and I don't
have between us and so even like the
admin på if someone came on board and
took on the mid piece that would be huge
and able to move us forward we're like
this is you know um I'm never gonna
write out the white page for this thing
it's not within my skill set someone can
write they can take that idea and
actually write it out in and understand
format in like you know a ten page
document how great that we're not there
until that person comes on board cuz
then they're part of creating it so it's
gonna be a lot easier for them to write
that to write it out so that it can be
candid easily but there's a good chance
that no that we may not have enough may
not be solid enough for anyone to really
join a Jubilees who would i will have to
spend time or get it get it more solid
and then some people may join or we
might just find another organization
like you know microsoft are they already
doing the same thing and just join them
so okay I'm silly and find like you know
a group of people to become a I don't
know but there's it's called transitions
it's called pods and there's a lot here
like everything is chicken-and-egg
everything's like well if we had this
tool then we could create all these
tools if we had the way to communicate
if we had a way that couldn't have a
consensus is it like which is both
extremely frustrating but also the power
lies in that cuz once we get started
once we like kind of figure out how to
work with a hundred people it's a much
easier to exponentially grow that but
you can't really figure out how to work
with a hundred people until you have a
hundred people you so right now we're
figuring out how to work on a five per
you know how to get five people and work
on a five person consensus model with
the idea we're going to invite the world
so how do we keep growing it and making
it bigger like there's a big barrier to
this in that people have to be available
at 11:00 a.m. on or my time 11:00 a.m.
on Friday how do we include people who
aren't available during that time period
[Music]
you're kind of starting from a almost a
to rigorously empty platform if you may
just I'm not trying to be a devil's
advocate exactly I'm just sort of
looking trying to look at this is a
rational analyst and so for example
Jubilee you're just talking about how to
get you know learn how to work with a
hundred people then get up from there
and so on and just start by having this
conversation with you and Bentley and
then see if tracks a few other people
and sort of you know continue on for
there and see what happens
they're a bunch of a lot of insights
that are already exist from the world of
you know social anthropology
evolutionary biology and so on we
already know a lot about what human
beings are and how they work at least
some people know about this and one of
the things we know is that we grew up as
a species and we involved as a species
in southern Africa probably in what is
now in northeast Botswana and Southwest
Zimbabwe region as in as
hunter-gatherers that organize in small
groups where you you know this the
groups were these bands that were maybe
at most an affiliate group of a hundred
people or so 150 at absolute maximum but
more like usually only a few dozen
people and even within that you knew
some quite a bit better than others and
and so the ability to work together well
we're naturally structured to work in
fairly small teams and the fact that
humanity has developed into something
that can work and massive teams of
millions through you know stuffing
everybody into uniforms and then having
one person bark orders at a group of
people or something and zero tolerance
for disobedience and things like that is
it works in armies is is an interesting
thing but even there if you look closely
you see people working in small teams
they just disaggregate what the
different teams are responsible for but
at the end of the day it's a small group
of a handful of people that actually
gets things done so ok can't we make use
of that information as we're structure
you know that's the idea behind the fact
of the moxie idea is really you probably
don't the money thinking behind it was
you don't want the base group or the pod
or whatever you call it to be more than
seven people five might actually be
better first of all an odd number of
people so you can make a majority
decision by vote because you're not
always gonna get consensus and secondly
you don't want the group more than let's
say seven people because you want you
want everybody to be heard you want
everybody you know pass the talking
stick around the circle you don't want
to exhaust people's patience and focus
of attention and if you have more than
seven people it's just too much even
seven is
at five is better so even the introverts
even their rows to be quiet people get a
chance to talk and be heard and then at
the end of the day they choose a
representative and send that
representative up to the next level and
it's the same process they're in a group
of either five people or seven people
depending on how big the part is that
you choose the N equals five or in
equals seven and then again they make
sure everybody's heard they try to
develop consensus if they can't they
have a vote and again they choose a
representative up to the next level so
that you always are working within the
natural unit the natural a small group
unit the human beings are actually
designed for does that make sense yeah
but until we actually would do that we
don't act like we we know the Sociology
we know the science but not necessarily
how that actually plays out in the real
world right like we have this whole
conversation for an hour on fractal
democracy and some of the issues that
could arise and yet it's not in the
world actually playing right and so what
we were playing with and I don't it was
forming a board right and having it run
with liquid democracies no matter how
many members there are there they're
putting their power they're choosing who
on the board represents them and if the
person on the board isn't doing what
they want them to do you just move your
vote and so people around the board
table have a different power dynamic
based on who gave them their vote and
yet your hat you're coming to consensus
decision-making with five seven nine
people right who are meeting weekly and
having but are paid for it so we're you
don't I mean it's not a hobby it's not
something that needs to fit around the
rest of your life um and who is how
those people are decided on with
democracy the top delegated people are
the ones that come into play maybe
something like fractal democracy or
you're able to form to form groups but
then there's like well maybe I want one
group for my food right and one group
for my clothing and and one group did or
I don't care about I want to eat but
it's someone else could deal with deal
with clothing so a bit of like we're
dealing with the Menna the big of like
how this could look if there were
millions of people and also what we're
starting from the ground there isn't
even a board yet right the board might
naturally form with who's here first but
if we're not willing just to recreate
that structure once there's a hundred
people who are like wait yeah we love it
we don't want a board and there's a new
thing that can emerge that isn't a board
we're open to it and so that's where
like you're also come here to very it's
always a bit of a chaotic time but like
this thing is constantly evolving we I
don't think it's good for it to be to
constantly evolving or else I can never
never settle into any decision pattern
to move forward from am I wrong about
that well the right now not wrong but
right now it's because we're looking at
what's working and what's not working
right is this fun for Bentley and I to
come to and what does it need to be so
that we're moving forward towards
something and it's also an enjoyable to
come to and so we've only just evolved
to having the fixed the Saturday project
raisins we're only on our third one
tomorrow and part of that was like wait
all of these people have projects and if
only they could come together so let's
focus on their project let's find the
common pain instead of just inventing it
instead of like thinking we know what it
is let's find what can help all of these
projects and maybe create a platform
from that may be how do we we're trying
to create the communication tool but we
kind of need people on board first
because if we create the database what
you said right which would be awesome
but that's not free and so we're not
putting in that money so if we found
thousands of people to be like we're
like yes we want to find our people and
they put in money and that we can work
through that process together using
existing technology including where it
doesn't work right like oh not everyone
can be on video so people have to
participate in the comments the comments
are too chaotic it's looking for what's
not working as we go through the process
towards creating a solutions technology
that's designed for anyone to bring a
problem to you and find a group of
people to work through it with yeah and
we're not we're also learning like you
said you know we know how well there's a
lot of theories on how people interact
and there's a lot of tools you know
we're finding more every day so we're
also doing you know in the process of
learning what's out there learning what
other people are doing make sure we're
not duplicating that work all this stuff
kind of takes time and right now we have
two people so I don't even know if we
need a process at this
and I don't know that a lot of people
coming in are going to say well what's
your decision-making process I think
most people would be say oh yeah I want
to kind of help the world I have a
project but I want to help other people
with similar projects so let's chat on
video I I don't think that'll be a
blocker for a lot of people it may be a
blocker for you you may want there to be
more structure at this point and we're
not opposed to get in there I want to be
I want you to be more structure in a
longer term because well it's it's
perfectly nice for a small you know
group of people have informal chats to
help each other on things if you
actually want to aggregate power and
aggregate coordinate the activities a
lot of people and aggregates the money
and figure out how to spend it then you
do need decision-making processes that
that enable that and division of labor
and so on and people you know making
decisions about where they fit into the
scheme of things otherwise you're not
really able to put enough order into the
chaos in order to be able to move
forward so you don't you know I
sympathize I resonate with the idea of
not wanting to impose order from above
in a dictatorship right obviously that's
why I thought of fractal democracy but
same time I do want order to emerge from
the chaos sufficiently to be effective
because we're gonna need to for example
in relation to the climate crisis we
need to do some big stuff really fast
and that's going to require a lot of
aggregation of resources and some major
decisions to do things like shut down
coal-fired power plants and decide you
know to build some Giga factories for
solar panels and things like that pool
the money to do that billions of dollars
per gigafactory it's it's not it's a
non-trivial thing and just sort of get
together with a few people and chatting
about it the video call isn't going to
be the tool that makes that happen so so
yes I think that having a
decision-making structure which is
democratic and bottom-up but yet is
effective is going to be really
crucial and yeah and I think that I
think that maybe Jubilee you probably
agree with me which is why you thought
Franco Marquez II was an interesting
yeah I mean I love interesting tools I
love like figuring out how things could
work part of it is that what Bradley
said that this isn't necessarily a
sticking point for a lot of people right
other people don't necessarily need us
to have that's that before they they
come on board you do and so if you
wanted to come on board that would be
part of like listen I'm not on board
unless we already have the structure or
I'm here to help make that structure
right and you're here for like this week
so that's not so glad necessarily
something that I'm not asking you to
take on but the point is as people come
on board
that's not we both have answers to those
issues is like how we create in a
massive group but we are not stuck on
that because we have answers in her head
right so we're like we can figure this
out no problem but if you like if you're
not at that point it's yours to solve
right it's yours to kind of greet and be
like how do we how do we get the
decision-making process
how do we solve problems when we have
the Dunbar number like how does that
actually happen how do we have
conversations with four people around a
table and have the best things get to
the table and we're having the
conversations around that that structure
as opposed to just imposing one and
eventually we will have to impose one
because you can't have infinite choices
there has to be you know three pick why
do you want to play it never yes sir
yeah so let me just clarify gesture
we're in complete agreement with that
there needs to be a process and we are
working on that process so there's no I
would guess that it's going to be a
decision-making structure and and all
structures for all kind of different
things but they will come into play when
it's time for them to come into play
when people need them and probably that
video chat here is partly exactly for
that reason to discuss okay what kind of
structure do we actually need what kind
of next step do we need and so I don't
think what they do know about so far as
what structure are we gonna put in place
so we're just not quite there yet but
that's what we are actively
okay yeah I kind of thought that that
was the mission of this setters chats
which which is to try to decide that
that is one of the goals yeah and this
is also the chicken in the egg of like
the chaos it's like well we need a
finance structure we need like what is
the most important and we can't really
decide on any of until there's people so
what we're actually focused on is how do
we get people right how do we get five
people and they're not going to come on
board unless this is fun
so what's the structure of actually fix
our world Friday right like how do we
make this enjoyable for like was this
enjoyable for you Jonah so Jasper for
you to come on board does this work for
us to have people come on board right
that are like here for just one week and
are we actually creating solutions maybe
we don't concentrate on the tech and
what that process is we actually figure
out a solution together to something
right that is we focus on food or we
focus on we're still having all of those
conversations constantly okay so we
could take that as the topic I mean if
we could definitely in our next 30
seconds but yeah I mean that's that that
was actually the top that was one of the
topics of today that we kind of talked
about was you know which which of these
things to use so yeah so if you want
that's why again will join do it again I
guess that's why we were also trying to
look at this micro solidarity and the
collective one thing because potentially
one of those things
my provides a good for going processes I
assume okay I know you guys yonis and me
to this particular meeting are you
thinking that this the meeting that
started with Jubilee and
Bentley is meant to grow into a large
meeting with more people until and then
from there work out a decision structure
and do something and then grow further
in other words are you planting the seed
of the entire global movement here is
that your concept or are you trying to
design a an abstract vehicle technology
that you know some other people could
become the seed group of some something
you know something are you designing the
technology or you try to be the seed
group I think more Beasley group be the
C group unless someone else is and and
willing to have us join them right like
other people aren't doing the work we're
doing they're doing adjacent work and so
that's partly like sometimes there are
people doing the work we're doing we're
trying to find the space of what do we
have to offer that is within this realm
of tech and solutions that's also not
being done in this way and therefore not
being done the same time I see also
trying trying to create you for yourself
to be the group yeah yeah yeah it's a
jasper's point the the primary goal is
for that group to exist the tools are a
means to get there and we'll use other
tools if if they exist
we're not dogmatic about creating the
tools yeah I don't want to reinvent the
wheel we want to use what's out there
but nothing's quite the tool like we
can't even find the schedule it's by the
way Heather said she might be able to
find she knows it exists and think she's
used it okay I've had an amazing
conversation with her
sorry Jesper interrupted on apologize I
was I was under the the thing that for
me is interesting is to see if I can
empower lots of little groups to form by
giving them a structure that they can
use that works fairly smoothly and also
for people to find their people which
that was a
phrase that you said early on in this
conversation today that resonated with
me Julie another thing that resonated
with me as you said you know find your
people even if you're autistic or
something and 99 people out of a hundred
are not gonna resonate with you but you
want to find the one out of hundred that
does okay I think that's an important
criteria because because it's true you
know that you one doesn't really
resonate most people don't resonate with
a thousand people there is the
sociologist talk about agreeableness or
disagreeableness is for example is one
of the key one of the five key traits
and how does that work in a group like
this like if it's completely based on on
how likable you are and otherwise nobody
wants to work with you then you're gonna
have the disagreeable people excluded
but ironically sometimes the
disagreeable people are especially clear
thinkers that's what makes them seem
disagreeable as they keep on coming up
with objections because they people are
talking the way that they fight is maybe
not well grounded in logic or something
like this and so they say well wait a
minute you guys are full of such
and such is the case and that comes
across as disagreeable so entire
cultures are based around you know being
agreeable the Japanese culture for
example the British have this
interesting way of trying to be
disagreeable without being too obvious
about it and so on so this is actually a
fairly big deal and and thinking about a
structure that allows people to to be
effective and to work and teams together
whatever their personal characteristics
in that sense of communication styles
although of course you want people to
improve in the communication styles
that's that's a part of this as well and
so I'm interested in the idea of
creating a vehicle in which it's
possible for everyone to be heard
remember I said earlier even the
introverts making sure that everybody
gets a talking stick everybody gets a
chance to say something and be heard and
yet be effective as a group and also be
able to aggregate the work of many many
people which is that's again I'm not
gonna be a broken record
but that's why it occurred to me that a
fact of democracy approach might be
useful because it kind of allows you to
do that and it would tend I will admit
if you have a group of let's say seven
people and they choose a spokesperson
and they're encouraged to choose
somebody who who's particularly good at
being a spokesperson who is particularly
empathetic listens well takes the
concerns of the group forward and so on
what you're probably doing there is
you're you're creating a bias towards
agreeable somewhat agreeable people but
you know it's likeable enough that
they'll get everybody else or majority
of the votes in the group but you can't
actually go to totally agreeable people
because totally agree people people
maybe have a really hard time making a
strong case because they don't want to
upset anybody so so this is this is
again why I think that at the end of the
day complete consensus basis might not
be feasible I think we actually need a
process for coming to majority decisions
but but in such a way that there's
strong accountability there's always the
possibility of recalling your decision
or your spokesperson and that that you
can ensure that the that weapon aware no
matter who you are you are always going
to get a chance to speak directly to
your spokesperson and make sure that
they've understood your concerns the
liquid democracy thing that you said
earlier is kind of sketched over very
quickly I think we talked about the end
of our one-on-one talk the other day
Jubilee and I didn't fully understand
what you had in mind for the model there
but that's maybe something we should
talk about again are you familiar with
liquid democracy just yeah in principle
but I haven't used it okay it's just
giving your vote to somebody else as
long as you feel comfortable doing so
you sort of say here you've got you on
this particular class of issue I'll
trust you to make decision to cast my
vote yeah but you can recall it any time
you want yeah basically so yes and that
was why I like the concept of liquid
democracy but we are past the hour so we
should probably end our fix our role
Friday
and thank you very much Jesper and join
us for joining us that was great to have
other other people contributing and
goodbye to YouTube see you next week and
tomorrow for a project I see