[Music]
[Music]
man with Zack Stein intact thank you for
coming on the podcast yeah I was
wondering to start if you could just
give us a bit of an idea of your
background what got you interested in in
education in particular and I suppose
reforming education which is what a lot
of your work seems to be on let's see
I'm am dyslexic so I was always at odds
with school and with no assessment and
testing in particular and so I think
that meant from a young age I didn't
just take schools as given and
understood learning as something that
kind of took place outside the schools
and so I taught myself music and it was
mostly interested in being musician
until about halfway through college and
it was actually at that point that I
became obsessed with certain kind of
philosophy a kind of developmental kind
of evolutionary way of thinking about
the human experience I found it in
Emerson and Ken Wilber and
livanski and Cobb Kaufman and a whole
bunch of other people I was reading then
charles sanders peirce and that allowed
me to see that there's a kind of almost
cosmic function to education as an
aspect of human cultural evolution if
you understand cultural evolution itself
as continuous with biological and
cosmological evolution which is to say
that if you understand the human as
nested in and evolving nature and you
want to help the human continue to
evolve
you should probably focus on education
and this was what John Dewey you know
John do we realize this early probably
the most in the most profound way at
soonest after Darwin right because it
was Darwin they got the entire world
system to start thinking about evolution
as opposed to a static or cyclical way
of thinking about stuff so yes that
meant I plugged in education
not with for an example the desire to be
a teacher although I love teaching and
have loved teachers I've benefited
massively from teaching and teachers and
I also didn't go in thinking about
schooling in particular or being a
principal or thinking about school
systems I came in very very much as a
philosopher and doing basic work in
metaphysics and meta psychology and the
work in psychology was developmental
psychology specifically in the realm of
psychometrics and so the first book was
about how we measure Minds and the
social justice issues related with
standardized testing infrastructures and
I run the history of that from the IQ
tests up through No Child Left Behind
and then the second book education and
time between worlds continues just with
that kind of meta systemic reflection on
education as an issue transcending and
including schooling as an issue and when
you start to look at it that way you
start to realize that actually education
itself is tied up in issues of
civilizational continuity which is to
say one way to understand what
civilization is is the continuous
intergenerational transmission of a
particular kind of skill capacity virtue
and when there are rifts in the dynamics
of intergenerational transmission such
that the civilization cannot reproduce
itself however Moss thought of this as
sociological autobuses
when the society cannot reproduce itself
through the basic function of Education
then you have something like a
civilizational collapse dynamic and
these dynamics have been tracked by a
bunch of researchers including people
like Tainter and Danish Whataburger was
a colleague of mine so the issue of
education in civilizational collapse
started to fall into place for me
towards the end of graduate school so
that's mostly where I'm working now is
thinking about this interface of
metaphysics psychology and politics in
this realm of Education and I'm doing
loans
and that's the versus some of it kind of
brings us to speed yeah I mean based on
on some of what you've just said and
indeed the title of the recent book
education in a time between worlds
there's this sense that perhaps
something is is breaking down something
it's changing that's what I guess a
bunch of those guys
Daniel schmuck Dan burger talks about
that a bunch what do you think it is
that is perhaps crumbling falling apart
and how is that tied with education I
mean in a very general sense I talked
about it in the book as the capitalist
world system and this is a term used by
Immanuel Wallerstein it was incredible
historian of economics and politics and
culture and you know when we talk about
what's distinctive about the West and
specifically what's distinctive about
what happened after about 1600 when
there was a major shift in the dynamics
of industrialization and capitalization
which created what Wallerstein describes
as the capitalist world system and now
there have been other world systems that
have not been capitalists and in fact as
wallerstein shows if you look at
mesopotamia and what we now call the
Middle East and the Indus River Valley
you see prior to the emergence of the
capitalist world system a bunch of
coexisting non capitalist world systems
and so what that means is that the
capitalist world system did something
interesting and actually succeeded in
making a global world system as opposed
to a self-contained world system on the
same globe with other world systems you
see and so thinking about it in those
terms actually this is maybe a footnote
but thinking about in these in these
other terms
helps you think back into cultural
history what it would have been like to
live prior to the emergence of the
capitalist world system where
intercultural exchange was more like a
movement between world systems then like
a movement between cultures within a
single world system which is what we
have now and that's what people talk
about when they talk about
multiculturalism and the complexity of
that is that it's like the whole
system's contained by capitalism by the
infrastructures and dynamics of
capitalism and we can get into that but
which means that culture is now
different than it used to be and so
however most talks about this as the
colonialization of the life world which
didn't used to be potentially complete
before the capitalist world system
achieved its global enclosure and so
what that meant means is that for the
first time ever a civilization has
enclosed the entire planet and
unfortunately that's what I'm talking
about when I'm talking about something
coming apart and so it used to be when
world systems came untangled there were
other world systems thousands of miles
away that weren't affected and there
were ecosystems that had never been
touched by humans were brought into the
dynamics of any world system capitalism
world systems are also world Ecology's
world systems also organize ecosystems
live within them and so yeah this this
particular one that we're looking at now
and capitalism may not be the right word
anymore to be honest with you but it is
a it is a totalized infrastructural
project and it's a fragmented planetary
computational stack as has been
described by Benjamin Benjamin Bratton
at the most abstract level and it's
cobbled together
it's a planetary system yes but it was
not Planetary by transcendental design
was Planetary by ambition and
retrospective piecemeal scrapping
together of international trade and law
and standards I've looked at the
Catholic world system particularly from
the perspective of measurement and the
proliferation of complex measurement
infrastructures exemplified by the
international standards organizations
but also you're living right with it
when you're taking a standardized test
or in any kind of building that is up to
code
you are in a architectural space that
has been standardized by the capitalist
world system for you as opposed to an
architectural space that's built through
cultural transmission alone for example
so there's a shift in the relation
between culture and system and is a
shift in the relation between system and
system so that we have one giant system
where it's all interconnected and we
don't have what I call a planetary idea
app ad is a Greek word that means
education so although we have an
interconnected infrastructure that's
global and that's complex statement and
we can get into that of course it's not
entirely global Russia China right
places that are not but from one another
perspective there's nothing outside of
the containment of these largest
infrastructures there's not a major
systemic cascade that wouldn't ricochet
around the entire planet which is
unprecedented amazing gift of planet
ization the kind of urgency of
interconnectedness of it all but also
the danger of having the world system
incapsulate the planet is that if the
world system fails it's game over in a
way that didn't used to be true and so
yeah the measurement infrastructures are
some of those things that already
encircle the planet and our educational
infrastructures are fragmented and from
like the 19th century
and so that's the dynamic I'm looking at
is the lag between technological
economic interconnection at the
planetary level and fragmented
nationalistic human capital oriented
educational systems which have not kept
pace with the technological change and
to the extent we're now at the
technology field chains acting back on
the generational transmission because
I'm getting answer like the technology
companies are disrupting the potentials
of intergenerational transmission
through predatory and addictive behavior
screen-based cultures so I'm kind of
rambling that but that it's what's
coming card is big and complicated and
truly complex in like the technical
sense of that term which means that it
is going through some catastrophic
bifurcation so that's what I also kind
of mean and this is Wallerstein's terms
he pulls from pretty gene and looks at
these kind of very complex systems far
from equilibrium and what they do and he
says this is what this is what world
systems look like they're massively
complex systems that go through
catastrophic bifurcations or anyone
which means now is a time of incredible
opportunity as well as incredible danger
so I see mostly it as an educational
crisis it's a time that we need to
understand again what it means to be
human and understand again how to
instill in the next generations the
things that will constitute the future
that's worth living and one very
different from what's currently our path
we just got we into the edge of
basically I think it's only it's only
sort of frames a lot of the problems
that we face really well to think of
sort of capitalism or maybe even you
could even call it modernity as a
world-system it sort of makes a lot of
sense that we would be facing a climate
crisis that affects the whole planet and
I think there's a very good point you
made about education I've heard it said
that we basically still have
factory-style
education we produce children in batches
based on age and the day's sort of the
the the school if you look at say louie
alpha sir he very specifically draws a
parallel between sort of level of
schooling and class that basically the
one thing you can obviously be said is
that in sort of Britain nowadays a
university degree is essentially just a
ticket into the middle class and though
I think I think I think that's a very
very good point about how how we live in
a world that's moving in leaps and
bounds and the is now totally
interconnected education seems to still
completely resemble what it did in 1850
in many ways yeah I mean in in some
places that's totally true so the way I
would frame it is this there's a kind of
correspondence principle that sometimes
talked about in the history of education
where there's a correspondence between
the mode of production in the economy
and means of relationship and dynamic of
relationship in schools and so that's
that notion of the factory school occurs
in the society that has people in
factories as their main mode of economic
productivity now the one-room
schoolhouse occurs in places where the
mode of production is the single
household right so the mirror between
the single household as the central mode
of economic production and the one-room
schoolhouse and the transition into
modernity with the factory school and
the factory workers we're actually
seeing another shift in that
has to do with move towards taking apart
the big factory schools and replacing
them with things that look like startup
companies this is the charter school
movement where you're literally
fracturing the unified high school into
a bunch of various targeted specific
kind of charter schools or independent
schools and so that's interesting we're
now the kind of white-collar and kind of
gig economy is being mirrored in a kind
of much more fractured and
differentiated almost stratified
entrepreneurial education space and
that's very different from a kind of
doing an ideal of getting all the kids
in a melting pot you're actually
differentiating all the kids very early
age and so that's that's key to get the
the difference there so yeah the
difference you know between it's not
just factory schools in fact we
transcend a factory schools with the
movement into white-collar labor some
time ago and we're moving into something
now that looks like this educational
marketplace like a educational gig
economy and yeah the kind of
marketization of the educational system
itself as a dynamic that's important to
see as part of this expansion of the the
capitalist world system part of the
endgame is that we start to turn into
markets things that were never
considered as to be markets and
educational capitalism
yeah yeah it's a symptom of late
capitalism that we need to find more and
more realms to commodify to continue to
grow the economy so I'm yeah I think I
was just saying about how how we
actually did an episode with I'm sure
you remember and with
guy who asked to remain anonymous um
yeah
Irish University professor Eck's
University professor and he was
basically saying about how universities
as educational institutions have
fundamentally changed in Britain oh well
in Ireland and you see exactly the same
thing in Britain which is that they
basically are now geared towards getting
students into the university because
number of students determines funding
which in turn determines profits and and
this has been completely at the expense
research and that the university
management are now very uninterested in
research going on in universities think
about it that could be an entire
paradigm shift in education is the
traditional unity of the educational
institution in the research institution
that is university is being essentially
attacked that now places where people
are taught and learn will also no longer
be the places for innovation and new
thought and and and research right you
know it's it's an interesting dynamic i
I write about it under the rubric of the
education commodity proposition right
which is the idea that you can apply
market models and business models to the
quote creation of educational quote
products right which I'm suggesting as a
as a base level of fundamentally wrong
metaphor and model and I'm also written
about this with the Economist Hans des
pain under the heading of the
financialization of higher education we
wrote series of op eds on one of them
can be found on my website and there you
also see that it's not simply that the
transactional relationship takes place
between the student and the college
which are saying whether it's direct to
consumer advertising and increasing
inflation of tuition and
but there's also this relationship
between the colleges and financial
services agencies which is to say that
where the colleges put the kids in debt
the colleges are themselves in debt and
you end up creating an idea a dynamic
which is like a bubble but it's a
student loan bubble so it's the works
like this and it doesn't have worked in
real estate where the people who build
the houses get the money from the banks
to build houses and build them on debt
and then the people who buy the houses
of course take mortgages so the houses
are bought on that were also built on
debt the same banks give out that debt
so the contractors pay back their debts
with the money that the people who
bought the houses took from the same
bank so you can see how and this is a of
course a mature economic analysis but
you can see how this works right where
the colleges are now in order to pay
back their debts needing to fill more
seats they just build a new building
they need to fill more seats in order to
pay back those debts putting the kids in
debt in order to pay back the college's
debt and so great were talks but great
for dogs been made yeah greater talks
about the dynamic Anna and a few other
people and stricking because it means
that at the end of the day who's
shouldering the ultimate debt is the
student and what's the likelihood
they're not gonna be able to pay it it's
very high similar to the mortgage holder
in the financial bubble holding
ultimately the end of the debt rope and
their house not being what it actually
said it was worth right and that's how a
bubble bursts when at the end of the day
we need to cash in there's value
somewhere and it's supposed to be now in
the skills of the kids who went through
their colleges but the economy is not
functioning such that they can actually
cash those skills and you repay the
debts so the student at least in the
United States it's different elsewhere
the student loan debt
situation is quite bad and it's not as
simple as forgiving it which is the
Saints although I promote the ideas of
debt Jubilee in my book it's the
situation with the student loan crisis
is again educational first the society
needs to understand what happened why
didn't we do this why do we get in the
situation which is very complicated and
hard thing for a culture to grasp only
then when there's a broad understanding
of how it is that when they're doing
this to a whole generation then we can
start to think about you know
remediating the actual concrete economic
situation otherwise it looks like you're
just letting the kids off the hook and
given to a bunch of money back and so
and that's the reaction those people
have when you say forgive the student
loan debt the reaction is well that's
absurd and unfair unfair what do you
like I'm older I still have student loan
debt does mine get forgiven errs there
is some age at which net we forgive all
of theirs or so it becomes complicated
technical problem if we don't resolve
the kind of ethical moral
self-understanding problem that was the
root of the crisis itself which is that
we thought it was fine wait and do
things we know it was fine to turn
education into a purely transactional
relationship in which the student is
understood as human capital and so other
other countries didn't choose to do that
to the same extent but because of the
way universities are nested in economies
more broadly many of them are happening
to be turned into market-based dynamics
anyway just to make ends meet often to
pay back their own debts so it's a
complicated mess and of course where the
research goes on is is an important
question and that gets to the issue of
civilizational collapse as a function of
educational failure if the mind of the
civilization the place where the
thinking is supposed to be done in the
civilization in order to steer the
civilization if that think he's not
actually being done because they have
marketized it and set up incentive
systems that actually disincentivize
long term complex research in the
interests of
short-term kind of funding structures
and those kinds of dynamics mean you're
not actually making sense in the
academic realms to where you need to be
making the most sense in order to help
civilization solve problems right so you
can see there's a vicious downward
spiral of kind of like the cognitive
side of these collapse dynamics and
that's the education crisis it's not
serious you've talked about taking the
philosophers perspective on education
and this is what I find quite
interesting I know you have heard you
talk elsewhere I think with Daniel
Thorson about the ways almost like it
used a word meta psychology the theory
we we have about ourselves and indeed
the way we interact with each other and
with society plays itself out in how we
do think like education I was wondering
if you could perhaps explain what might
be the theory of self that exists in the
kind of current paradigm as it exists
and what might be a better theory of
self and indeed of society going
forwards that's really interesting you
know at least there's two ways to think
about this you know one is that there's
a there's a way that were there's a way
that we're like structurally
incentivized to understand ourselves by
virtue of the bureaucracies and
institutions and family systems we find
ourselves in and so that's an important
kind of dimension of this issue which is
that when you talk about like a false
self and a real self right or kind of in
authentic self in an authentic self or
persona versus like you know
individuated like Union self that sense
of duplicity in identity and that who I
show myself to be in society is not who
I feel myself to be in private right so
those kinds of dynamic
need to be surfaced before you start
talking about like what which self
are we moving into itself are we coming
from so you need to locate first the
question in your own experience yeah
because I think that would be one way to
think about the self or leaving as
itself that's just a thought
right that's what the ego is a thought
which is to say it's important one it's
like the linchpin thought it's the
center of your self-esteem and it's the
center of your motivation and the center
of what holds your identity to Gander
with you know together with boundaries
but at the end of the day it's it's an
abstraction and that's what many
contemplative traditions are trying to
expose something that's not real that
doesn't have a function not that it's
not important to be actually a healthy
dynamic and mature and complex ego but
there's still a way in which there are
other ways of relating to this question
of self non-descriptive not parsed in
semantically and propositional e
differentiated speech but as lived
experience and so this is the
phenomenological traditions and the
begins contemplator traditions and so I
think because of the nature of half
civilization is changing the educational
crisis I raise this question what is the
human and so I I don't think we're
looking at like some new theory of self
that's articulated in language although
I think we're gonna get that I think at
the end of the day we're looking at the
new new certain new possibilities for
embodied experience of self and which is
kind of like a move out of the abstract
linguistically mediated forms of self
understanding and to move into those
forms of understanding that are mediated
by relationship empathy movement
it's a dissolve quite abstract and but
it's you know the difference between
knowing someone by virtue of their
resume and knowing someone by virtue of
sharing a meal with them right
so like the abstract ego of modernity is
like a resume right like it's mostly
about that front facing persona and what
it looks like that's the commodity
fetishism of the identity that
characterizes the self of modernity
which is that you apply the commodity
form to the self which is then you
pretended you got a shelf and you hide
the whole production process behind it
and you clarify its relationship to
price so you know wage labor
characterizes the self of modernity and
the selling of myself into the wage
labor market forces in a sense the
application of commodity form to the
self and therefore the truncation
alienation so so for example this is
what I'm getting at if we didn't have
the category of wage labor anymore
because there was something like a basic
income guarantee then that would disrupt
not the thought of self but the embodied
experience of self like intergeneration
there would be something so different to
being brought into an ecosystem of
social life where there was no category
of wage labor where the self didn't
necessarily have to be commodified and
presented into the markets as a resume
and so that's an example where it's not
so much gonna it's probably more that
we'll figure out which of the theories
of self we've already had in which of
the ways of talking about self actually
makes sense not that we're gonna have a
new novel way of explaining myself in
fact we're gonna kind of come to realize
what I call like the return to the human
we're gonna come to realize what we've
kind of always been what we've been
tricked out of realizing we are again
just like thinking that self organizing
enable
educational initiative all volunteer
based right doesn't quote count but for
me an LLC that makes a profit the gen
moves up the GDP that quote does count
right so it's kind of like where are the
places where you can do self creation
outside of transactional market dynamics
as more of those become available for
better and for worse because the economy
right which is a safe economy breaks we
also get that opportunity because then
money is not worth anything and then
we're stuck realizing other ways of
thinking about the relationship between
people and who we are what we're worth
what we can do right so if there's going
to be a D abstraction of the self return
to kind of a basic embodied sense of the
human and yeah that's I think one of the
things that characterizes a lot of
crisis and transformation of personality
and relationship is moments when the
language game breaks down and when you
fall into a deeper layer of relationship
and process and it feels like you're
actually in reality not in some model or
language you had about it and so we're
going through that like as a culture
where the language isn't working and
certain realities are beginning to well
bump up against the you things we use to
control them like the weather and the
human nervous system and our inner
nature's are exhausting our control
mechanisms and our explanatory capacity
which means we're going to be forced
back to the kind of raw experience of
being human hopefully we will as we've
done in the past reconstruct some sanity
out of that to sort of a realization
that we've sort of been tricked into
thinking that we haven't had is is very
because I can certainly think especially
with this sort of with the analogy of
not-for-profit organisations that most
of I certainly would consider the
volunteering which is not a lot by any
means especially in terms of the amount
of time I've spent volunteering prepared
comments been working I would certainly
think that the volunteering that I've
done has had a much much bigger effect
on my idea of myself and my life then
and work but I've done
I mean paid labour that is that I've
done and and I think that that's
something that a lot of people in my
generation or probably probably relate
to that I think people are moving more
and more towards seeing what as kind of
an unfortunate necessity whereas in my
parents generation I certainly see in my
parents that work is kind of you'd as
the defining aspect of your life that
for I mean I think this is maybe more
true for people who have sort of
professions and you know for example my
parents you know compute a lot more
define your life other types of work but
I certainly see in what I'm doing bodies
their life whereas I think in a lot of
my generation a lot of people myself
included and the kind of see war is an
unfortunate necessity so that you can
make money so that you can then go and
do the things right you see is sort of
defining you right no totally and that's
uh that is a shift and it is I think
unfortunate and part of the educational
crisis right which is that in fact my
contribution to civilization right my
work is an unfortunate necessity what I
really do is what I only get a chance to
do with a very small portion of my time
most of my time I have to spend dealing
with this unfortunate necessity of
civilization that sucks and that's the
experience you get in school right away
many people
cool feels like itself like this job
you're eventually gonna have school
feels like an unfortunate necessity and
we're kind of habituated to tolerate
these unfortunate necessity x' and you
know freud classically wrote
civilization and its discontents and you
know this argument that it's an
unfortunate necessity this is definitely
that kind of fergan view here that i
like yes duck we're stuck in this i i
don't think it needs to be that way and
this gets to basic issues of this time
between worlds and the opportunity to
create a social system that
participating in doesn't feel like an
unfortunate necessity right and it's
interesting because there are definitely
a Shalom's within the capitalist world
system the high ranking cronies as it
were and some of the meta modern
aristocrats who are freed to feel like
that they participates in civilization
in such a way that it's not an
unnecessary or unfortunate necessity and
and so that's interesting that there are
places where we can see that it's
possible right like where there are like
these pockets and niches that occur
where people are really aligned and
doing work that helps civilization and
baize the bills and allows them to be
doing something that doesn't feel like
they wouldn't do it anyway yeah like if
like if they had unlimited funds that
they would still do this that they're
not just doing it for money right and
again this is about what does it mean to
understand yourself outside the context
of a wage laborer it won't be to be
growing up in school all along
understanding as you're growing up that
you don't have to eventually work some
job whether you like it or not there's
going to be enough diversification ways
to participate and enough equitable
distribution in
some of the goods of our participation
in cooperation that you are not forced
to engage in something that feels
perpetually like you're wasting your
time with an unfortunate necessity just
to make money all right that's it I'm
saying this as an educator more than as
an economic reformer I'm saying that
you're sapping the lifeblood out of
learning and schooling because of this
way of conceiving the ultimate goal of a
dull life and so there's a cynical
acceptance that sets in which I think
some of the younger generation who are
kind of like loving the hustle have
adopted where they're not particularly
invested in the project of civilization
and perpetuity but they are invested in
climbing through the meritocratic or
ostensibly meritocratic ranks of wage
labour and running so that can flip and
which is to say you can game the game
for your own self-interest and succeed
by many metrics but ultimately not be
invested in this project of civilization
in perpetuity which is what civilization
requires it requires us understanding
certain forms of cooperation and
transpersonal commitment to goods and
ideals that allow us to create
infrastructures and to provide social
benefits and to create art and other
things that are based on a logic of non
reciprocated care rather than pure
transaction and so that is what's
characterized civilization that's the
rule of persuasion over force right the
rule of persuasion over force and the
unforced course of the better argument
rather than violence and that requires
education so again I'm a broken record
of staff but I'm an education class word
that's what you get it really did
something came up when you're talking
about the idea of civilization in
perpetuity and
I was thinking about I suppose like if
there is a meta statement we give to
people about why you're doing education
and I just think that I never really got
that like I don't think it was
particularly well explained to me while
I went to school other than having the
odd argument with my mum basically
saying he said why do I have to go to
school so you can get a good job so you
can earn money house right but why do I
have to do that and then like I remember
I had a bit well my undergrad years were
characterized by a bit of existential
crisis because I very nearly went to
study physics and then I had this moment
outside this real intuitive sense like
no studied classic study ancient
literature study ancient poetry and
philosophy but the thing is I didn't
have a clue why I wanted to do that and
I spent two and a half three years there
like well this is really cool but I
still don't know why the I study
no-one's explained to me why I'm
studying this or what the vibe it's just
a degree and fortunately I feel like I
kind of worked it out by the time I
started my monsters yeah okay
now I feel like I actually understand
the history of Western culture and art
and that feeds into the Renaissance in
quite a deep way and that's cool but I
wish someone had told me that from day
one right well it's interesting it's a
it's a problem and it's you know it's a
problem that results from solving a
worse problem right so the modern
innovation schooling is a result of
separation of church and state
right so they're basically saying like
hey no no we're exactly not telling you
the answer about everything yeah we're
exactly not telling you what it all
means right and now for a while it used
to be we're telling you you're a citizen
and you're you're an American damn it
like that was that's how we solve the
problem of what it all means in the
schools but eventually we stop trying to
answer what it all means all together
and so that left the students with this
kind of yeah this sense of this kind of
unfortunate necessity that's never fully
explained except insofar as its
instrumental value for future wage labor
now you'll get a couple of teachers cool
like behind closed doors
whisper in your ear and tell you now man
there's this thing called like Bill doom
or like self building or self
development right that education is an
end in itself and then if you build your
capacities and insights and
understanding you'll find a way to
contribute and but like there are people
who are aware of this message but the
predominant message is one of no you
just do school visits they're like it's
kind of like a second nature that we've
created that you just go into and up and
out of and don't really question it and
that's what's interesting is that the
smartest ones will want an answer to
that question and so we misunderstand I
think attention-deficit sometimes as
actually just the tension produced by
the answer to that but the absence of
the answer to that question right so
it's like why am I doing this why am I
doing this why am i doing this why am i
doing this and if no one actually
answers that or if all the answers are
obviously not enough and you know that
and I know that then there's in built-up
tension in the mind body of an absence
of an answer to the fundamental
motivation of how I'm spending most of
my time
and so I think you know it's clear that
many kids are the ad D there are other
issues we've got nutritional issues and
a whole bunch of things but it's also
clear that where they really care about
something like for example videogames or
friendships or music or other things
they'll actually get a lock in effect
where you can tear them away and so that
shows that there's a pent-up desire to
actually really operate on the world and
to focus when there's a sense of why
when it when the my motivation and the
motivation of what I'm doing aligns and
it all feels right and I can do it and
when that happens in schools and kids
still can't focus then we can start
talking about a problem with their brain
but until we answer that question and
stop that loop of why am I doing this
why am I doing this really stop that
loop to say you're doing this because we
are humans because this is the nature of
our civilization because we value this
XYZ and until we do that and it's it's
very hard to actually expect these kids
to to try you know them that I'm talking
about this the smartest most reflective
most abstract and complex and some of
the ones most wanting to benefit and
help civilization are the ones who will
be in school scratching their heads like
Henry David Thoreau thinking about what
is all this around me and in general
their response is not enough like
they're not not coherent enough not
forthcoming enough and many cases
blatant lie because a lot of these kids
know that there's no job waiting for me
dude like look at these kids who were
coming out of school where they go to
work like let's be realistic here
like principal or whoever is telling me
I'm gonna go get a great job like let's
be realistic about what the job
prospects look like for degrees like
mine versus the dead I'm incurring
coming on and so there's a basic problem
that we can't say good true and
beautiful things about the nature of the
situation we're putting the youth in and
they know it and so of course we're not
paying attention
oh they're paying a lot of attention to
other things just not to you and not to
school until YouTube and they're paying
attention to social media and all kinds
of things so again this is part of the
dynamic of the educational crisis is
what I call a legitimacy crisis which is
the absence or inability to secure
political legitimacy or investment in
the project of cooperation which is
Society and that's one of those things
education has to do or the center for
the center falls apart and it's an
intergenerational rift which is what I
started off kind of talking about yeah
so that's heavy you know he gets right
back to your and I experienced it in
school too but as I said I was just like
sick and so I had already kind of like
not identified with school and so I
lucked out
but if I really wanted to succeed by
virtue of the tests in high school and
the SAT and a few other things but I
really wanted to succeed in that way I
would have been destroyed before I had
an opportunity to discover my gifts and
it was those gifts that allowed me to
get up and eventually into higher
education in like upper echelon kind of
Harvard style but I snuck in basically
I'm telling you guys because I made
relationships with key professors I had
no GPA because I went to a school that
didn't have tests and grades and true
College which is now falling apart and
dying and I also you know bombed the GRE
I'm because I'm just like psycho
terrible test taker so by normal
standards of the educational system I
was a failure and kind of always did
just mediocre enough and so that's still
how I'm basically perceived by the
standards and measures of that
traditional system I managed to find
niches and get through by virtue of
basically you know luck and grace I
would say more so than my own tenacity I
certainly you know felt like it was a
gift rather than anything else but most
people in my situation who reflect as
early an age as I did about how the
whole thing is feels like it's rigged
against me or something like that they
never would end up getting into graduate
school or anything of that nature just
by virtue of how the cookie crumbles
so I think yeah where we are in a sense
we are false positives and false
negatives in the sorting mechanism of
the educational system which is to say
that many of our best and brightest are
not getting found and getting the
resources they need and many of our most
conventional kind of growth thinkers and
kind of game a success oriented ones are
getting rising through the bureaucracies
and into positions of power and prestige
and so yeah we are that's part of the
educational
is also their capability crisis can we
get the right people with the right
capabilities into the right positions in
civilization so there doesn't break and
that's another thing the education
system is supposed to do it's gonna
route those people oh you're the truly
responsible highly capable a reflective
one you should be in that position right
oh you're the political power hungry one
who can't actually do abstract thinking
you should be in this position but if we
flip those and the power-hungry simple
thinker
who's manipulative gets put in a highly
responsible high capacity position and
the person who's actually a very
responsible and very abstract
incapacitated puts in a low
responsibility lower so that happens and
it's happening almost systematically
and so that's not again bad sign that
bad sign for educational systems in
particular I suddenly remember what I
was in school kind of having a
psychology almost to basically like I go
to school and I do my homework and I try
to do well on pests more or less
entirely just so that people don't get
angry at me don't do that that's a real
motivation for you yeah good job 10
years 15 years so now's not actually a
real motivation give me what I know
about a lesson development and their
brain and the frontal cortex they're not
actually able to think on decade-long
timelines but they can think about the
weekend and yeah and not getting
grounded and so that ends up being where
the rubber hits the road with motivation
in schooling usually early it's like I
have to do my homework because my
parents are gonna take away my xbox if I
don't exactly I know you know it took on
the one hand you can see this sort of
thinking in terms of how do you get a
child to do homework that's kind of the
functionalist sort of like this is the
objective how do we force him to do that
instead of like if you know it's it's a
similar logic to I mean yeah this kind
it makes a lot of sense I think it's a
similar logic to sort of wage labor
which is hmm we have all these dogs that
no one really wants a together trailer
society so that some people have to do
these contexts
no external motivation but notice that
like you know the Xbox is what's
interesting why is the explanation
enjoyable the Xbox is actually enjoyable
because of the way the videogame is
designed where you get the thrill of
learning and success yeah and like they
did a lot of research so no one actually
has to use external motivation to get
you to play xbox because they did
literally research in the doughnuts that
rival the federal research and
development budgets for education are
the video game developers who look into
the skill sequences and the structures
of challenge and support and levels
sequencing so that the experience of the
video game is one of flow and the
optimal structure of support and
challenge and complex enough to be
intriguing and forced learning and the
dopamine reaction of learning and
success that comes from learning so the
video games have actually captured the
attention and learning mechanisms
through good research and development of
the whole generation and the school's
failed to do that and now they could
have if they had let's say maybe twice
the research and development budget of
the video game industry is just twice
which would be like some very small
fraction of let's say a defense industry
spending right so there's a failure of
imagination about what's possible I
think with public schooling and so
ultimately my book is about getting a
very different kind of educational
system based around educational hub
networks which are unprecedented
institutions that recapture the
attention of the youth with real
learning and actual work in local
context
selling problems multi-generational
intergenerational collaboration so
there's things that can be done oh I
think we have to think outside of the
schooling as the main mechanism and
think outside of economic futures that
look like just more of what we have and
start realizing on
we're preparing youth for a very
different kind of economy that's going
to come online 10 15 years from and so
that's another factor
[Music]
[Music]