howdy this is Jim rut and this is the
Jim rut show listeners have asked us to
provide pointers some of the resources
we talked about on the show we now have
links to books and articles referenced
in recent podcasts that are available on
our website
we also offer full transcripts go to Jim
rut show.com that's Jim ruts show com
today's guest is brett weinstein an
evolutionary biologist and an acute
thinker about the future of humanity hey
Jim great to be here thanks for having
me off ah great to have you out probably
although don't know this but Brett and I
go back quite a ways what - about 2012
something like that yeah that's that's
about right yeah well we worked on
something called the Emancipation Party
and then that became something called
Game B and we r and all kinds of funky
problems and actually Brett summed up I
think is better than anybody why we did
not succeed in that path at that time
and I still repeat this from time to
time Brett said ah we have too many
Thomas Jefferson's and not enough Ben
Franklin I didn't say that I had
forgotten but yes that was exactly to
the point it was to pinheaded but anyway
game B is making a return these days and
we'll talk about it later but anyway
from Brett's website I took the
following I'm gonna read it and then I'm
gonna ask Brett to talk about it if
humanity continues down our current path
we will not survive there are too many
of us consuming too much our technology
is too powerful we're all hooked
together in one global system our fates
are now linked and we will thrive or
perish together we got into this
predicament through an evolutionary
process all the problems that we face
are actually symptoms of a process that
has no name before we talk about what
might be done about it could you start
by describing the evolutionary and game
theoretic dynamics that have brought us
to where we are today sure have you got
a couple weeks yeah it's one thing I do
here I go deep don't be afraid doc go
deep yeah I'm not afraid to go deep the
problem is
one of layers and you know we can do a
short version of this which is pretty
much what will be held to and then we
could spend a lot of time getting into
the nuances I give the five minute
version sure so more or less our problem
is that the magic of humans arose
through an evolutionary process driven
by an arms race in which human beings
were their own worst competitor so at
that point that one reaches what my PhD
advisor called ecological dominance that
arms race causes a massive jump in
essentially computing power and that
computing power came along with all of
our best and worst characteristics so it
resulted in a spectacular capacity for
collaboration but the objective of that
collaboration is increased competitive
capacity against other groups with
similar powers now I don't think we can
spend too much time worrying about
whether or not that was a good process
it got us this far and it has given us
the capacity to understand where we are
but what it has done is it has created a
drive that is now outstripping
our capacity to compensate for its
consequences so that quote you read from
my website essentially is about what I
would call a sustainability crisis now
conservatives often hear when a liberal
like myself starts talking about
sustainability they assume that we are
cryptically talking about climate about
which there is much disagreement in some
circles I'm not talking in particular
about climate I do think we have a
climate problem but even if it were
false we still have a sustainability
problem in which we are simply using
resources and creating waste in a way
that simply mathematically cannot
continue indefinitely so you have to at
least be a cornucopia
to imagine that the problems we are
creating will be dealt with in
do course buy solutions that will
magically emerge I don't think it's
reasonable to be a cornucopia
but you would have to at least make that
jump and say well yes we're we to
continue down this road we'd be in big
trouble but we all know that solutions
our eyes when they're needed so if you
don't believe that then you would end up
in my camp and what I know from
experience to be your camp thinking oh
 we've got a very serious problem
and we don't have a very long time
horizon with respect to figuring out
what the solution looks like yep I think
that's a very good short summary in fact
you know to the point of the fact that
it certainly seems to me that we are
approaching the cliff and we may act it
we may have actually have a hard time
hitting the brakes hard enough to not go
over the cliff to dadums that I come up
with recently you know I think
underscore the seriousness of our
situation half of the mass of all large
mammals on earth are now humans and then
even greater than humans is our domestic
animals most of it cattle that's half of
the mass of all large mammals on earth
or humans and their domestic animals
mostly cattle and 70 to 80 percent of
the mass of all birds not just large
birds on earth are our domesticated fowl
and that's today with only but maybe 15%
of the world living the advanced Western
standard of living I think those two
data alone tell us that we are at or
probably over the ability of the
ecosystem to carry on the way we're
carrying on absolutely and in fact a
huge fraction of the protein that exists
in us and our domesticated creatures is
actually not even natively biological it
is a product of nitrogen that has been
brought into the bio biological cycles
by the haber-bosch process which uses
fossil fuels to take atmospheric
nitrogen and turn it into biotic lis
available nitrogen so in some sense we
have chemically to stabilize the
equilibria that would ordinarily have
held us to a much smaller population
with many fewer voracious creatures in
tow but we've just simply unhooked it
without thinking about what the ultimate
consequences of that
we'll be I'm glad you brought that up
it's one of my favorite examples the
population of the earth without
haber-bosch is probably one to two
billion people max right and here we are
moving on eight with the current numbers
saying will peak at ten or eleven by the
end of this century so let's say it's
ten that's between five and ten times
what could have been supported without
this artificial pump of fossil fuel to
nitrogen so we are you know living way
out beyond what mother nature intended
and that and again as I said before
that's before the other 85% of the
people start to demand their right at
the table to live the affluent lifestyle
so we got ourselves a real real problem
here it's it's a humdinger of a problem
but I also think it is worth pointing
out that at the moment that the
haber-bosch process came online first of
all it was not initially intended for
creating fertilizer is initially created
for bomb making it then became useful in
the production of fertilizer and if your
listeners can put themselves in the
mindset of people who have suddenly
discovered that they can make crops grow
more efficiently by using energy that is
available in surplus to turn nitrogen
that is otherwise inaccessible to plants
accessible at that moment that must have
seemed like a god set especially if you
were compassionate and you thought about
the number of people who didn't have
enough to eat this must have seemed like
the solution to a problem not the mother
of all problems and yet down the road we
find that that process has unleashed a
set of patterns that we now not only do
we not know what to do about them we
don't even know how to think about them
yeah and certainly and as you pointed
out in previous work we did not evolve
for the environment that we live in you
know most of our evolution was completed
by 12,000 years ago before the first
small town was invented or settled
agriculture so we are not tuned to think
about these problems we have to work at
it very hard but that's not to say that
we can't do it I think that's one of the
most important takeaways I hope our
listeners will take today which is while
our problems are dire it is not a
foregone can
inclusion that we will collapse if we're
smart we may well be able to think our
way through this and then act our way
through this
in fact I'll I'll go one step further
the human niche is niche switching this
is what we do better than any other
creature that has ever existed on earth
now we have set ourselves a new level of
problem that indeed is unlike any past
analog however what we have on board our
human birthright is a mechanism for
figuring out what to do when the wisdom
of the ancestors has run out and so we
are certainly in an extreme version of
that problem but if there's one creature
that is built to address that sort of
problem it is us it's a very useful and
hopeful thought let me put forth what I
think of as the engine that is driving
this late pursuit of the edge if we want
to call it that the ecocide and now
you've heard me say this before it's the
pursuit of money on money return powered
by psychologically astute advertising
that really got underway in the 1930s
and now reaching its near perfection
with the highly instrumented attention
hijacking systems which are our
interactive social media it's as if one
of the things that got us to have all
the good things we have in our society
is now turned into the paperclip
Maximizer that people talk about in
artificial general intelligence what do
you think about that Reid oh I
absolutely agree with this what I've
said elsewhere is that the AI apocalypse
is already upon us but we don't
recognize it because we were expecting
robots and the fact that it isn't robots
it's algorithms they are already proving
to be out of control and causing us to
do massive self harm and the way you can
tell that this read which you and I have
have arrived at together is correct is
to look at the behavior of people in the
best position to understand the power of
these algorithms so every so often we
will get a defector from Facebook or
elsewhere who will
tell us about the extreme measures that
they have to go through in order to
retain control of their own lives in the
face of algorithms they had a hand in
writing so I think what they're telling
us is they don't know what the
algorithms do and they don't know how
they work nor should we have expected
them to the very thing about AR that's
so frightening is that just as we are
wired for success rather than
comprehensibility the algorithms wire
themselves to be effective and what
psychological apparatus they trick and
in which way can be a matter of
speculation what the market does is it
finds those things that are effective
and amplifies them so they these
algorithms have clearly gotten out of
control and are having an entirely
unknown effect on our ability cult to
collectively think and see the
predicament that we find ourselves in
hey I had a conversation with a friend
of mine at lunch and he dropped this gem
which I thought is so good that I have
to share it which is these black box
algorithms and that's important to
remember this deep learning revolution
of the last seven or eight years is not
good old-fashioned AI which was a bunch
of logically understandable statements
if this then that you know or the other
thing look up on this list these are
basically impenetrably opaque neural
simulations nobody can say with any
great certainty how they do what they do
or what they actually weigh and to what
degree they're very nonlinear it's been
amazing the progress that's been made
but it's also very scary how opaque they
are but anyway this is a friend of mine
pointed out and I don't know why I
didn't think of this first goddammit
which is the dating apps you know tinder
and I don't what I don't what they are
I've been married for 38 years I don't
know about the dating apps there's a
bunch of dating apps I know one of
them's called tinder and they're driven
by these black box algorithms so
therefore and dating leads to marriage
which leads to children therefore black
box AIS are now driving human evolution
yeah that's a really interesting point
although you said something I think we
should correct you said that dating
leads to marriage which leads to
children I think you're showing your age
Jim well doesn't all the
I'm but on average it does I mean it
certainly it's there's a strong positive
correlation no I think I think if I
understand what the the kids are telling
us today
dating leads to hooking up which leads
to ghosting which I'm not sure what that
is but I think it's not good no I think
ghosting is like when you break up with
somebody by refusing to respond to their
text messages see I'm not as old as I
look
I agree with you that is what it seems
to mean but anyway yes there there does
seem to be a rapid departure from rather
ancient wisdom about how life gets lived
and some of that departure I am
absolutely certain is good but the level
of departure is so great that it can't
possibly help but be catastrophic in the
aggregate but I I agree I agree with
your friend there is a way in which
these algorithms are going to be driving
the kinds of affiliations that result in
offspring which will then potentially
affect what sorts of offspring we end up
seeing and you know I don't think that's
so vital die don't think there's
anything at a genetic level that's worth
talking about in that regard but what is
worth talking about is that most of what
kids pick up in their natal home that is
of consequence is culture the way they
think is heavily structured by the way
their parents thought and to the extent
that the dating apps or whatever they
are may result in combinations of
cultures that have some sort of new
emergent nature whose to say what the
outcome might be I mean frankly it could
be positive you could get a situation in
which it used to be that you tended to
marry people who came from near enough
that you shared a whole lot of culture
and it could be that this is a moment in
history in which we would actually
benefit from people being paired up by
algorithms who wouldn't otherwise have
ended up together
you know perhaps that results in more
broad-mindedness on the other hand I'd
have to say evidence from
the immediate present suggests the
opposite we're seeing an epidemic of
narrow mindedness and in fact we're
watching heterodox the thinkers being
socially penalized for daring to save
things that are out of phase with the
current fashion yeah we'll get to that
later that is certainly a major theme of
what's going on in the world today but
before we do that I want to also point
out that you know things like
algorithmic driven businesses or just
business is driven by astute
psychologically informed advertising are
also driven by the fact that something
broke in our culture and I would put
those timelines somewhere around 1975
before that people in business at least
a fair number of them weren't money on
money maximizers at all cost in fact the
way I gotta cut involved in this whole
discussion that led the game be and all
that was Jordan green Hall now Jordan
Hall and I met out at the Santa Fe
Institute one time and after a board
meeting we sat down and talked for about
four hours I realized that we saw the
world fairly similar it was a first time
we met and I was laying this out that
when I joined the business world 1975
the people that ran even publicly traded
companies often would not do things that
would be profitable if they thought they
were wrong but by the 90s the ethos had
changed to be if something was arguably
legal and profitable not only should you
do it but perhaps you had a legal duty
to do it right there was no sense of
what was honorable what was honest or
what was good and I think if we say
where are we in 2019 it's gone even
further which is not only is it arguably
legal but the current standard in big
corporate America is on a risk-adjusted
basis are the penalties for getting
caught smaller than getting away with
the crime look at the money laundering
that the big banks are constantly being
busted for a group I'm over in Europe or
just busted again for a little money
laundering hundreds of billions of
dollars and you know they get slapped on
the wrist for you know a few hundred
million dollars and they probably made
money on it so anyway a system where
honesty and good faith has become a
sucker play is just setting up a
competitive ecosystem that's engineered
for sociopaths
I was a corporate executive a c-level
executive at a major multinational than
a CEO to medium-sized technology company
I'd say in my experience probably 10% by
the year 2000 of c-level executives or
sociopaths and maybe 30% the higher
levels of Finance and that compares to
1% or so in the general population so it
strikes me that not only do we have an
algorithmic problem but relatively
recently we have a have had a breakdown
in values and morality in the social
operating systems that operate our
economy well I don't I don't think
that's what happened actually I agree
with your description of the transition
but what happened is not a breakdown it
is an evolutionary trajectory that was
absolutely inevitable in light of the
incentives that governed the system in
other words the quicker you woke up to
the opportunities that weren't morally
acceptable but we're legal maybe not
even legal but weren't going to be
prosecuted
the quicker you profited and the more
your strategy spread so what we saw was
basically it's not even an analogue for
the evolutionary process of a creature
discovering a niche and evolving to
exploit and fill it what we have is the
identical object we have basically the
market discovering everything that isn't
being policed and is profitable and
exploiting it to the maximum extent
possible and really what else did we
expect though it didn't necessarily do
that before the same dynamic could have
existed I will argue the other side of
that and say that yes there is indeed a
game theoretical ratchet that pushes
businesses towards that but in Prior
1975 there was a social ethos that most
companies did not take that road so
there was an ability socially to resist
the forces of the game theoretical
ratchet a hundred percent agree with
that in effect what you had was a
gentlemen's agreement
that was being policed so that somebody
prior to the evolution of this change
would have come out behind in so doing
you know this would have been policed
maybe at the Country Club rather than in
a court but what happened was
globalization caused a circumstance
where what they thought of you down at
the Country Club mattered less because
you were in a much bigger pool and
effectively the evolution of
ruthlessness was an inevitable
consequence of the fact that we did not
forestall the exploration of this
evolutionary trajectory by treaty or its
equivalent I think that's actually a
good way to look at it I like that a lot
and some people say well it is what it
is
you know I would say we should look back
to David Hume the skys philosopher and
the famous is aught problem right just
because something is isn't the way it
ought to be if our system really is spun
up to exploit every extractable rent
extracting opportunity a lot of it
operating on the cognitive weaknesses of
human nature how can we fight back
well you know I think we are we are
wired to fight back and the question I
mean really to me there is almost one
question the question is those of us who
understand that we must fight back can
we engineer a system that allows us to
opt out of the things that are so toxic
without being competitively overrun by
those who refuse to opt out that's
really the game beat question as I see
it that is one approach to game B which
is the withdraw and parasitize game a
while not taking the toxins in yourself
the other alternative called the
emancipation party alternative is that
historically the way that markets have
been limited so that they were good for
humanity and not run amok has been
through governance and so the other
alternative is to for the humans to
finally wake up and seize control of
their governance and use the market
which is one of the greatest inventions
of humans of all time but
use it in a way that it's like a fire in
your wood stove not a fire burning down
your house I think so roads are possible
but I don't I don't think that's two
roads I think that's one road the fact
is we have to utilize markets as a tool
to forge the new system you're not going
to get there any other way even modes
that might once have worked like
revolution are implausible they would
create far more destruction at this
moment in history so we have to use
something like markets and we have to
use governance to structure those
markets so that they return an answer
that is viable rather than
self-destructive now the question is how
you do that and the answer the game be
answer has to be through the
exploitation of mechanisms that are
competitively superior to the parasitic
mechanisms that we face and therefore
spread naturally through competition so
you know we can talk and we probably
should talk about what game B is and
isn't but I think baseline it has to be
the idea that we are in search of a
solution that solves these problems
without any of the failure modes that
would accompany solutions of the past
yeah I think that is at the highest
level a good description and does and I
would add with the caveat that it does
so in time that we don't have a
disastrous crash when we reach the
limits of our ecosystem which appear to
be no longer than 80 years from now at
the most at the most and it could be a
lot less and I'll point out relative to
something you said at the beginning of
the conversation one of the things that
I fear is that we are talking about
systems that are so complex that the
thresholds beyond which there is no
plausible return probably will be
crossed without anybody knowing that it
has happened so for people who are used
to dealing with the kinds of systems
that shudder before they
break apart who maybe thinking that
things are relatively alright based on a
kind of Steven Pinker sort of analysis
about where we are are going to lead us
into ever greater danger because the
thresholds that must not be crossed will
be invisible until it's far too late yes
I think that's a hugely important point
for us all to be cognizant about you
know bread as you know I've been a
student of complexity science for about
the last eighteen years and frankly the
biggest takeaway from studying
complexity is what I would describe is
epistemological modesty we know a lot
less than we think we know about what's
going to happen in a complex system and
essentially every system that's at all
interesting with respect to human
affairs today is indeed a complex system
yes a complex system but I would point
out that the fantastic difficulty of
comprehending these things is the flip
side of the simplicity of the basic
principles that run them and so to the
extent that one looks at a biological
organism for example and thinks oh my
goodness I mean even just a diagram of
the known metabolic pathways is almost
beyond human comprehension
on the other hand this thing springs
into being automatically itself
assembles it maintains itself it repairs
itself it defends itself all starting
from a single cell in which the
instruction set is written in a code of
four letters so the point is that the
thing is so darn elegant that we ought
to be thinking in these terms with
respect to how civilization should run
in other words we should not we must not
be imagining a highly complicated
governance structure to maintain the
well-being of people that will turn into
a nightmare what we need is a highly
elegant governance structure that does
the heavy lifting of modulating
civilization that is that exists at a
level of complexity that we will never
fully comprehend what's going on I think
that's a good goal but though I would
say the other takeaway from complexity
science is it appears to be in principle
impossible to accurately determine the
Emergencies that you will actually get
from the simple underpinnings you know
of a complex system so we could design
an elegant and basic operating system
but the actual result I would argue is
unpredictable
which leads me to believe we should not
believe our own designs we should
approach oh we should approach game B
with a tentative modesty with an
experimental and evolutionary
perspective so you and I it does not
surprise me have arrived in a similar
place here what I say is we are not
smart enough to design the system we
need but we are smart enough to navigate
there I like that and that effectively
but we have to do is take a good guess
that where the foot hill of the system
we are trying to find is and then we
need to ascend by empirically basically
prototyping and empirically discovering
what the unintended consequences of our
best guess were where we can improve on
things and we must may be above all else
avoid any instinct towards utopian
thinking that utopian thinking is the
undoing of any such plan and that one
needs to do is recognize that we will
recover an incomplete set of our desired
goals but what we can shoot for you know
if we use the Pareto principle and
thought well we can't be a hundred
percent free but we might be eighty
percent free at the same time we are 80
percent safe if we start to balance
things in this regard that we can
produce a system that far outstrips our
grandest hopes without being unrealistic
without being utopia
and that's ad within the constraints of
mother earth right of course lease until
we're off of mother earth that's the
boundary condition that's the mother
earth bats last so all this thinking has
to be within that constraint absolutely
I'm glad you mentioned trade-offs and
purrito because I know that's been part
of your very important tract probably
close to the foundation of the work you
have done in theoretical evolutionary
biology and maybe you could do a little
sidebar on how trade-offs in evolution
work sure I mean the the irony is that
trade-offs in evolution work exactly the
same way that they do in engineering and
economics we just don't know how to map
them yet so one of the things that I
discovered when I was doing my
dissertation work which ended up being a
theoretical exploration of trade-offs
and the rules that govern them was that
there were certain systems that I knew
well enough that I could peer into them
and see how trade-offs worked and then
back up and try to look into a
biological system and find the same
sorts of properties so for example I was
a photographer fairly serious about it
for a while and the kinds of trade-offs
that one encounters with respect to
having a given number of photons
incident on the lens that then can be
spent either freezing motion with a fast
shutter speed or making a sharp image
with a small aperture that those
trade-offs mirror the sorts of things
that we see in nature with respect to
for example the wing shape
characteristics of flying animals like
birds and bats and so the key insight of
my dissertation was that the trade-offs
were not one-off phenomena that in fact
every two desirable characteristics that
existed in the same mechanism or the
same organism had a trade-off function
that related them and that the reason
that we did not Intuit this in biology
is that many of those trade-off
functions have a bargain at one end and
so we don't see any diversity at all
along the trade-off because creatures
that
press anything other than the bargain
condition are eliminated competitively
and so we see one state in nature and we
do not into it
the fact that the function is more
complex than that but there are
circumstances in evolution that will
reveal other parts of a trade off and
that that's really the game that we're
caught in we're caught in a game in
which we see a desire to improve things
and we view evolution traditionally we
have viewed it as an engine of
improvement but a sophisticated player
in the space recognizes that improvement
quickly exhausts itself as a cost free
or nearly cost free pursuit and that
ultimately the game one ends up playing
is one of balancing competing concerns
as elegantly as possible yes I remember
reading in some of your biological
thinking about how that really wasn't
even grasped by a biologists and I was
shaking my head because my own
scientific home base of the gray I have
one is in evolutionary computing where
we essentially create software by
evolving it using essentially toy models
of crossover mutation and sometimes more
sophisticated techniques but in
evolutionary computing very early on we
started realizing many of the
interesting questions were multi
variable and that the best you could do
was optimize to a purrito frontier right
and then it was a matter of value
decisions and where you wanted to be on
that frontier where you would not did
not want to be as a place where there
was a better place to be without you
know you could change a it get a better
position on a without losing anything on
B you didn't want to be behind the
frontier but once you had to find the
frontier then it was a values question
to where you want to be on the frontier
where you want to be on the frontier and
then you can increase the sophistication
of the game by mapping for example
changing conditions on to your efficient
frontier which then causes the desirable
location to start moving around in ways
and you know lo and behold if you play
the game long enough you begin to
realize that every evolutionary question
that
we biologists find difficult is actually
has a tremendous amount of light you can
shed on it by simply recognizing what
the underlying fundamental trade-offs
are and what sorts of things are pushing
creatures around with respect to them
interesting now going back to game B you
know one of the really interesting
people I would suggest people check out
his work is very very creative in the
possible economics of a game be world is
a guy named Daniel schmatta knew ger
well after reading his economics he and
I started having a series of discussions
and we actually talked for four hours
with me arguing against Daniel's
hypothesis that a game B economics would
eliminate trade-offs that struck me is
just entirely implausible yeah it well
let's put it this way Daniel is a very
smart guy I know him pretty well as well
he might mean something by that that is
recoverable but as stated there's no
conceivable way it can be true now what
you can do and what you will see
creatures do all the time is they will
innovate a mechanism to spectacularly
reduce the cost of some trade-off but
when they do this what happens is they
temporarily become what we would call a
super species that is to say a
competitor that's simply ahead of all of
the others with which it is competing
and then at the point that it has
eliminated those competitors it will
diversify but all of the descendants
will have the innovation that allowed it
to exceed some prior trade-off so in
some sense it's very much like the
situation that you were describing a few
minutes ago with respect to evolution of
computer algorithms where you find that
there are frontiers and you want to be
at the frontier you don't want to be
suboptimal and be below the frontier you
want to be in the optimality
zone but what there are are frontiers
stacked on frontiers and then ultimately
the laws of physics or chemistry will
provide a limit that cannot be exceeded
so
for example if we think about minimizing
surface-to-volume ratio you get to a
sphere and there's nowhere to go so
nature many times has minimized surface
to volume ratios for various reasons
like minimizing the radiation of heat
for example and it will come up with
something spiracle and we shouldn't be
expecting a next innovation because
geometrically there's nowhere to go
whereas if you go the other direction
let's say you were trying to maximize
surface to volume ratio there's all
kinds of literal convolutions you can
add to a structure in order to increase
the rate of contact it has with the
environment or neighbors and so there's
all sorts of room for evolution to take
place so I don't exactly know what
Daniel might be getting at with respect
to eliminating trade-offs you may be
saying something along the lines of
eliminating perceived trade-offs I have
to go back at it but in four hours I
couldn't he couldn't convince me and I
couldn't convince him so I think it's
some work we need to do but I'm with you
that I believe that trade-offs are
fundamental to the nature of reality
right I'm a certain of that as I am of
my own name ah
so I think we're on the same page as you
say Daniel is a very smart and good
faith guy and it may well may be that
he's trying to communicate something I
was just too dense to get it so I will
touch back in with him and see see if we
can make sense of this I wanna I want to
pause you there for one second I don't
think it's a question of anybody being
dense I think it's it's something else I
have seen this now many times which is
you've got fields which get stuck I
would argue that they get stuck
regularly and for evolutionary reasons
but once they are stuck you're left with
everybody inside the field thinking the
same incorrect thoughts and then people
on the outside trying to figure out how
to break through the deadlock
what the people on the outside
inevitably end up having to do in order
to break through deadlocks is they end
up inventing their own language in other
words the language that they are handed
isn't good enough to solve the problem
so they end up redefining terms
and unfortunately for most of the people
who do this they forget that they've
done it the language becomes so native
to them that when they talk to somebody
else they are using a language that has
been partially personalised and the
person they're speaking to imagine us
that they're speaking gobbledygook
because the way they're using terms
doesn't add up in a standard framework
and so my best guess would be that you
know Daniel being the way he is he is
most certainly redefined some things in
order for him to do productive work and
forgotten how those things if he uses
those terms without clarifying them how
they get heard by others and we've seen
this before and unfortunately I always
thought that people are gonna do this
they ought to have a personal glossary
online so that when you're talking to
Daniel or you know Jordan or somebody
you know that when they say X they
actually mean Y at least in mapping it
back to standard English a glossary is a
good idea and I've toyed with the same
idea of writing one for myself but I in
practice what I've seen happen is it
takes a couple of weeks of interacting
with somebody you know if they don't
know anything about the topic and you
know something and you're teaching them
if that's something you can do
relatively straightforwardly of course
they will pick up your weird Tom
terminology and they won't understand
why other people don't resonate with it
but if two people have done independent
work and then they sit down to compare
notes they will both have personal
languages and it takes a couple of weeks
of discussing even relatively mundane
thing is to bring out what these
definitions are and what they mean what
I always say when I'm in this situation
is look I don't need to I don't need the
right to define a particular term like
if I've redefined the term sympathy or
empathy for reasons of making progress
with respect to that realm I don't need
the right to define those terms but I do
need the right to have a term that means
what I mean when I say that and I
there we're gonna use my terms for the
purpose of the argument or we're gonna
come up with some other term but what I
can't be left with is the same blunt
objects that everybody else is using I
need some term to mean X and so anyway
two people who have done this in
adjacent realm take several weeks to
learn each other's language and again
and again I've seen those couple of
weeks can be quite contentious because
it does feel like you're talking to
somebody who doesn't get it and then
ultimately when you've figured out what
they mean by X Y & Z and and what you
mean it can be very productive but I
don't know of any way to fast forward
through that process that's actually a
very good point we've seen this again
and again at the Santa Fe Institute
we're doing really radical
transdisciplinary science is one of our
hallmarks and when we do a workshop
where we bring 20 people and from around
the world from many different
disciplines that work on a single
problem we basically just assume it'll
take at least three days and that's you
know eight-hour days just to get the
terminology straight yep so this is a
known problem in the sciences and it's
almost certainly a related problem in
this area of future of society so I
think I'll take that personally as a
mission to you know not argue so hard
and rather try to find out what is it
the other person saying cuz we know
they're not dumb right they must be
trying to say something they just show
using words in a different way than I am
let me pop back one level before we go
further into game B something I forgot
to talk about we're talking about the
current state of the world but I think
it's hugely important and that is we
have co-evolved very very recently the
ability for everybody to talk to
everybody at least you know through a
filtered Network but in principle I
could post a tweet that could get seen
by 20 million people or even two million
people and unfortunately again as we'd
unfortunately expect in a world driven
by money on money return and you know
game theoretical ratchets what we've
ended up with is a huge amount of bad
faith discourse on these social networks
how do we think about putting these
networks which should be a very powerful
engine for the good
how do we think about policing them and
turning them into something useful
without be having them become something
even worse which is a domain of
censorship by by one party or the other
well are you talking about the
platform's themselves or are you talking
about the communities that live on them
well it's both unfortunately I mean
let's the bad faith this course
currently isn't coming from the
platforms themselves are coming from the
the players on the platforms and but
what I'm hearing
sometimes as a proposed cure is that the
platform should start to be sensors in
fact in the last year they've started to
be sensors that strikes me as equally or
maybe even more dangerous than putting
up with bad faith this course is there
some alternative where we don't have to
rely upon the good faith of fairly
peculiar dudes out in Silicon Valley but
yet we can start to reduce the impact
that bad faith discourse on these
networks yes there is absolutely an
alternative and I will say I don't think
having the platform's police this stuff
is any sort of solution to any known
problem yes you can address certain
kinds of noxious speech that way but we
already know the cost and it's a
disaster and it's an especially big
disaster in a condition where these
entities have a financial motive to
alter thought or to prevent certain
kinds of transitions in thought there's
no way that these private concerns can
be empowered to adjust what is tolerable
with respect to speech and have them do
anything like a decent job so as far as
I'm concerned that's a non-starter the
alternative of having a total
free-for-all is better but it obviously
has its own problems including the level
of noise what I think we are seeing so
we have two things going on
simultaneously we have the platform's
taking on a
Leasing roll which they are screwing up
badly and in which they have perverse
incentives and then we are watching
communities try to self-police and on
the one hand I think the instinct to
self-police is a good one
and that it works at small scale but
what we are seeing is that the
mechanisms of self policing simply do
not work at large scale and so that's
really what we need is a means of taking
those things that function at small
scale and scaling them up without
creating an authoritarian nightmare that
dictates the limits of permissible
thought that seems to be about where
we're at and you're right that when
groups are under 10,000 perhaps self
policing seems to work I've been a
member of an online service called the
well since 1989 and it actually started
in 1985 it's still out there if you want
to check it out well dot-com it's kind
of like the Colonial Williamsburg of the
internet you can still use the command
line version if you're so inclined there
is a web version but I probably twenty
percent of people still use the command
line anyway it's been a famously
contentious community from the very
beginning lots of flame wars and such
but nonetheless there was an emergent
cultural non authoritarian sets of
limits on what people would do within
within that community and I think in the
30-some year history of the thing they
may have expelled ten members at the
most right and yet it was never
community a bigger than 10,000 it's
about 2,500 now I think something like
that we're also seeing some success in
game B and game be proximate groups on
Facebook we have rally point alpha it's
a Facebook group people might find
interesting I think we have like 1500
people on that and we have a set of
principles and it keeps discourse pretty
decent the game be Facebook group has a
bit more complicated sometimes for my
tastes a bit too complicated set of
guidelines but they also seem to have
kept the peace but you're right so far
when we see these groups get big like
facebook scale or twitter scale cultural
and soft means of policing seemed to
fail
and neither of us want to go down the
road of empowering these platforms to
make these kinds of decisions so that
leaves us with having to find scalable
tools which I find amazing that the the
platforms themselves are not investing
in providing us tools to prune our own
behavior of course you pointed out part
of the reason for that is that as long
as they're in the attention-grabbing
advertising sales model their incentive
is to keep us online for as long as
possible and so the last thing they want
us to do is to be able to radically
prune the stream of stuff trying to grab
our attention that's right now I will
say I have had a very odd experience
online and while it does not point the
direction to what we collectively should
do it does suggest that there are
opportunities out here that we may not
be aware of
so I hear very frequently about how
terrible twitter is for example as a
place to discuss things and I've
certainly seen that but my own weird
story the story that brought me to
public attention has resulted in a
community of people who follow me on
Twitter who a do have some experience
with the way I think the topics I tend
to explore they've I think come to trust
me that there isn't something lurking in
my character that's going to suddenly
emerge and embarrass them if I say
something that sounds difficult to
understand there's probably something
behind it but in any case what I've seen
is in general that community and I think
I now have a quarter of a million
Twitter followers that community is in
some way that I cannot explain
self-policing it is generous people look
out for each other they look out for me
if I say something that can be
misinterpreted people explore it so that
you know it becomes clear and the
replies to a tweet or something like
this and there are only three or four
times in the last couple of years a
couple of years being in
17 in April of 2017 I had 400 Twitter
followers now it's a quarter of a
million and in those couple of years
there have only been I think it's four
instances where I have unleashed
something that was I would say
out-of-control and mean-spirited by
virtue of having tweeted something that
set people off in general my experience
is of a community that is surprisingly
nurturing and caring and decent and
intelligent and nuanced so I know that
that's not the general experience but
the fact that some of us and my wife
Heather hiring who also has a large
following experience is the same thing
my brother Erik Weinstein who has
similarly large following I think he's
now somewhere above quarter-of-a-million
but he has also experienced in general a
generosity of spirit online so what this
says is that there is some subset of us
who are having a different experience
that isn't quite so toxic and it would
be worth knowing what it is that allows
that to happen because frankly I think
if people knew that it was out there to
be tapped into
they might explore to figure out how to
get there that's interesting and we're
thinking about it may be that it's
essentially polarized around one topic
slash point of view I'm not really one
topic but at least a point of view and
that people self-assemble there because
they plus or minus share that point of
view if we go out to the wilds of the
internet in general Facebook in general
Twitter in general that's not the case
there isn't necessarily an organizing
principle in fact I was giving some
advice to a young woman recently you
know I currently amount of Facebook
sabbatical or I take six months a year
off every year don't do Facebook and she
was lamenting the the crud of Facebook
and I said yeah the open public Facebook
is kind of cruddy but there's a
tremendous amount of good stuff going on
in groups various sorts and groups might
be analogous to your experience I agree
except for one thing which is you said
that people grouped around some idea who
may tend to agree and the funny thing
about
my followers is that my guess would be
that the vast majority of them disagree
with me on most of the things that are
typically flashpoints in other words I
know that my audience leans slightly
right I am far to the left so I'm seeing
this generosity of spirit and this
nuance amongst people who would not
ordinarily be my allies and when I have
seen these flare-ups it has been a small
number of people and it has been over
certain topics in which I think nuance
is I won't say impossible but has been
rendered very difficult I'd forgotten
the fact that oddly you have a
relatively right-wing followership and
here's something that's even odder you
know every once in a while your name
will come up in a conversation out in
the in the real world real people and I
would say three people out of four think
you are a right-winger yeah and I go
what the I've done for everyone and
he is so far to the left he makes Barney
look like a partner at Goldman Sachs
right that's right you know the same is
kind of true for me I'm a radical son of
a bitch go out look at the emancipation
Party org reforms which a bunch of us
including Brett co-authored and we all
signed off on them it doesn't get much
more radical than that and yet
unfortunately today's left has become
very strange if you don't buy off every
jot and tittle of their law and then
they want to excommunicate you my own
case I think my three qualms about the
Left agenda and I speak very freely
about it is I'm a zealous defender of
free speech I believe in gun rights I
believe the First Amendment free speech
is defended by the Second Amendment
which is gun rights and I have qualms
about stream versions of
multiculturalism you know I believe
multiculturalism should be tolerated as
it always has in America but not
encouraged you know we've always had the
Amish the Hutterites the acid's etc but
in general most immigrant groups have
assimilated and melted into the American
melting pot which is
a bad thing to say these days so those
are my three sins against leftism and
yet in the basic principles of trying to
make life better for real working people
to keep finance from cheating the
regular person for having a tax system
that rewards honest work not rentier
behavior you know farther left probably
than you are and isn't it interesting
how that works well I think I certainly
remember meeting you and I you know you
started out earlier in life fairly far
to the right and I certainly started out
far to the left and I think part of the
reason that I think you and I get along
so well is that to the extent that we
are radicals it's not because we want to
be I think the point is this is a moment
at which if you have understood the
danger we are in as you and I have
understood it then radical change is the
only option it's never a good option
it's a last resort but the fact is it's
better than going extinct and so in some
sense it's not an ideological position
it is the only response to a crisis of a
certain magnitude and we know that the
basic values that make us patriotic
Americans are shared
we might not put them in the same order
but we believe in them and that it
really doesn't matter how we ended up as
radicals whether from the right or the
left it's just it's a it's a rational
response to to a dire situation yep I
think that's a good way to put it what
do you think your offenses are that
makes leftist think you're a right
winger well it's the oddest thing but
the left has a love-hate relationship
with Darwinism and this is long-standing
I think this is because on the one hand
the left is traditionally the keepers of
the scientific flame that is to say
conservatism
on the right surrounding religious
beliefs has resulted in the left
having custodianship over enlightenment
values at least traditionally on the
other hand Darwinism itself opens very
uncomfortable questions about what human
beings are and what the meaning is of
different levels of success that
different populations have experienced
and so there is a long history of people
on the left effectively trying to
modulate how Darwinian our thinking
becomes with respect to humans and in
fact much to my shock
I heard Richard Dawkins arguing against
applying evolutionary theory to human
history when I met with him on stage in
Chicago last October so this is a
long-standing concern now my feeling
having been down this road some distance
is that in the end Darwinism is not a
universal win for the left but that the
story that emerges from Darwinism is in
the end positive for a progressive view
of the world on the other hand this is
science and irrespective of whether
Darwinism hands a win to the left or not
we have to go with what's true we don't
get to modulate the truth based on what
we want to be right it goes back to the
human point about is versus odd there is
a question of what is that is the
province of science what we think about
it and do about it is outside of those
bounds and as a Darwinist I'm committed
to figuring out what actually is
irrespective of its implications but
what I encounter on the Left
increasingly is fear of even the most
basic terminology that might be used to
understand humans so I've gotten in
trouble in
political spaces for example for even
invoking the term genotype or phenotype
with respect to humans as if there was
any controversy at all about whether
these things apply you can also get in
trouble these days for asserting that
there is some significant biological
difference between men and women of all
things if you had told me 10 years ago
that I would live to see a day in which
there was any controversy surrounding
that question at all I would have said
there isn't one chance in a million but
here we are yeah there does seem to be a
lot of real wackadoodle nonsense about
this gender business these days and I
frankly just tuned it out I figure those
people aren't worth talking through
they're goofy sons of bitches someday
they'll straighten out and hopefully
most of them won't reproduce so they'll
go away but I know in some areas it
could be quite a pestilence actually I
just try to avoid all that you know the
one I have seen the trigger I will say
you know I deal with a lot of
evolutionary theoretical biologists at
the Santa Fe Institute and other
scientific institutes of associated with
and frankly most of those people are
left wingers and I've never seen any
cognitive dissonance in them in thinking
about evolutionary biology and
progressive politics at all but where I
have seen it this is you know came as
quite a shock about two years ago I
happen to reference a work somebody had
done on something and they were someone
who traveled under the title
evolutionary psychologist and talked
about setting off an explosion right and
you know to your point about Pinker it's
it's very weird well you may disagree
with any one person who flies under the
flag of evolutionary psychology clearly
our psychology had to evolve I don't
remember who said it but one of the more
famous theoretical biologist said you
know nothing is knowable in biology
except through the lens of evolution and
that certainly has to include human
psychology yeah that was theodosius
dobzhansky you got it nothing acting
makes any sense in biology except in
light of evolution yeah and really the
this ought to be uncontroversial surely
the burden of proof is on anyone who
imagined
that human psychology has some other
explanation but the problem is this
requires several weeks perhaps of
exploration in order for people to
understand that their right to determine
the nature of their own existence is not
up for debate in a discussion of that
which created human psychology in a
Darwinian context in other words we are
at a moment in history where we are not
fit for this current environment and we
have to define a new path for how we're
going to interact certainly the tools
that we haven't inherited through a
Darwinian process set the bounds of what
is possible but they do not tell us who
to be or how to act and so in other
words I think what's happening is people
are imagining that if you're saying that
our psychology is Darwinian the next
thing that you're going to do is you're
going to tell them what they may or may
not think and that's simply not the case
yeah it's totally up I mean it
violates the is art principle I started
to have these discussions with people I
say it's certainly possible and perhaps
even likely that ugly aspects of human
nature like xenophobia and you know
extreme patriarchal thinking may well
have evolved biologically in the
Pleistocene
but that doesn't mean mean to say we
have to put up with it we now have the
authority to reject the past we are not
driven by our genetic destiny not only
do we have the ability to reject it but
the best hope we have of banishing it is
to understand what its nature is so we
can stop triggering it this is the
hardest message I think I have to
deliver it's the one that is the most
difficult to convey but as much as I am
in awe daily of what evolution has
produced and really I'm the kind of guy
who can go out into the backyard and
look at a squirrel and marvel so it's
not like I don't get how impressive this
stuff is but the game that evolved
creatures are playing is absolutely
without a defense it cannot be defended
it is both mind-numbing and amoral we
have an obligation to reject what
evolution wants for us and to reapply
the tools it has handed us to something
that is worthy of our ideal so I really
am not telling anybody that you are
condemned to play out some evolutionary
story I think you'd be a fool to play
out the evolutionary story you have to
choose a story that you can play out in
light of the evolutionary constraints
but I am certainly advocating that
people find something to do with their
time that is more useful more rewarding
and more defensible than spreading their
genes far and wide
very well said I'm I'm gonna go mine the
transcript for this when it's done and
I'm gonna start using your language
because you said it a lot better than I
did well thank you that our genes are
not our destiny but guess what folks
they are our genes right you can't deny
that when we have the the is aught
distinction we have both the is and the
aught and to deny the is is not to think
fruitfully about the ott exactly it just
strikes me as the strangest mind set
that these people are in well you know
it's sad because in some sense I mean
maybe this is the bleeding heart liberal
and me coming out but in some sense I
don't think that the people you know
there are bad actors in the group that
are making trouble on these lines but
most of the people who are trying to
prevent us from having a proper
scientific Darwinian discussion about
human beings they're effectively
panicking over fear of something that
will be in that story that I don't think
is there and what they need in fact what
I believe they are entitled to is a
proper exploration of
Arwen ISM that would allow them to
understand just what an interesting and
for human beings flexible landscape that
is I mean the fact is our genes gave us
more freedom from genetic destiny than
any other creature that has ever existed
on earth that's really the punchline to
the evolutionary story is that as much
as we are not totally free we are freer
than any other creature has been and I
mean if you just think about the
distinction between for example the
gender roles that people had to choose
from when you were a young person versus
now I mean this has been a radical
transformation in the direction of
liberation and I think you and I would
both agree that this is mostly for the
good I would say with in respect to you
know homosexuals not having to live
their life in the closet it's all good
it's all good what an inhumane way to
have lived and then we know from the
historical record that we have had a
significant portion of homosexuals as
part of the human condition at least for
2,500 years of people have been writing
about it and to disenfranchise them as
humans is disgusting right it is and and
you could say something similar about
women who frankly are now quite free to
choose to do things that only men had
access to and whether they do choose to
do them at the same rate as men we can
you know we can discuss and we can talk
about the reasons that they might not
but the fact is I see it as nothing but
positive that somebody who is born
female gets to decide what role they
want to play on earth in a way that even
two generations ago would have been
almost unthinkable yeah but I've been a
close student of feminism for a long
time and one of my quotes I hope will
live beyond me is that when the scholars
of 5,000 years from now look back at the
20th century I suspect that they're not
going to be impressed by world war ii
nuclear weapons or landing a man on the
moon or the internet but what's going to
stand out in his store
terms is that for the first time in at
least 12,000 years of history and more
likely 200 thousand years of history
women in a small part of the world the
West finally started to be able to be
free of the patriarchy you know it's a
journey that's still not done to this
day but by 1975 it felt to me like the
corner had been turned and that at least
people who were thinking with a clear
head knew that women should have every
opportunity men should have and if this
actually does work its way through it
seems like it is that will be the most
momentous occurrence in human social
evolution in a very long time it's
spectacular and I mean the other thing
is all right there was a lot of discord
along the way but frankly as much as it
doesn't work perfectly yet it's amazing
how well it works yeah we have not
seamlessly but we have effectively
figured our way to a much more honorable
division of opportunities and that's
something to be proud of as Douglas
Murray though points out in his recent
book the madness of crowds there is
something odd about the tendency at the
point that a coalition has arrived at
approximately the goal they were seeking
the tendency of the train to continue
and barrel through the station is
notable shall we say yeah I mean you
know as much as I am a huge supporter I
think it's one of the greatest things in
history of the emancipation of women it
doesn't mean that men and women are
gonna you know fill the same jobs in the
same proportion right I was talking to a
very intelligent woman the other day and
she was saying oh yes I fully expect you
know within twenty years there will be
an equal number of men and women in the
inner sanctum of writing artificial
intelligence software and I had to tell
her I doubt it
you know I doubt that the distinctions
at that level of career choice are due
mostly today to discrimination you know
we know that women are sick
two percent of college graduates we know
women are almost exactly equally
represented in the elite professional
programs you know Harvard Law School
you know Wharton Business fifty-fifty
right on down the line it would seem to
be highly unusual if somehow the
academic culture of computer science was
so different as to produce a 10 or 15
percent result I think that's shows some
light on this is the situation in Sweden
Sweden is without a doubt the Society in
human history that has gone the furthest
not all the way there's still issues we
all know that in gender equality and yet
in Sweden a higher percentage of
Engineers are men than in the United
States and in Sweden a higher percentage
of nurses are women than in the United
States so it seems to at least throw
some light to my mind on the fact that
the inherent differences between men and
women which as we pointed out earlier
are real could well result in different
choices about careers and that doesn't
necessarily mean there's something wrong
with those institutions sure it doesn't
doesn't mean anything of the kind nor do
we know where those inherent differences
between males and females live they
could be in the genes but they don't
have to be one of the things that is a
very important realization that comes
from recognizing that the genome has
been much of the work that the genome
once did in our lineage has been
offloaded to the cultural layer but the
cultural layer is still an evolutionary
layer and so it's quite possible for the
differences in preference to be
transmitted culturally that does not
however mean that they are arbitrary it
is also worth pointing out that although
it is true that some of the jobs in
which the most glory is found are
disproportionately inhabited by men men
also inhabit many of the jobs in which
there is disproportionate danger or in
which the work is particularly discussed
and so I'm not going to pretend to tell
you that I know what a totally fair
world would look like in terms of what
people would choose but I certainly
would not expect a totally fair world to
result in equal representation of men
and women in all fields that's just that
is a fairy tale I think I'm on board
with you there and it would you know I
think to your point who would you say to
somebody Murray Douglas Murray wasn't
the guys that listener yeah I think he
the way you described it seems right to
me that we arrived at the station but
the train didn't stop yes it kind of
accelerated into these post truths hosts
reality based arguments of the sort that
you know that we all they're all very
aware of it's been a good conversation
there let's move on to a couple smaller
topics we can move through quickly and
wrap up here in about ten minutes if
that works for you sure you know one
thing I picked up in in some of the
writings about you and by you is that
despite being a self-proclaimed atheist
you established a distinction between
your beliefs and what are sometimes
called the New Atheists guys like Pinker
Dawkins Hitchens and I'm going to argue
in a minute unfairly Dennett could you
describe how it is you distinguish
yourself from these new atheists and how
well this is interesting actually I
mentioned earlier in the conversation
that I had only a few times said
something online that had resulted in an
intemperate response from Twitter and
one of them the most recent one had to
do with my use of the term new atheism
which resulted in an amazing amount of
firepower coming back at me including
Richard Dawkins Steven Pinker Michael
Shermer Jerry Coyne and Neil Shubin all
of whom reacted
none of them on the topic of atheism
though they all came back at me on
Darwinian topics but all right after my
invoking new atheism and I'm quite sure
that that was the trigger the reason
that my view on this
is contentious is that the so-called New
Atheists oh I am going to use that term
I I believe Sam Harris uses that term
sometimes so it has at least a certain
degree of legitimacy the difference is I
believe that religion must have evolved
that the meaning of long-standing
religious traditions is a Darwinian
meaning which does not imply that in our
modern circumstances that these ancient
stories are the guide to what we should
be doing that is likely to be true in
some cases but it is almost certain not
to be true in many others the fact is
that Darwinian evolution does not
prepare us for the environments in which
we live it prepares them for the
environments from which we came and we
don't live in the environments where
religious traditions evolved so in some
sense even a recognition that these are
a kind of ancient wisdom that has been
encoded in a cultural package that is
easily transmitted even that recognition
leaves us with the profound sense that
we must now figure out what to do next
because those stories are not up to the
challenges of the 21st century but what
I found is that and I think there's a
historical path here we even twenty
years ago
lived in a paradigm in which the fact of
being an atheist made a person suspect
in the eyes of the majority there's a
question about whether or not an atheist
for example could be elected to the
highest office in the land and new
atheism arose in response to that
paradigm the problem is it drew the
picture far too simply and quite
unfairly to those who retain some
connection to their religious past and
what I've been saying is that religion
shows all of the harm
of being a Darwinian adaptation and that
therefore it is as deserving of a proper
Darwinian treatment as an eye or a wing
or an enzyme that has inflamed many of
the people at the forefront of the new
atheist movement because in some sense I
think they see it as coddling a
perspective that is anti scientific
ironically many of the people in
religious communities who have felt
quite beaten up by the New Atheists are
responding positively to this message
they don't agree with it because of
course the first thing I say is I don't
believe anything supernatural is going
on in the universe but simply to be
taken seriously and to be told I don't
believe that you are suffering from a
delusion or that you have a mental
pathology that you are in fact adhering
to these traditions because they have a
historical importance that has created
an awful lot of goodwill amongst
thinking believers of which there are
quite a large number and it has inflamed
the the new atheist community who I
think sees it as a as a betrayal I'm
hoping that as things settle down the
new atheist community will come to
understand that a whether they like it
or not
the argument is correct evolution has
produced religion we know that that must
be the case for reasons I've argued
elsewhere and that that being the case
if we attempt to move forward on the
basis that religion is a mass delusion
then ultimately what we are doing is we
are undermining the credibility of
evolutionary thinking rather than
advancing the Enlightenment ball oh well
that's interesting because let me unpack
all that first I'll point the audience
to a very interesting book called
breaking the spell religion as a natural
phenomenon by Daniel Dennett who is
sometimes considered one of the new
atheists but in that
book he actually goes through the
evolutionary and adaptive arguments for
religion and seems to by the fact that
they did indeed evolve and they were
indeed adaptive to provide you know
group cohesion the you know
distinguished ussin from them etc so
there's some tradition even amongst the
new atheists in that perspective on the
other hand I would accept what you said
is absolutely true evolution religion
almost certainly evolved in fact one of
my fun games when I meet a new
anthropologist and that one of the fun
things about our Santa Fe Institute
community we've always had a number of
anthropologists and archaeologists in it
it seems kind of far afield but it's
been the case I always ask them and your
field of study has there ever been the
equivalent of the obnoxious 16-year old
kid who challenged the religious
orthodoxy with a question like why don't
we do the rain dance in village a not do
the rain dance in village B and see if
there's a difference in brain and
everyone of them and most of them are
atheist themselves have said absolutely
not such a thing would be utterly
inconceivable in a you know pre-modern
person and so that's led me to believe
that the phenomenon known as religion
has been ubiquitous as far back as we
know and for it to have been ubiquitous
despite its high cost it must have been
adaptive in some fashion so what you say
is true however this is where maybe I
turned one step further around the bend
it doesn't mean it's not a mass delusion
I mean it's just not true
Thor did not does not cause thunder Zeus
does not throw lightning bolts and every
time science has made an incursion into
the world of the metaphysical science
has always been right the meta
physicians have always been wrong so I
think it's perfectly reasonable to say
it is evolutionary it was adaptive and
it's a mass delusion is color a mass
delusion
it's color uh it depends on what you're
talking about we do have we have our
rods and we have our cones right and the
difficut which ones which the cuttings
the cones that are for the color yeah
all right and so they fire under
different frequencies so we have in our
brains we get different signals from the
different colors so I would say colors
are real color is not a delusion no but
the experience of color is it is well
let's put it this way when we look at
photos of Saturn for example sometimes
you'll see true color photos and
sometimes you'll see photos in which the
color wheel has been rotated to
highlight things that are hard to see
with the standard color okay so we would
say it's false color right but the fact
is the experience of color that you have
inside your mind in fact the idea that
the the room you are in is visible is a
mass delusion of a kind the room you're
in is also filled with radio waves and
they're bouncing off things in
particular waves you just don't happen
to have a detector that organizes that
information into some sort of subjective
experience so you experience the room as
empty of radio waves and full of color
and the color is a trick of the mind
that allows you to quickly categorize
objects as to think from each other so
that you know where one starts and the
other stops and my point is I'm not
saying that it's a delusion I believe it
is a useful heuristic right it is a
heuristic that is not analytical it is a
heuristic that is experiential and
allows you to navigate the world quickly
without thinking about it but certainly
somebody could portray it as a delusion
in the same sense that we can portray
belief systems that have made people
successful as a delusion but the
connotation of the word delusion is
unfair the fact is we're talking about
compendiums of adaptive belief
and to the extent that you want to take
anything which is not a perfectly
literal belief and say it's a delusion
then you're going to end up dragging in
many of the models that we use in
science to which are also approximate I
would say this is qualitatively
different they make specific claims
about the nature of the universe and
they're never found to be true you know
the Sun is at the center of the universe
you know argued from a metaphysical
perspective they were wrong
we were right you know with respect to
color I mean that falls into my area of
cognitive study of consciousness and
that's what we call qualia the
subjective experience of color and I
would say that's a completely different
thing than a system of beliefs operates
in a different domain entirely so much
or that comparison was particularly apt
well but the question is where are you
gonna draw the line how literal does a
scientific model have to be before
you're gonna exclude it from the realm
of delusion I agree with you that there
is a distinction between a claim about
where the Sun is relative to the earth
but you also have models in science that
are approximate and they get better over
time you know we say they're approximate
the whole doctrine of science is that
everything that we say we think is true
today we know is wrong in some detail in
some way and that overtime experiment
and data will in some cases fine-tune
what we believe and sometimes turn it
completely on its head if it's amazing
you know Einstein entirely turned on its
head the Newtonian perspective of
absolute space and time and every good
scientist knows that and knows it in
their bones you know religion is the
exact opposite of that I think maybe
you're miss you're miss hearing me in
some sense then because it sounds to me
like you think that there are
circumstances in which we should
prioritize factual claims coming from
religion in spite of scientific evidence
that is not what I'm saying what I'm
saying is that those claims have
persisted because they have been
effective and so for example you have in
the Old Testament
you have a repeated invocation of the
concept of Filth basically and the
deity not wanting filth in certain
places like in the middle of camp now
that belief that there is some force in
the universe that cares where filth ends
up is not literal
it is literally false but it is
metaphorically true in the sense that it
prevents disease from spreading in camp
so what I had the fair comparison is for
a population that exists thousands of
years before the germ theory of disease
would you have them abandon a belief
that a deity cares where filth ends up
waiting for the enlightenment to deliver
the tools to understand what microbes
and pathogens are or would you have them
utilize their shorthand belief for
something in the universe cares where
this stuff goes waiting for a better
deeper understanding to supplant it when
the evidence says it's time to do that
that's where I would fall out and I
think that's all right you know in fact
the line I draw is Darwin here was a big
question where the hell did life come
from what are humans really and before
Darwin provided a good answer to that
you know believing some story about how
it all happened seemed to me reasonable
but that was a long time ago yeah that
was over 150 years ago
and yet people are still clinging to
these things and it's not to say they
aren't adaptive and I absolutely agree
they almost certainly work as they're
expensive and they've existed in
essentially every culture that we know
about but I would put them in the same
basket of xenophobia and patriarchy
things that probably were adaptive and
useful in our past and especially in our
Pleistocene path and now it's time to
pitch them ah so I agree with you about
it is time to pitch them but I would say
we have to qualify that a if we are
going to get people to listen to us
about the necessity
of moving towards a system in which we
are governed by what it is we know we
have to understand what the hazards that
come along with that are in other words
there are some realms where we know a
lot chemistry for example there are some
realms where we are still pretty new at
it biology there are things about these
compendiums of belief that we can't know
we don't necessarily know how these
biblical texts for example have served
the populations who believed in them and
therefore we've got Chesterton's fence
issue with respect to throwing these
things out so what I'm concerned about
is that in hearing me say something
other than the standard atheist line
about well it's time to walk away from
these beliefs whatever they are and
fully embrace the Enlightenment model
well I'm on board with the idea that we
have to be governed by the Enlightenment
model but I would caution that we are
not yet in a position to simply say
here's what's true and this is what it
implies about how we should live we're
still coming to understand that Darwin
may seem like he's a very long time ago
but really it isn't very long at all in
terms of the time necessary to
comprehend our situation and our
understanding of human evolution has
actually lagged quite a bit behind our
understanding of the evolution of other
creatures in part because human beings
evolved in a fundamentally different way
so I am NOT hoping to coddle these
beliefs there are many reasons that we
should look at the inherited wisdom that
comes along with religious belief and
register it as a mismatch for the 21st
century because it can't help but be
mismatched but if we are to make an
argument about what must be done instead
that argument should be grounded as
carefully as we can in the deepest
science we have available and that says
we have to take this stuff seriously as
adaptive phenomena rather than delusion
or pathology yeah see I would say it's
not pathology but it's delusion but
we're not going to agree on this one you
know I think it sounds like I'm halfway
in between the New Atheists and you yes
evolved it was certainly adaptive it's
not path wasn't pathological and the
place the scene probably wasn't up until
the time of Darwin but now it's you know
that anyone who's paying attention
should say alright time to pitch it just
like marxist-leninist
were thinking about until you know 1932
right the purges well I would say then
it's something like our insatiable
desire for carbohydrates right that
obviously has an easy to interpret
meaning in a past environment but in our
current environment the fact that
there's no limit on how many
carbohydrate molecules we can source at
the supermarket and then you give an
hour means that we we are in need of a
better newer more factually grounded
wisdom I think that's good I think on
that note we're gonna wrap up as I
suspect that this was a phenomenal
discussion all over the place at both
broad and deep
I hope our listeners will have enjoyed
it I've certainly enjoyed it thanks for
having me on Jim yeah it was great we
got to do this again all right I look
forward production services and audio
editing by Jared Jane's consulting music
by Tom Muller at modern space music.com