the internet connection suspect world is
suspect I'm having a heart attack today
which is why it is 8:20 in the morning
in and I have already smoked pot I don't
know what to do
I don't know how to do the executive
functioning all that I'm not doing
the executive functioning the universe
hasn't given me the ability the
executive functioning to get this ideal
world so I have to let it go I have to
just like be okay that I have this
world-changing idea but can't fix the
gap can't all I can do is own it and
even that I kind of suck acts like I
don't even want to communicate what it
is that is lacking and missing I need
someone else to do the basic basic
that any human being can do like send
emails like set up an event run an event
figure it the out cuz I can't it's
like and it's the problem and it's the
solution and I can see it all but I
can't do the basic nobody can be
everything but there are some basic
stuff that is lacking that I can't do
and because anyone basically can do them
does they don't have brain damage and I
don't look like I have brain damage it's
just ridiculous like I feel like
if I looked like I if I talked and
looked like I had it then people would
want to step in and help but then
simultaneously they don't trust the idea
with brain damage like it's like
right because you haven't experienced it
you don't know what it's like to live in
the brain of somebody who's like
simultaneously a genius and
ridiculous the same time
if we can get people together in the
same place ie online at the same time an
actual time to talk to each other by a
video I need three people consistently
not even the same three people I don't
care
three people to have a conversation with
weekly and if it's not the same three
people someone else seems to figure I'm
going to get that all coordinated so
that the next person understands that
went on the first conversation at least
a little bit but whatever for simplicity
sake the same people people who are
committed to changing this world who
that is what you need to do that is all
you need to do meet for an hour a week
someone else figure out what about
 hour is because I did it I
figured out what the hour is based on
other people's not based on my brain not
based on when I'm available and this
will be the third week tomorrow and if
nobody shows up tomorrow the last week
at that time spot like I'm not working
around your guys schedule when nobody
shows up maybe that's what's supposed to
happen maybe that's why there's no one's
showing up cuz I'm not supposed to do it
at 2:00 p.m. on Mondays that's not what
my brain works and then I fall back on
my addiction because I don't want to
deal with the this this feeling of being
inadequate and being a shitty human
being he can't do basic and yet
possessing the idea that will save all
of us like it is humorous how ridiculous
those two things are to exist in the
same person at the same time and yet not
always like really frustrating and
stressful and kind of stressed and it's
just and I know this is a cycle then it
goes through the cycle of like feeling
shitty and showing up as you are and
that is what I need to show more
showcase mark come on board and show the
shittier side which hissed on at all
what anyone else would give us advice
but it is it's what needs to happen so
the universe keeps telling me to do and
it's all I can do like I can be more
vulnerable I can put myself out there I
can put out a shittier and shittier
on it no problem what I can't do is make
it better like well don't just do this
simple if nothing is simple nothing is
simple not when you have executive
functioning issues like figuring out
what to eat and eating it is not a
simple task that is not something I can
figure out how to fix the entire food
system for our planet or at least the
system that would do that for us by us
working together but I cannot figure out
what the is for dinner and make it
and figure out how to eat healthy and
cheaply and that I need us to do it I
need us
I need the cooperation because I can't
exist in a competitive world
it's basically what we're dealing with I
can't exist in the competitive world
because I lack some basic it wasn't
always lacking of it something I was
when you had a TD and up in five minutes
this is not just an hour long one I
don't know why I even came on here good
god I've been doing this for when I have
it I haven't been doing this for three
years I'm barely used by YouTube channel
I need a personal assistant I need like
someone else to take on the basic
function of life and not in a
hierarchical because I'm so important
and a diva but like I'm important
because everyone's important but this
idea in my head is so important
that it needs to come out and exist in
the world and I need help i need help
from people who want to understand it
and will ask the questions and try to
understand it preferably people who are
better at communicating it than i am so
that we can explain it to the masses so
that the masses want to come on board
because i know they do
it's just by communication lacking i
need someone else you'll be the basic
 like oh we just need to send this
email basically if it's easy and simple
i can't do it somebody else needs to
it's like I just said I'll just do it
it's not happening it will not happen
even strict instructions basically that
it can't happen that's not the way
there's always that gap because
somebody's
most to fill that gap I'm not supposed
to create the cooperative that loop our
cooperative system on my own because
it's a cooperating system and I need
other people to cooperate with like I
need the piece to be fun and light for
people but like if I have to pull teeth
to get people to sit around the table
having a conversation about what makes
the conversation in front of light
that's not simple and easy for me and
I'm the one who absolutely needs it to
be simple and easy because I can't do
the complex I need to allow my brain to
do what it wants to do and not all the
other basic that society says it
needs to do when it can in no way do and
I need to learn to sit with this
uncomfortable shitty feeling without
necessarily got me did away but no
that
no I live in a world where children
getting locked up in a world where our
planet is burning and I can't feel that
all in function and I can't feel that I
can't do anything by myself and so all I
can do is sit and be by myself with this
idea until other people come on board
and make it easier well trying to the
best of my ability to do it from where I
am and that's like all I can do but it's
nearly impossible to sit back I could
only do that and feel okay with it
you're like yeah you just want the
executive functioning cuz there's still
the piece that I like even like so then
how do I get the person that can do that
and it's putting myself out there
continually finding one way it's
sticking with it isn't gonna happen do
not who I am and it's too much executive
for me for my plane all right I need to
get off this has to us the donuts