all right so today we are doing an idea
Cafe on what makes a project game beat
or rather game be transition because are
we ever getting to gain me it's a whole
other a whole other question so anyone
want to start
in usually in the ID cafe we all take a
turn or we have an open conversation but
we don't want to do that but it seems to
be in direct idea cafe
we'd like to start I could start
although I guess I don't feel very
qualified I get I guess it'd be anything
that's exploring the space of game B or
can help us transition to what we think
game B might like might be like like
Julie said we don't have a definition to
game B and it's one of those things that
they say once you define it it's not it
anymore
but but things that are kind of leading
that way so things that help us to you
know the Omega rule where you try and
listen for signal and everyone that you
can or things that help us to be more
decentralized be more inclusive and less
rival wrists so that's kind of that's
what comes to top of mine when I hear
that question can I see yeah
for me game beam is reducing inequality
and for that I believe what we're saying
with Kari is that cops are the way to do
it
so to hear more than that in the open
discussion if you don't want to expand
more on it now for me a game B project
it's a lot of what Bentley said a lot of
that it's its Omni win that its
antivirus practice and Omega rule is
definitely good start lowering
inequality it's like the perp there's
the perfect project I'm sure that is
never actually obtainable especially
right now and so it's just how many of
the interconnecting circles of values do
you possess in your project and the more
that we can be transparent and
democratic or better or decentralized
there's a lot of qualities that I think
are in that sphere but where they
interconnect is is the question right
maybe you can't do decentralized yet
maybe you can't do fully transparent yet
but wanting to get more and more towards
that side and also I just want to
acknowledge that I've been up for 10
hours since 2:00 in the morning my fire
alarm went off so I my brain is extra
extra right now
so whoever would like to go next
next so I mean I agree with everything
that's been said so far I think cuz sort
of an overall it being sustainable which
is both like from you know not damaging
things but then also a model that's able
to sustain itself so actually like given
that at least in the transition it has
to work in a game a world working just
enough by the game rules to sort of
sustain itself will not be encountered
to the point of that existing and to
that approach it needs to be able to
compete in the current model and win
however that works which I think you
know goes towards the working together
of the cooperative's the like that and
when I think about it it's sort of the
the best of both worlds from the two
competing models that people tend to
think about as the only models where you
know there's capitalism and socialism
and to me it's sort of the the best
where there's the it's competitive
enough but not rival risk and it's sort
of the people working together but
outside of the like we don't need to use
the government's to do it it's not about
forcing it it's about working together
enough to make it work and that sort of
why it needs to be able to out-compete
because it's not using the government to
force that approach on people it needs
to be able to enter the arena and come
out on top just by people working
together and doing what's necessary to
sustain itself
okay I'll go right and have you think
what you've all set
but look it needs to be metastable haha
I don't even know what that means but
it's Santa cause I had you brought tight
once it needs to be metastable so and
also her flat won't seem saying that
whatever you do needs to be strong
enough so I don't know what this might
mean metastable but strong enough to
withstand any challenges it faces and to
be able to get stronger with those
challenges so not being crushed by
challenges you may not even thought
about and being able to survive that but
also get stronger as it does that and
maybe take the status quo of what is
right at the moment and create something
that's different and like as I said that
we think he says and transcends and
includes what's out there already and
yeah an omni win and and everyone
benefits it's not just a case of well
you know I'm in charge I'm the boss so
I'll just benefit the most while
everybody's working shit I was somewhat
of yeah um but yeah so being able to
sort of like everybody wins out of it
it's not just a case of them someone
just takes all the money and runs and
it's just everybody gets to have a piece
of what they put into and and it works
you know I mean and as I said if it can
spread out in there and not not just be
our project for yourself as well but
also to spread out in the the local
communities and be able to help them as
well so and not just be standalone as
most game a stuff is it's all kinds of
standalone we don't want to play out
with others whereas with a game be think
it'd be like yeah I'll play out with
your enough and we'll spread what we're
doing and as I said I'm not being avid
everything behind paywalls that people
can't access when they need it and and
just of that really so that's I think
everything I've said
yeah and everything forever your sense
as well that'd be good
yeah everything yourself and one point I
think MA and maybe like we're on a
spectrum and then a is like extreme end
of the spectrum because it uses just one
metric for playing the game the game
being ABCD whatever and its profit so
everything that is done purely and
exclusively for profit this time I I
think that's how we can define it and
then various stages of you know when
there's the company that is kind of for
profit but the profit a side effect of
doing something but even in
non-transparent way that's kind of
beginning of game B and then the extreme
other and of the spectrum would be
something that is done like completely
in a transparent manner for the greater
good or you know completely regardless
of the profits that's on so right that
was everyone this weekend I'm you and
have an open conversation for the
remainder
it's a record I think all six people
sharing an idea cafe and done with him
he'd have minutes that means we each of
us took less than two minutes to share
we got it we got the parameters for what
I can't be project this was just waiting
for one person to be like you're all
wrong as this yeah voluntary was a big
when a drone star I was like right I
forgot to mention what the solutions
have to be voluntary which is part of
the OU community game a as well as
antifragility which Kerry mentioned I do
want to look guidance I was gonna say I
might want to challenge on the
anti-fertility part I think that well I
guess it depends on where the project is
in its stage some of our projects will
be experiment
they'll be learning things and those
don't have to be anti fragile but if we
when we're building when our project is
to build something that we hope to last
we'd want to make it anti fragile
although now I'm thinking about you do
want to keep things fresh you do want
things to be maybe self-destructive like
if their purpose no longer exists then
people should disperse and go elsewhere
that's probably a different theme
anything but that's kind of that's what
I thought when I was hearing it well
yeah I understand that cuz like as I
said there's loads of saucer-like
charities that are set up for a single
papers right and then it doesn't become
about the papers what they've been set
up for anymore
it just comes about keeping themselves
in a job and keeping themselves going
which it I get that so I think maybe if
you build in something and like as I
said like it's a lot of businesses so
columns are due to Co good 19 because he
didn't foresee what if we're not going
to have any customers anymore and so - I
think as Brett Ryan seen you have to
have an evolutionary stable strategy to
develop one of them so so if you're if
you purpose but that know is to create
something that helps people out and then
once that that purpose has been sort of
like done I think you should build into
you build into it built into it right
okay so what at the end of the day the
reap dumbness it's all being finished or
not needed any longer I think you need
to build into a plan right what we're
going to do after that you know I mean
because as assembly because if you build
that into the plan and then you're not
going to get people going oh my job my
job got to keep my job you know I mean
yeah but if you if you plant and build
other stuff around on that so it's not
just the one thing okay the papers might
have been the driving force or you've
also things that promote without that
one developed alongside it so you could
have things being developed in parallel
so when that kind of mine happens and
maybe that's not where again and then
fine but the case of coab in 19 when you
you know obviously you're not going to
be able to operate the way you want to
do anymore
think you've got a say right okay we're
setting up this what happens if the
biggest disaster on the planet so I
think you've got to be ready for all
sorts and as I said we get all sorts
thrown at you know whenever you try and
do something so I think him more than as
I said much I wouldn't call anti fragile
and roses and just being able to survive
withstand challenges and also get them
challenges that year of to become on the
other none stronger and as I said as I
stronger what I'm hearing is that game
be is anti fragile but the projects
aren't it's like you know if a limb is
gangrenous you cut it off even though
you still want that limb but if it's
going to cause more damage to the being
overall like with Mondragon the the
worker cooks being it owns a bunch of
different entities its goal is to
survive and it brings on companies but
if the company isn't serving its purpose
if it's costing more than it's worth
then they cut it loose and so I like as
Henley said in the initial stages of a
project you're trying to contribute to
the overall but if it ends up not being
worthwhile then alright it folds and
that's totally fine because the overall
goal of game B's being anti fragile the
like if you know if my project starts to
take off and then it ends up being
either you know more trouble then it's
worth or it has of actually being bad
then it needs to die
even though game B itself still should
go forward yeah it's a lot of what we've
been talking about a lot like human the
human the individual humans involved in
whatever way are anti fragile not
because they actually anti fragile
because anything we go through if we
have the foundation of our needs being
met we're able to come out stronger
right we're able to know like we can
focus on our own genius our own projects
and so like there's a certain amount of
antifragility for the individuals and
then also the whole like as a project
fails at whatever stage it fails at
including it you know you cutting it off
because it's keep on angry and that's
not a failure that's just they lived its
life cycle and how it's ready to go that
there's a learning process in that
because of the transparent
is that the next people get to learn
something and grow for it which were you
know I'm trying to do here with together
tech sharing that that because of how
game a is so proprietary and you have to
keep things hidden and you had like you
have to put on our error of being
professional and you can't make mistakes
and if you do then you know like one
other that was part of the whole Mark
like marketing strategy and we planned
that one instead of what I hope that
we're doing here and learning and
growing together well I think the most
kind of different answer was Leo's I
wonder if we could ask him to expand on
that
I don't know cuz um Tech is working I
will say when he said it I initially
heard cops but I'm guessing he meant
coops that's my guess you're muted carry
right I have to add to chat with neo
before and it was basically about coops
and we were talking about coops in
Brazil and he was telling me about the
place where yet without those two cops
and one of them and his big problem is
them how'd you stop corruption within a
co-op race so I think the big question
for Leo is how to stop because
apparently someone's room the coop is
quite you look than that and all the
money ends will go into him so how why
when if you run in a cool how'd you stop
that from from taking over you know I
mean how'd you get hurt there we go how
you how do you prevent it all happening
probably I can I ask what kind of
cooperatives oh I don't I don't always
be working it was a pet cause if I lose
but taxi taxi cool so the worker co-op
like the people who owns the taxis or
driving the taxis owned the coop yeah
what was I to do during the people
dropping the taxis owned the cooperative
people with the medallions owned by
co-op just sounds like a taxi company
actually people prolonged attack on the
cause the probability that you need
authorization from the government local
government and then the local
politicians took over the clock and
unfortunately with the sound quality I
think their mic may have switched or
something because the first time you
spoke it was totally clear and now it's
like almost sounding like a speakerphone
or something yeah and now you what so so
let's see if if we understand so your
example was a taxi co-op where the
owners of the cars and it could also be
drivers there's a tax co-op and there
was some corruption and the question is
how do you prevent that in that
situation and pretty much in any kind of
co-op and since a lot of our projects
have to do with people cooperating and
then together Tec is a tech co-op we've
handled avoiding corruption by not
having money involved so far but that's
not possible in that yeah that's I think
that's that is an important thing there
seems to actually I've noticed in the
last couple weeks I've heard of several
different groups working on governance
of coops so I don't know where the space
and then there's also D baby
decentralize the wrong thing but
autonomous organizations we have some
sort of system that kind of allows
everyone to participate equally so you
know kind of like well we tried to do an
R and the United States is just you know
have no central person in charge didn't
really work out yeah so process is kind
of like that which I think a lot of a
lot of times there's boards and stuff
like that so no one person has there's
still collusion and stuff but yeah
there's I think there's a lot of work
going on in that space that I would want
to look at before starting a new project
I don't know if you've had a chance to
look into that yet yeah
[Music]
[Music]
but if you type it out in the private
chat
one of the main ways from what I'm
hearing is like you would need really
good transparency so if somebody was
being corrupt it's really hard to hide
it and then the other side has to be
there has to be a way to you know
replace that person so if they're you
know like with the liquid democracy or
young the shareholders eventually voting
that person out or if they're just an
employee then getting rid of that person
some method to sort of uncover it and
then decide as a community what do we do
that's important to know unfortunately I
still don't quite understand what the
coop is because there's calling
something to co-op it doesn't actually
make it a coop coop there are producer
coops which sounds like that's almost
what it is that it's like the taxi
owners are part of a co-op but whether
if you own one taxi in that fleet or a
hundred taxis and that fleet if you have
an equal vote because that is a fairly
rigorous rule for coops there are some
wiggle room if you have a worker slash
you know consumer cooperative and you
can have a vote for each or some people
have shareholder votes and such but
generally speaking it's one person one
vote and so but even in that like
mecca's is a consumer co-op and it's one
person one vote about equipment go up
and there's still problems with people
taking over the board because meth gives
you recommendations for who to vote for
and nobody looks into it so you're just
going to vote for who they recommend
which means you have
if you only have a certain amount of
time on the board it um they're keeping
the people they wanted power in power
it's like the Liberals constantly like
yeah I vote in the next liberal vote in
the next liberal without actually having
the brand of liberal under them and so
work the only co-ops I consider actual
co-ops that help with democracy are
worker and producer
sorry worker and consumer cooperatives
producer cooperatives are like Ocean
Spray cranberry cocktail it's like well
yes it's great that they have a way to
get their cranberries into something and
get profit from it but it's not helping
the consumer or the worker so so that's
why I guess nice because especially if
you have voting on the same thing and
everyone is not equally familiar three
people in the god everyone wonders so
what is described in rate they're
inventing organizations different models
and approaches our governance could work
in big and he describes really big
organizations and it involves not voting
at least company-wide votes so and also
and it's also worth taking a look at
because he also has some ideas about
something between the alternatives to
voting that's also kind of where reason
score my project comes in because
instead of voting you're putting down
evidence on why you should or should not
do something and thus it gets past that
issue where the people don't know
it's going on and you could either have
that be part of instead of voting you
could use reason score because it'll do
a score and you say oh it's over a
certain point then we then the
organization will do it or it could just
be information available to the voters
and then they could vote on it depending
on how mature and how trustworthy people
trust in the in the system totally I
think you can't have recommendations
because people don't don't pay attention
so you have some method to just really
like boil down like maybe what you care
about and then sort of score the people
based on that and it has to be very
evidence-based so that you know you you
can say as a member okay I care about
you know your ethics and I care about
you know people not trying to line their
own pockets and I care about you know
anything else like the environment and
then score people based on the
information available what it seems like
that person is sort of about and what
what their history shows that maybe
helps summarize it based on that but
like as Julie said with Mountain
Equipment co-op
if people don't really pay attention or
like if even ten percent do but then the
organization makes recommendations that
is then very prone to corruption then
you just have the you know the people in
power are going to recommend themselves
or you know yeah the person who thinks
very much the same and then even though
you're voting that 10% just can't make
up the difference for the 90% of people
who aren't paying attention and we'll
just vote how they're told however you
know basically all coops night you you
go and get 10% of the people voting so
it's actually somewhat if you got enough
people together right five percent of
the co-operative you actually can easily
sway the vote because nobody cares so
it's like the board that's why the board
can just recommend people who are like
yep practicing my democratic right I'm
that part of what a good board doesn't a
co-op instead of saying yes Mary Smith
is the person we're recommending is to
say hey we know that that Bob Sue and
Mike are leaving and what we need are
these skill sets and then we you know
like we think these people
have the most skill sets of those but I
like what a turtle said like having that
actually be more transparent said of it
being Mary it's like right we need
something with accounting we need
someone with marketing we need someone
with this and then showcasing which one
of them has the best marketing which one
of them has the best finance maybe
there's someone with the best of all
three but which like an effective gaming
board that's actually how they operate
is they have you know a bunch of specs
saying here's the skill sets people have
and you know the more sort of a equality
based ones will say like here's how many
men we have here so many women here's
how many white people here's all this so
that you can go you know you've got your
shopping list for okay we want people
that have these skills and then have
these attributes lose let's go shopping
and then you go and find you know okay
here's three or five people and then you
can decide the between them and you want
something like that but for it to be
sort of a more like not as easy to sway
in the direction that people think it's
already going anyway or that the
existing board thinks it should which of
course is one of the problems with the
game a board is they're very much a lot
of the companies are prone to do that
and there's nothing to stop them it
turns out ten hours is how long my fire
alarm will not be pin between I'm gonna
go deal with it and hope yeah I'll be
back in a second
so any other thoughts about game view
projects or do we want to talk about
some projects that aren't dengue that
shouldn't be in game be if we want to be
a little bit more critical and rival
risk yeah or even not this is early
projects but like attributes that we
think might sort of come up or something
like if you were half of the attributes
but if there was one thing that was a
part of it you're like I'd only think
that's game be like I mean an obvious
example is like if your based on using
slavery right like right even if you
thought which I at that point you could
although I guess you could theoretically
be a consumer cooperative to chose to
use slavery although I think that would
be weird but its theory okay possible
yeah well maybe not yeah using but yeah
if you were doing a co-op between people
who are currently enslaved right well no
but that's what I mean by a consumer
co-op right like if the people who are
voting for Emmys he said yeah we don't
care go ahead and use slaves just keep
the prices low again that's weird but
like the possible they ironically do the
opposite and say no we really want them
to have fair wages and then no one shops
there like it so but then I'll go next
door to Walmart it's like I want another
thing I don't partly own to be ethical
but then if there's a better price down
the street that arise you see I reckon
which yeah and I think then they're sort
of does need to be like some model of
okay so based on what we voted on here
the prices if you wouldn't shop at that
price then change your vote because we
can't be sustainable
like we're voting on something that is
going nowhere and is going to have no
impact good good job because you know
the membership have full ownership of
that and I think that happens much more
easily and like that and City the other
cooperative that I'm familiar with
because although you're not voting on
mortgage rates and interest rates at the
same time you're watching them and seen
and the bacons like the CEO can set
their own the board can set them and
decide and change things and so you are
look
more within your finances but still if
you can get a cheaper mortgage at RBC
you might and yet you know and I mean
and switch it over but you're more in
like I don't like you feel more like an
owner rather than my sporting goods
where it's like I you know I'm not gonna
only shop it back and so making sure
that that the members are fully
entrenched in it to that like the
purpose of MEC is to get your your
outdoor supplies met so if you're gonna
go somewhere else we need that to be
part of the information we gathering
next time we vote on fair trade yeah I
guess you can't vote on like individual
slivers because you know you're gonna
vote on being as ethical as possible and
having low prices and you're like yeah
but you can't get all of those things so
here's a package where were you know
doing this and here's how much we're
going to pay workers and here's where
the materials are coming from here's
what things would cost in that model
would you shop here no try again until
you you get to like okay it's not
perfect but maybe it's better than
Walmart and better than the options out
there and the price is reasonable enough
that people if they knew the other
things that you know like the actually
paying and you know employees well and
producers and and everything all coming
together as a package is yeah the
consumers will always sort I mean it's I
don't think that many people would
voluntarily you know vote for paying
employees crappy you know and using
slavery but then they also just want the
lowest prices and as you said they'll
just go to Walmart like okay if that's
what you would do then why are you
voting that way when people aren't
shopping it back specifically sorry
Bentley is that they um are their
quality of goods isn't as good as it
used to be partly of them not just not
like they're paying people well in China
and places they get it made but the
quality of goods is no longer as good
and because they have basically or did
have almost a lifetime warranty more
people are returning it now they're like
that and that's a much bigger viewpoint
right it's like okay so we need to have
quality goods so the person's paid well
and then how we can't have a lifetime
warranty that doesn't make sense
what does make sense for a warrant
right how long should have should a rain
jacket last for before it's no longer
waterproof how long and getting that
feedback to is part of it that data in
it like hey how often do you buy your
rain jacket why because it was stolen oh
well that's different than because it's
no longer rain proof and I'm gonna be
quite lemon top oh I was I was just
gonna say I wasn't sure if we were done
with that specific item I wanted to talk
about other just list of other things
that if we saw them as part of a project
we might suggest that that projects not
game B which adrià was kind of bringing
about kind of elimination flags like it
like well I mean I kind of struggle with
this with reason score because there are
some uses for a reason score that our
rival wrists that promote competition
but it is a fun competition as opposed
to you know and it and it drives you
towards cooperation but it's competitive
and in the middle which some people
might still say encourages the attitude
of competition so I don't know it'd be
eliminating in that specific project but
if a project is focused on profit you
know and and getting other people you
know extracting resources I think would
be one of the and not sustainable it
would be one of the kind of factors that
we would look for we can expand on that
that extracting resources well or yeah
or not taking into account all the X
what's normally external impacts right
so a business can produce goods and just
dump waste into the environment and not
take care of it and thus we're all
paying for their business to be cheaper
right because we have to suffer the
consequences but it's not in their
profit model so if we knew of a project
that was doing that they're saying oh
we're not gonna have to worry about that
because we're just gonna dump it we'd be
like right right I think the question
with that is also how does it compare to
its game a
competition like if you had somebody
that was using slavery or that was you
know I had a bad environmental impact
but if they were like the same or
slightly better than the competition and
better and other avenues is that still a
negating factor or is it sort of the
full package like okay you slavery but
use half the amount of slavery and the
other people you actually you know in
you introduced some some good paying
jobs so it is still slavery and there is
still some pollution but it's better
than the alternatives you know by at
least twice is that still a deal-breaker
to me it's not to me it's right we've
talked about that yeah we're trying to
transition the game be so if our
requirements is at every project be
perfect then we'll never get in there I
mean the one thing that I'm not quite
sure how to word this is something about
like where the profit goes I think if
the profit goes to shareholders so I was
like I think that's what one of the
really bad parts about current
capitalism is the whole like yet being
paid out to shareholders but more
importantly that that's the driving
factor the end-all-be-all
and all decisions must support that I
think tip like some version of that is
one of the the deal-breakers because
that drives bad decisions yes although
if you if you're not giving project
profit to shareholders they're not
shareholders right so it might just be
having shareholders yeah okay I mean
there are some there are or you have
constituents or you have yeah and you
can own a share of the company and there
not be any profits as long as you're
okay with that or dividend so I guess
like you can have stakeholders but not
shareholders that might be something to
consider and then we do need to kind of
work on how do you get people to invest
in these things which you know values
not just in dollars so people can be
investing in that to have a better world
right and and maybe there are models
where there are dividends based on
investments it's just they're not the
main purpose it isn't being a staple
that everyone that's got something to do
with the business and what up yet it's
not what they for goodness that's
everyone
yes I'm separating stakeholders from
shareholders I stakeholder is somebody
who's sort of interests that or has a
vote you have to have those or in theory
right that's that's normal but the
shareholder because as Bentley said if
you aren't getting paid up from the
profit but you're not really a
shareholder so because at first I said
no shareholders and then we talked about
that you know that separation so it
might end up being you can still have
stakeholders right so in like an an
employee owned co-op your stakeholders
are the employees a consumer own co-op
your stakeholders are the consumers but
in this the end goal is that it's not
about being a shareholder it's not about
having everything be profit driven where
the end-all be-all is anybody that paid
money in wants their maximum investment
out it's just when them I've been
involved with things and they were
talking about stakeholders he just just
meant so it wasn't just the employees or
the coop owners so whatever yeah it was
everything from the customer so the
supplier you know I mean that was that
was all of us I was thinking you know
and some of them didn't have any you
know it means so that's what anything
I've been involved in that's what's they
called he said stakeholders what
everything you know I mean from anyway
anyone who has any interactions with the
business with the stakeholder
even in a consumer own co-op the
employees and the partners are still
stakeholders because they sort of have
something they might not be a voting
stakeholder but they are stakeholder in
the neighborhood and all the
neighborhood Leo wrote out what we asked
him to write up so that we all said the
government government around the world
use the system to prevent corruption and
people taking control so I want to
develop a framework based on that to
increase democracy inside the coop as I
posted on the group is that we usually
have three powers that are independent
and harmonious the first power is the
people involved they vote on an app
they can they also can dispose the
executive the executive is elected Home
Depot's thank you thank you for the
executive is elected and they are
responsible to administer administrate
the coop the third power is there is to
judge and their job is to look at the
principles and constitution of the coop
and they prevent malicious like slavery
from happening so just also to know Leo
I don't know if you're able to come for
the roundtable tomorrow morning which no
is like in 21 hours or so because that
is maybe you could be in the hot seat
and we can talk about the coop and and
that that is as part of it and because
because what my response to this is is
like coops are democratic and they do
mimic the government's and at the same
time to do one as the government would
like this is already kind of failing is
it's almost like why not play with it
like why do you need the executives and
that because I don't think that is how
coops necessarily operate but if it's if
there's a reason for that for that piece
to be part of it then playing with that
is playing with it on a smaller scale
and said a lot a bigger scale and fight
you know how to make that work as the
three executive branches I can never
remember our legislative executive and
judicial okay quite okay yeah I think
part of it might end up being like
almost a translation into this sort of
model so the executive wouldn't be it
like a normal executive that that you
think about especially in something like
a liquid democracy where they're able to
easily depose the executive you know you
vote together and say that person seems
to have the right idea that they're you
know they're making some good claims so
we put them in power but then as soon as
they start like oh nope they're not
doing that or you know they are kind of
doing it but they're also completely
violating our charter you can kick them
out the next day and it's not like that
you know in current governments where
you can lie to get in power and then you
can do whatever the hell you want for
the next four years and who's going to
stop you
I do think that sort of top-down like if
they're being true to their word and
trying to to to get there there is some
advantage into saying I'm gonna pick
that person because they seem like you
know they have a vision and you're kind
of voting on the full package like what
we talked about with you can't just vote
on low prices and no slavery in this and
that is some of them are in conflict so
if you have people saying here's the
vision I have we're gonna have no
slavery and try to pay people well and
keep prices here and have this sort of
model then you can say yep that that
sounds good and then if either a they're
failing or B is you know weren't
entirely truthful about maybe some of
the stuff that they were doing you don't
have to wait for that to run its course
you can say nope that's not working you
aren't doing what what you said we're
going to depose you as soon as possible
and replace you with somebody else yeah
I guess it'd be interesting in that if
we cover it tomorrow to know what the
bylaws are for that co-op because that
what you're describing is well I guess
it's not that standard to have like a
legislative plan to no co-op I don't
know it's usually just a board that's
like the board elects the CEO or
whatever the equivalent is the CEO and
and the members get to vote on yeah
who's on the board in its rotating over
to a year to two years four years if the
members can depose people they kind of
become the judicial branch where it's
like you have your your charter and you
say I here's the rules that viola is
waving at something I'm not sure Souter
type something out or what's going on or
if he's swatting a fly but I think is
hearing out because I mean I'm fairly
familiar with coops not as familiar with
our government but between us pretty
sure all this yeah the other caution is
that allows the government models are
great in theory but no one likes the
government so no one thinks the
government is performing well so I'm not
sure if that's the best place to start
well it's also like we talked about the
cooperative
we met and that members then go off and
go to Walmart which honestly we don't
want to do but we do it based on price
part of that is that we know what Mex
stands for and it's beautiful but I
can't afford it and I don't know if it's
gonna break down and I'm not gonna feel
as guilty bringing it back to Walmart as
I bring it back here
but my point is the ecosystem in which
meth is involved in is Walmart is all of
this right including the supply chain
everything else that well creating those
whatever you call the mineral packages
like like you're voting on on are we
doing this are we doing that also making
sure that that's visible for things like
Walmart right and I don't think MEC
could legally do that but we can write
like it's like if we're essentially for
a mega consumer cooperative like hey if
my choice if I'm telling you I'm not
shopping at Mack because Walmart cheap
birth then what we want is a consumer
basis to know when it makes sense to
shop at Walmart and when and I want it
like what is what are their people
getting paid the whole supply chain and
whatever is available putting that into
yes on that note and it's something that
I do a lot of people disagree with but I
think that competition is important even
in game B because it like if you could
have for example three different lines
at MEC one is sort of the high end like
that top or the top it's got everything
that you want but you have to be able to
afford it and then something that maybe
tries to compete with Walmart but while
saying it's not going to be as good as
the upper line but our goal is to be
better in every avenue that we can right
so not no slavery but less slavery not
no pollution but less pollution so you
can say if you were going to shop there
comes up here instead the price is
comparable but because we aren't paying
out shareholders massive you know
executive bonuses and all the stuff it
is still going to be better hopefully
yeah and then you can start to to manage
those separately and they're still
competing with each other technically
and you could have you could have no
slavery and no things but have just the
lower quality products because sometimes
you don't need something that lasts a
lifetime which so I don't know if they
have that or not yet
so yeah so we could finish guessing
Leo's report more comments go ahead much
ish because no competition that means
also no challenge to the status quo
which means if we have a product like an
aqueducts in ancient Rome and it's
underperforming it's not the best that
can be or it was the best when it was
built
but then competition also means to me
that someone comes along and sees
potential for improvement and the way to
improve India is to make something
better and sell it for enough profit so
the better thing replaces at least or at
least that's the scary replaces the the
previous thing so there is nothing about
maybe not in competition but being able
to change in meaningful way what is now
we've something that is potentially
better so this kind of competition but
you know a big difference yeah right
that's why they use the word rivalry is
rather competition they are slightly
different
right yes I like that separation because
I think the virus is where it's a bit
more heated and it's a bit like I'm
trying to shut you down as opposed to
like in theory my project and Bethany's
project are kind of in competition but
we're working together because we're
still trying to achieve the same goals
so it's like and that's where I put in
the private co-op petition that's
actually a term that like I've been
trying to use to try to explain what I
think it should end up being which is
like it could be that reason the score
takes off and wiki election falls flat
or wiki election takes off and reasons
card falls flat but Bentley and I are
still trying to sort of solve that
problem together as much as possible to
sort of have that chat on what do we
think the challenges are and how would
each one of us try to resolve that and I
might give him an idea for reasons core
or he might give me an idea for wiki
election that the other one of us
couldn't do but because our end goals
are the same and that doesn't mean that
like all of a sudden
I want to absorb a reason score or
reason score absorbs wiki election
unless like that makes sense because
part of the goal is to have them
separate so they are doing completely
different things towards the same goal
like having the three different product
lines at Mac where you actually want to
keep them separate and up one of them
fails okay why did it fail should we
replace it with something else does it
not make sense to have three but like
probably having to in most cases is sort
of the bare minimum in my mind unless
you know it's unless one of them is
selling ninety nine percent it meets
that the goals are like oh it turns out
we might actually be able to get away
with one I think two Matus this point if
later on somebody else has I have a new
idea they're welcome to start it up and
see if it competes and then if it starts
to get traction and people start to
switch over cool we just found something
better to mention the again the
ecosystem of like I know Adriel and
Bentley and I'm all good with them
coming together and either creating
something or wiki election being the
thing or a reason score but as a third
party who doesn't know that sounds if
you don't understand what cooperation is
and what rivalries this is it sounds
like collusion right it's like well how
do I trust either of you if you don't
and part of that is the transparency of
like you can see it you can see that
that's not the case and if you can fully
see what wiki elections doing and fully
see what recent score is doing and know
that you guys aren't in cooperation
together then there is a beauty to that
but I just want to own that like people
coming in third party it's like sounds
like if they can't like that absolutely
I'm talking a good poem like no that's
that's a whole other level of monopoly
yeah that's that's interesting because
collusion isn't collusion unless you're
you have a profit motive or some sort of
motive that's not doing what's best
right for the external people so because
we can't you know occlusions I guess
technical inclusion if you're extracting
from these your customers I think or
that's that's the way it means whether
that's the actual definition of the word
that's the way it's use so
that's an interesting concept but and my
please like the customer the person to
use either of those things doesn't have
to know what collusion actually is right
so like just the idea you guys are
talking to each other behind the scenes
could be enough for them to think about
something like collusion and be like
wait how do I trust you then you're
Zuckerberg and whoever making things
decisions behind instead of what it is
which is like right but there's no
profit motive
what are we cluding on getting
information in the hands of the people
oh no and that's part of yeah and they
don't have to be correct you just have
to avoid the appearance of even doing
that and you're right that transparency
goes a long way towards that like being
fully transparent about our
conversations you know with these
councils working together where we're
cooperating but competing and then also
having like being very open and vocal
about what's different about these
organizations where that's actually a
good thing like not having shareholders
and like we aren't like any money that
comes out of this just goes into the
organization to help grow it we aren't
fattening our paychecks by having you
know our project take off even more that
doesn't personally enrich us there's no
reason to do it except getting more
users on our platforms which of course
is our goal and that's fine as long as
as you said there's some facet of like
not personally enriching yourself to me
that's the main thing like and whether
or not that's the real definition as
Bentley said that's how people I think
mostly think about it I think I don't
know why this is coming up in the moment
but it there was just a Twitter thread
where someone tried to cancel American
Girl because they had a um a black doll
there like a slave doll like wow and
they also had a First Nation stall that
was specifically from this one tribe and
they of course they tried to cancel it
and the amount of the customers for
American Girl who were like are you
kidding me have you read the books it
was like she like escaped slavery does
XY and Z and they consulted the tribe
and the tribe said yes and they get the
money blankets it that having a loyal
and that's American girl they're not a
co-op they're not not-for-profit but
because they had created that brand and
people grew up with it and we're loyal
to like they're like you can't disparage
us because they understood it because
they were part of
story and I think that is a certain
amount of protection and this is like
wait a minute we I saw them have the
conversations throughout the whole thing
and or at least heard whispers that
equipment I could go and watch it we're
gonna sit through all that like that
that is is part of it it's the more that
we are transparent also there's like a
loyalty to the customer base that goes
beyond mac or you're not going to
Walmart because it's like wait I I want
to go to one for for my reason my
reasoning if I'm gonna offload that to
someone else camera what the word is but
I guess what
for the last several minutes we could
probably go ahead and see if anyone
wants to have any closing things or we
get planned for our meeting tomorrow
let's see if Leo can make it
I'm background noise Sears I couldn't
quite hear you them
I thought I heard you believe I don't
know what no I just yeah so we're just
gonna see if Leo can make it to the
meeting tomorrow and be in the hot seat
so what time is it be I think it's
Pacific Daylight Savings Time so so the
full or one o'clock tomorrow
Bellino I think it's one o'clock Toledo
can you make one o'clock tomorrow
those get me x mixed up but I think it
it's known at 9:00 a.m. your time and
it's five o'clock my time I think it's
four o'clock Leos time where would be
the best place to get information for
Leo coops and collectives and things
that are running and things are being
successful where would be the best place
to go we're getting half percent of the
p2p foundation still one of the examples
that I sort of just recently learned
about and that Julie's has a long time
it is Mondragon well that's been a co-op
it's actually been very successful it's
actually now I think like a
multi-billion dollar company that has a
bunch of things underneath it and I'm
sure that you know I as beautiful as
Mondragon is it started in the 50s and
like it started a long time ago and so
to a certain quality it's you can't reap
you can't recreate Mondragon it's like
going back and trying and looking at how
would you start a new a new car company
let's go look at Ford what did they do
instead of like what did Tesla do yeah
you wouldn't look at how they started
but you might look at how they've run
now because that they're still operating
in the current world or operating any
game world giant monopolies like there
is close to a monopoly in a coop like
there's something about it when I'm like
this is
cool but you also can't go back to the
60s and 70s appliance business and
recreate it that way but there are I
don't know where you are Leo I know in
like BC and my province there's like a
coat there's a co-op BC cooperative for
every different organization and they
have three meetings with people to say
like now they only do free meetings once
you're actually ready to get whatever
the equivalent of Incorporated is where
they are in Brazil they um there are
organizations right now working on
governance for coops and that's it's a
co-op for for coops I just I can't
remember the names or I know that I saw
them recently
I can look for that and add it later
I mean I'm fairly knowledgeable and
coops not necessarily on I've never
started one I've worked at them I've
shopped at them and I'm interested in
them I mean creating the global
cooperative global tech cooperative so
I'm open to questions and look forward
to you've been in the hot seats well
does anyone have any closing closing
statements for now what makes a game B
project a project gave me just do it
fail and help us all learn and like
let's not use slavery but other than
that let's just move forward and see is
it an improvement and as long as we're
transparent open I think one aspect that
I almost never heard about this is the
ability for I now the project to be
dissolved when it's done and completed
and this is especially important because
usually I really I mean always when
there's a problem and a project arises
to fix it
it establishes it establishes itself as
a thing
company organizations of which the
problem potentially because exist at
some amount of energy it has its
diverted towards self-preservation and
then it exists and it starts looking for
other problems to solve and it's not
necessarily the best it's like when you
have a nail and you build a hammer to do
whatever you want but then you have a
hammer and then you look for other nails
to look at problems as nice so you may
end up applying the wrong tool to some
problems that would be better if better
fixed if a new tool was built and after
the specific purpose ceased to exist
so cease to exist along with it yeah
yeah I think that is like a bit prior to
the antifragility conversation earlier
with the game be overall should be
antifragile but not the individual
projects because they can be allowed to
fail and they should be allowed to fail
a lot of key and a lot of them like
should end up failing or dissolving or
whatever like either they didn't do it
or they did it and now they don't need
to exist because or like they can still
exist but at 1/10 of what it was because
if you you know did a bunch of research
to figure out how a hammer works and
then you built it and you're like ok but
now all we have to do is build them and
maintain them 90% of this isn't needed
anymore and that's where it probably
helps have almost like I'm parodies
right and that's a it's kind of one of
the advantages of something like
together Tech is you have that shared
resource where it might be ok we put
people on the hammer project they built
one great now there's a small team that
that maintains that but then you move
ninety percent of those people over to a
different project hey now need a new
screwdriver don't I think that it like
having the conversation the beginning we
are incorporating when you are is like
when are we done when are we done that
mission and sometimes like
for the things I'm doing the solution
raising where it's like 10,000 people
$100,000 now I'm like great but when do
you stop it right because the idea is
the 10,000 frozen grows and grows but if
we create a food one and then someone
else creates one in ten years but
there's gonna be a tiny group of people
who are like Noah but I don't know I
want this one because it's the one I'm
used to so what's the threshold that
requires this for it to stay in
existence it's definitely a cost - how
long how much does it cost to maintain
it and then you know if one person if
it's costing you know you know there's
your to maintain it know if there's a
million people yeah we could probably do
about anyway I just wanted to thank you
it's part of something it's any other
clothes he'd say my support reason
protocol that love which we've talked
about here before it is also fits into
that kind of governance I think all
inputs of Linux alright thank you
everyone we'll see you tomorrow morning
before roundtable or whatever time that
is for you