I say this a lot it's happened a lot
putting together a book to explain what
it is I'm doing what it is I hope other
people will join me in doing less than a
week ago I got how big of a piece my
individual story is my journey I think
it's funny because I just draw the
outline and even then I don't think I'd
included my actual story the first two
writings that I found and put up words
weren't really about me they had very
little about me but one of the sections
which I wanted to talk about how we each
have our own individual roadmap which is
hard to talk about because they are our
own individual roadmap they don't make
sense to anybody else and so showcasing
mine and saying like see doesn't that
make sense
wait no nicely for you isn't the same as
living in your own isn't the same as
following a step and then getting to a
point and looking back and seeing how
everything led up to this point and so I
think this writing that I did in July
2018 showcases a tiny bit of that and I
think about everything that's happened
since then there's some foreshadowing
here between me and my sister but I want
to treat it to you guys there is no
dimension nice car perfect health
amazing finances that I've gotten and
can teach you how to get I'm a single
mom on disability who is in pain and
exhausted all of the time I can barely
get out of bed Sunday's my house is a
mess my body is a mess but I am happy
I'm discovering Who I am I cannot
explain the map of how we saved the
world without first telling you about my
personal roadmap that is my life and
what led me here the thing is it is my
roadmap and it is supposed to make sense
to me alone but if it helps you find and
follow yours even a little this is worth
sharing it is all woven together in my
mind and heart but I will attempt to
convey a bit of the beauty I've found in
my journey I'm having trouble
communicating this idea to the world I
do not know how to eloquently described
the process we can follow to create a
world that works for everyone I thought
I would start with sharing my story and
what I have learned not about the world
but about myself I know I cannot do it
just as either I can see the
that led me here to saving the world but
it is my roadmap and it may not make
sense to anyone else but maybe if I
share mine will help others find theirs
I've always felt I needed to save the
world and then I was never enough to do
so I devour books as a child wrinkle in
time narnia etc I kept waiting for my
quest to begin but it never did heroes
and romance destiny calling I knew I was
meant for something special but I never
really felt special I was not even the
best in my family let alone the world I
was pretty and smart
but not the smartest or prettiest at the
breakfast table we talked about being
great first for Jesus and then spirit
and business we evolved together my
siblings and me my sister introduced me
to many of my teachers Tony Robbins Ken
Wilber landmark I felt the pole to be
better but I never quite could every
event every book or a new diet was
life-changing for my sister yet for me
it was pretty myth I got a little
something out of all of them but it was
never the same
she continued to get better and better
learning more trying harder striving
more and more I tried to keep up to feel
like I was getting somewhere I went to
university the only one of my siblings
two and got a degree but they still have
both made more money than me I had the
added struggles of health to deal with I
had brain tumors leading to surgery
leaving me deaf in one ear brain-damaged
radiation further brain damage and other
surgery my body a mystery that medicine
could not solve it did not even
understand my need to know why why had I
created these two tumors why was I not
strong enough on my own to fix them I
was I could never trust enough not God
not medicine and science not myself I
felt like a failure I was 30 it did not
have a marriage kids career and I'd
definitely not save the world I had
tried so many businesses which just left
me in debt I tried to learn finance in
business but my ethics never let me
apply them this world was broken and so
was i I was not really one for subtle
lessons
anything's spelled out on a chalkboard
so that I can so I can take notes and
see the black and white life had to
knock me over the head I needed the most
obvious brain tumors my hearing nerve my
crown chakra ten years apart
ten years to get the message for my body
had no choice you are not listening to
your higher calling it screamed I felt
the call to be a mom
it was one thing I could not live
without I did not have a man so I used a
donor and had a perfect child perfect
family of two single parenthood was
exactly what I needed if I had been
better at relationships less independent
and may have had what I always wanted
but not what I needed I needed to have
this child on my own and only the only
way I have this child is on my own I was
and am an amazing and perfect parent it
has healed me and taught me in so many
ways I cannot even put into words this
gorgeous child who was a reflection of
my insecurities the things I once hated
in myself her curly hair freckles and
temper I loved her a hundred percent the
only way that was possible was to love
myself
she was also her own being feminine and
fierce dressing herself from age to
drawn to beauty and in love with men she
is extroverted feminine and we butt
heads all the time
when I am in a good state I can meet her
but compassion and love and have
patience and understanding that she
needs things go smoothly
humor helps in all times because many
times I know I am failing and that is
perfect too my child was never going to
have sugar or watch TV in reality she
rarely goes a day without some sweet
treat and she spends hours watching
shows and playing games
I do not keep her schedule full of
activities and boredom is a constant
limit it is my job to make sure she
knows she is loved for exactly who she
is I'm showing her that being imperfect
is perfect we are all unique and amazing
she is the best her there is she has
taught me that emotion so will not kill
me she is sad or angry it is intense
like a storm but after the emotion has
processed and passed be calm and left or
remain feeling emotions and being safe
and went
in them is one of the greatest gifts we
can give one another I could see in my
own perfectly imperfect childhood that
my parents had not accepted themselves
or us they were constantly trying to be
the versions of man and wife at the
church and society said they should be
on my 36th birthday I came home from
dropping my child off at daycare it was
10:00 in the morning and there was a
coyote in the roll road just staring at
me
coyote and First Nation stories is this
trickster the mystery of causer
and there was something in that moment
that told me that this was my spirit
animal and I needed to embrace that
piece not shy away from it my conniving
secret self could be harnessed for good
nobody else would probably pick this as
my speed as my spirit animal but the
universe did and it felt right
when taking landmark a self development
weekend's I learned that the words that
play in my head are different from other
people's I don't know what my act is I
don't know how to do this I don't know
what to do
turns out I don't know is my act and it
touches every area of my life I don't
know so I learned I learnt to be smart
and learn anything talk to me it made
sense if I knew I acted so I just did
not know I did not remember what was
what was for homework so I just didn't
do it did not know how to date so I did
not I did not know how to be gay so I
was not once I know I take action want
to be Jane Goodall so I went to the
University and got my degree I wanted to
be a mom so I became one I still have no
idea to know what how to know what I do
not know I do not know why my body gave
me tumors or why it is in pain and
exhausted all the time except now I do
only it is still there I'm very in very
me style I came out to myself while
watching orange is the new black there
was a sweet scene between two women and
I thought to myself which I could go to
Princeton and have a girlfriend followed
by that is a really gay thought I'm
gay then I knew it was not like there
had not been Clues I could not logically
be gay so I was not logic has all
to do with it I did not have to logic my
stir to logic my straight
so why my gayness but it was perfect too
I came up to my friends and family
because I don't know how to do closets
once I know myself and it went perfectly
horrible one of my family members was
not the most understanding and said
something that would have been very
hurtful if I'd been 20 and not 36 this
thing inside of you felt like love and
light not sin entombed as they described
it I felt sorry for them and can see
them more clearly than ever before I
knew they loved me it was their self
they were hating on I could also see the
parallel between not accepting me them
not accepting me and me not accepting
them not accepting me if I was offended
by their offense than who was right we
actually could both be ourselves I get
to be gay and they get to not agree that
being gay is okay until they do
being a mom is hard not the
actual loving this being that is easy
but needing to be everything Society
says and all the contradicting advice
there is not enough time and energy to
be everything to your kid have a
kick-ass career the inert train loving
mother who makes all meals from scratch
keep an immaculate house allow kids to
make a mess discovering life's lessons
give kids adventure and plenty of
boredom you can be some of these things
and which one depends on the family what
parents and the kids need I'm the
perfect mother for this kid and she's
the perfect kid for me and more rigorous
home would not let her have her freedom
she needs to create and play in a more
loose home would probably just let her
eat all the candy and she would never
would never make her fly into a fit of
rage she would not be learning how to
deal with disappointment it was my
imperfection that made me perfect we're
figuring it out together my health
continued to decline and with it our
finances we had to use the food bank and
get Christmas Bureau help she did not
care she thought we were rich here's
what I've learned from my road map we
are unique not at all in competition
with one another where we are we are not
doing it right where we uncommon we're
doing right is she prettier than me
 cares unless she's your
identical twin she can't wear you better
I'm still in the process about learning
all that society has taught me and
looking inside for guidance
I honestly don't know if this is a great
state to raise a kid from I cannot teach
her the rules while I am unlearning them
I'm teaching her to follow her own rules
but it I do not know if you are supposed
to follow a society so that you can know
that hand-me-downs are not your style
and are stained and torn from previous
owners took a left nope it straight but
I just like that that kind of is my
journey up to that point because there's
a lot that's happened a year and a half
since I wrote that you know I dot s and
then I had kind of falling out with my
sister then the next steps hadn't
occurred the idea cafe didn't happen I
didn't know where the World Cafe was and
watching this unfold is the journey I'm
showing so I want to treat this that's
not necessarily the thing that's gonna
be in the book because it's not gonna be
my story it's going to be how one
follows a robot that we all do have her
own robot but I wanted to share that
because I think it's probably a chunk of
you get a piece of my health I'm
single-parent nest by just Who I am and
what I'm here to do so that is video
today