[Music]
okay well I could just introduce
Benjamin you're the author of war for
eternity inside bannon's far-right
circle of global power brokers that's
the title of your book and it's about
you getting cozy with the far right I
mean that's not what it's about but but
it should sort of adventures and in
speaking with Bannen and various other
people like Alexander
sugan and Dugan and various people who
have been inspired by something called
traditionalism which probably know most
people don't know anything about and yet
it seems to be having this huge
influence in the geopolitical world and
that seems to be the thesis of your book
and also you're a music teacher and in
your book you said that that you were
you've been accused of being a spy so so
so I so I'm just wondering like I must
take a lot of courage to talk to these
guys and you must deal with a lot of
blowback yeah what what is what is
driving you to what is driving you
towards you know you wanting to know
about you know what's going on with
Benin and all of these of these
characters well I mean it it's the sort
of thing that you know the more it
starts you know years years in the past
I mean it was 2010 when I started doing
this type of work really in Sweden and
when you gain insight and when you gain
special insight to a topic you know or a
group of people it does kind of fuel
itself you want to learn more you become
you become expert in some something and
you want to you know deepen that
expertise so it it was it was really
quite random there wasn't a big agenda
behind my wanting to do this early on
but but certainly as time went on I mean
the nationalism right-wing populism
whatever you want to call it under you
there's so many bad names for for these
causes but they've become one of the
most transformative political wings in
in the early 21st century so certainly
certainly it's exciting also to feel
like you're you're witnessing history or
that you have a front-row seat to to
some of the major changes in politics
today so that that keeps me interested
but but I also like you know someone
more intangibly
and drew I also like the micro view of
things I think a lot of scholars
especially political scientists if I'm
to throw some punches in the university
world but a lot of people like to go big
and and generalize and I'm my instincts
are slightly different like
personalities I like the chaos that you
see when you really zoom in on a
painting and the way that that can also
take place when you zoom in on an
individual so the the type of the
methodology that I used ethnography
which is really about getting to know
somebody as best as best you can and the
colloquial sense of that of that phrase
getting to know someone I'm I'm excited
by that it's almost like anthropology in
a way uh yeah much as positive you know
what's so surprising about this is that
I I would have I would have made the
opposite comment about Ben's quirk
mm-hmm compare the other guys south to
doing political anthropology because
what I love about Ben's work is abstract
thinking it's the fact for example
warfare turned into the brilliant book
because there was global scope that's
big right that's big but that could be
possibly causes a reader
I'm obviously philosophers I'm
interested in the ideology and in less
in the journalism or already individuals
behind it because I'm interested in why
dog and and Bano think a lot but I don't
think that has anything to do with their
personality types I think it has to do
with there's a certain collective
unconscious thing going on at the moment
and and this is what's coming to the
forefront and by reading Ben I don't
think anybody better catches why these
guys arrive at the conclusions they do
and the contradictions of course they
arrive it there's a lot of romanticism
and contradiction involved they all
drive which it actually thrives on
so that's why I read been talked about
so yeah maybe I could say something too
about why I I was compelled by your book
and I I thought it was beautiful as well
it was that I met a guy in 2015 right
before a trunk was elected who was on
the extreme far left and he was a you
know apologist of Lenin and Stalin and
he loved authoritarianism on some level
but I thought he was just you know I
could understand he was a leftist you
know he was you know I could understand
it was a sort of ideology that I could
understand then when Trump was elected
suddenly he became he moved to the far
right and he became a Catholic
traditionalist and he followed Bannen he
loves Benin he loves he loves Marco so I
was I was just and I knew this guy in a
very intimate level like I worked with
him and I talked to him every day and
you know as he discussed his his
theories he wasn't stupid by any means
even though I found his views you know
on gay people and somewhat repulsive and
and I I could tell that he had some
daddy issues and all this sort of thing
at the same time psycho phallus to me he
was not he was not stupid and and
obsession with phallus as Julia Kristeva
would say so this guy was kind of known
in some small circles as a quasi
journalist who who you know he went and
visited Dugan and Iran and various
places he was in he went to all the
places like you know that nobody else
would go to Syria and and and he was
beloved of this small community and so
so it reminded me a bit about you know I
was very fascinated by this character
for it for a long time and remind me a
little bit about your relationship with
with Ben and Dugan and that kind of
thing so that's the personal aspect of
it yeah oh yeah a lot of guys like that
so there you go there's a lot of guys
like that but but but they come as a
kind of a sneaky it came as a man did
you find guys like this in your work
obviously who jump from one radicality
to the next or one fundamentalism
fundamentalism to the next oh sure sure
yeah I mean I mean there's the old
there's the old theory of kind of
political spectrum as a horseshoe and
that you know that that really I think
it gets exploded as well when you when
you zoom in closely but there's a
certain consistency to people who are
disgruntled and and and very
dissatisfied with the political status
quo and and who are collecting ways to
think about an alternative and and who
do not have any any any problem
borrowing from what we would call the
far left or the far right most certainly
most certainly and yeah and they're very
they're captivating interesting
unpredictable people I think in a lot of
a lot of cases that I mean banning as an
example of that he will speak warmly
about Marxism and Lenin in the same
breath as he will be talking warmly in
associating on the basis of his affinity
for Julia said Allah so you know brief
briefly if I before we get too far
because I was very interested by the
conversation we were having about you
know micro versus macro commentary in
books and in research and Alex as a
philosopher you know my myself as an
through politics we could be at opposite
ends but I one thing that I really like
is if a detailed study something that is
attentive to the nitty gritty the
chaotic level of life if you're able to
build a piece of commentary from that
that has wider application that that
really excites me I think there's a
distinction between that and someone who
just for the sake of grandeur builds you
know builds these these totalizing
accounts of people's lives like I like
certainly like people who are able to
speak to more generalizable concepts but
it's it's great to I think also to to
have that anchored in something and to
not deny the chaos that exists in
people's real life so it's something
that I strive to but I certainly like
what you were saying - Alex and and in
Andrew - yes why don't we go straight to
the top extent so we don't talk too much
about the medal of traditionalism Ben
would you like to describe how you
define traditionalism because that's
obviously the courrier
sure it it's this is a it's a I wish it
had a complicated label to go with the
idea with the ideology itself because it
sounds familiar to us but traditionalism
capital t traditionalism you need to
think about it as being different from
lowercase small t traditionalism just
somebody who thinks that things used to
be better before you know someone who's
critical of progress you know in as
mundane away as in you know saying oh I
want to I like fishing the old-fashioned
way you know some something basic like
that the traditionalists that I'm
talking about are overlapping was that
incidentally but it's really much more
elaborate and there's an attempt to
ground in spirituality the traditional
school really emerges and becomes
concrete around a thinker in early 20th
century French philosopher late 19th
early 20th century French philosopher
named Jernigan own who believed that
there was a sort of erudition an
original religion that was lost to
humanity ages ago and exists in
fragments today among a certain a
certain subset of world religions and it
is it is the task of those who are
enlightened to this to try and discover
what that eternal truth was and he
outlines a number of ways to do it his
his prevailing approach was to commit
yourself to one of these imperfect past
that exists today vote yourself to it
work as hard as you can
and maybe you'll catch a glimpse of what
was if you stay in that and stay in your
lane essentially and so he became
eventually he wanted to become a Hindu
but he becomes a Sufi moves to Egypt and
and dies answering not to renege and on
but to the name of Shaykh Abdallah Wahid
Yahia you know changes his life commits
himself to Sufism he was actually
converted to Sufism by Swedish painter
so this is like one of my idols so yes
and as a story that I think it's very
underreported the the whole Swedish can
I Sweden comes into this in a number of
ways but so he's writing books crime
would you say is that his name is even I
greatly so we don't miss the name yes so
he's he's writing a lot of books about
this religious pursuit and the spiritual
pursuit he occasionally delves into
politics to say politics are essentially
lost to us by the way here's a few
political that I felt like aims
individualism bullying egalitarianism as
being political strains of the current
age that he doesn't like but by and
large when everyone is trying to stay
out of politics in part because he sees
a message born of consensus among chosen
religions that our age the modern age is
actually the Dark Age it's what Hindus
would call the Kali Yuga and this is an
age of decay of fatalistic decline where
differentiation is lost whether it's in
form of hierarchy or a more horizontal
differentiation among nation-states and
cultures and societies that's all being
lost and in its place we are being given
a sort of materialism void of
spirituality so so our age is lost this
is a cyclic a cyclic notion of time
we're going to go through the stage and
we will be reborn into a golden age
regardless of our political efforts and
this of course where he contrasts with
political ideology coming out of the
19th century which is still this
Christian mold of progress towards some
kind of a goal so it obviously sounds
like pagan or even Hindu in the sense
that was being brought back is the idea
that the circularity of time is dominant
and in the idea that time is linear and
progresses in any kind of progress it's
an illusion right so this is like a
really strong traditionalist we do agree
and absolutely in a certain sense this
is I think this is the linchpin to the
distinction between lowercase T
traditionalism your grandpa who thinks
things were better when he was young
first is these esoterics is that
embedded in this notion of cyclic time
is not just the idea that you know
progress is really impossible it's not
really
a potentiality that we could create a
better world than one that has ever
existed in the past things were always
better in the past they're always
getting worse except for the notion
except for the fact that in cyclic time
eventually we are going to come back to
a golden age in the pathway there is
through decadence which means for a lot
of these thinkers decadence is something
to be welcomed and celebrated there's a
latent Apocalyptica in this would you
see that I'm sorry I just interrupt here
but there's a big difference between
Ganon and avala or do you think they're
coming from because I know
traditionalists who are you know and I
know that getting on is is a very he's
written many many books in there you
know some of them are very beautiful and
yes you know and rich and extraordinary
books you could might disagree with the
premise on them but he's he's worth
exploring whereas I find Ebola it goes
to another level of sort of demonism oh
sure
let's well I mean let's go there cuz one
of the key differences between Genoa and
Avila has to do with what we were just
talking about cyclic time and the notion
that you know we're fated to just go and
go into a rebirth so it might have been
an acceleration astana that's yes
exactly
acceleration is a mission point out that
it's a contemporary term for school
tradition Alyssa we're speeding things
up and going into the decadence towards
the golden age actually something we
have to do we should accelerate the
process meaning you could vote for
trumping if you hate him just because
what accelerates certain process support
Trump's foes because you think you know
support politics that you don't like
because you think it's faded and we need
to go through this go through the stage
so if if if gun owned had this sort of
withdrawn antipathy well not antipathy
it just a pathetic excuse me for
contemporary political struggles of his
followers who was a problematic follower
do a set Allah took an opposite approach
at least in the beginning of his of his
main political career when
when Julius Avila who is an Italian
living living in Mussolini's fascist
regime when he saw reggaeton he saw
Mussolini he saw Hitler what he actually
thought he was witnessing was an
unwinding of that time cycle
the Hindu that the pagan the
indo-european pagan time cycle if it
said that we you know moved from a
Golden Age to a silver to a bronze to a
dark before a cataclysmic rebirth to
golden Avila saw in Mussolini and Hitler
indication that that time cycle was
actually moving backwards that Italy
wasn't it was in the modality of the
merchants heading toward a slave from
the from the Bronze Age moving into the
dark and then suddenly we saw warriors
emerge and the aesthetics of Mussolini
and Hitler were as important as their
policies the fact that they were
dressing themselves they're making
military states they were presenting
themselves as warriors the metaphysics
of that and his mind said that ok wow
that you know the currents of time are
pushing us not toward not toward
decadence but on our way back to this
golden age to an age of the priests for
which an age of the warrior would be a
sort of intermediary stage and and so
Avila thought ok I don't love these
people but if I can support if we can
actually through activism supports
fascism and then thereafter make it a
sort of theocratic state after it
becomes succeeds as a military state we
will have unwound a traversed time from
by virtue by virtue of our of our
initiative and our activism and this is
of course a close related to call
Schmitt was emperor in Germany because I
mean you can't do political science
today unless you recall Schmitt first
and even if was a Nazi ideal or doesn't
matter he was fantastic is unique as a
thinker and he said political theology
to me is at least the first major
attempt to realize that separation of
church and state in the West in the 5th
century is a myth actually you can't run
anything without religion everything is
theological theology is ultimately with
loss of years so this would be very
eastern approach for example who travels
Asia there's no way you could separate
religion and philosophy it's a
ridiculous idea and it turns out we only
separated in the 17th century Europe for
practical reasons because we had
theological seminaries that were tied to
the Catholic Church and if you wanted to
be outside of the Catholic Church had to
call it philosophy no other culture
would you divide the two and what these
guys did a college myth it was to unify
the two which means you could both look
at fascism spiritually and you could
look at it politically at the same time
which of course made instant incredibly
attractive and of course because he's
stalling borrowing many of these
elements to install the nests and I
would Stalinist we arrived at a certain
communism but aesthetics is at the
forefront spiritual things our attitude
and of course you got the melians of
Lenin installed and how much of a
pyramid can you have right yes so so so
all of these things today are claiming
correctly that what's lacking in our
culture is the spiritual connection to
politics and they basically try at least
whether and zero they tried to create a
new political theology and and they're
right on some level you know that's the
thing oh yeah I have a degree absent and
that's maybe what's difficult on some
level they're right and on some level
they're wrong why is that difficult
Andrew why don't you just start there
because that's what I work with I want
to go back to Ben's book but what I'm
working with is to go all the way back
to the Persian empires that lasted for
fourteen hundred years and we're
basically the model little series
empires afterwards both in China India
and the West borrowed from the Roman
Empire century a copy of the Persian
Empire so in the Persian Empire they
were very adamant like in India to keep
both anomer ology which is the
circularity of time you know
reincarnation everything comes back to
the same point the journal return of the
same with what Zoroastrianism invented
which was Avant ology that later that
Brannock religious in different versions
have tried to stay with and later of
course eventually political ideology
outside of the Church of the West like
socialism liberalism and conservatism
have all tried to maintain this idea of
the of ontology do I worry maybe a Wolle
was sort of combining of ontology with
nationalism not commission
part of the smart very smart point
because I think with Evelyn and where he
also fails is that he understands the
attraction of Naaman ology it's just the
easiest thing in the world to accept
that everything is just reborn and
there's no evolution whatsoever you know
the daughter mimics the mother gives
birth to child and it's just the same
thing all over again every New Year in
pagan traditions the new year is
incredibly important the new year's
never celebrate nabek faiths always in
the no matter logical phase Hinduism is
no matter all genes pure form and
traditionalism is political no mythology
to me but the attempt to try to borrow
from the Arabic religions of further
back from the surest religion was that
the other mythology and whatever lot
tries to do is to see a certain
evolution but the problem with this
evolution is you can't discuss it until
you first discuss is it humans there are
progressing or is it our environment
that is progressing this is like
Aristotle's critique of Plato because
the player it was we as souls who should
have all that's of course what Plato's
the birth of Gnosticism all gnostic
traditions are that we should have all
solve transference we should have
whereas aristotle pointed out no
actually in a complex environment like
when you construct an army you build
weapons it's all about the context it's
only the technology that involves over
time not you and this is where this is
where it gets interesting because in a
vittala g of technology for example like
i work with
makes perfect sense we have undoubtedly
technologically evolved with last 8,000
years and we would probably need
technology to solve the current problems
where it's like i can go for technical
and intolerant easily but i have to do
it in my work by attacking Plato
fiercely attacking this idea that human
beings evolved at all because I just I
just think human bees are getting more
and more stupid I think our brains have
shrunk over the last eight thousand
years we're just getting more muscular
more dependent on the machine so while
the machine is growing we human beings
are becoming more and more deteriorated
and that's where I think I agree with
the old right guys they're onto
something that there is still
development to the human mind to speak
of but I would argue with them that
their obsession with the circular time a
certain mother worship but God is
worship I contrast with the god worship
all the gods
it and then you arrived in a completely
different place much more Hegelian hmm
but that's why I love Ben's work and I
think the book is profound with this
dialogue with all try right hmm
where but what you're talking about
those is the God worship of Technology
there there we see a teleology and there
we see progress yes okay for the simple
reason that it's information
accumulation so once I've invented a
certain machine and the recipe for that
machine exists I don't have to invent
the recipe again I just make a copy of
that machine so the cost of a new
machine follow flow in a the cost of
each machine is cheaper and cheaper so
so that's why we can develop normal
technology so that's what you say for
example in my work that would be
handwriting changed the world forever
biggest revolution ever what 10,000
years ago the printing press was a
similar revolution almost on the same
scale six others ago the internet
certain revolution the same scale now so
we've increased communication increased
capacities for information storage and
of course even more complexity with each
level a more and more complex which
again today with enormous complexity the
Internet's forcing onto us means these
alt-right guys are very attractive in a
romantic way because they say don't
worry because it's all just a repetition
of the same yes yeah they're there
they're heading backwards I mean on some
level it's just some golden age in the
past which which and I think your vision
of Cynthia ism is is is is more of a
constructive utopian version for the
future so so let's do it no no no no no
the only difference here is that I agree
I agree is a niche and Alesi and thinker
today and all the delusions are involved
in this discussion I mean Nick lond for
example no the friend of mine he's a
fantastic thinker the author of dark
enlightenment any sort of acceleration
is just awful connected oh I'll try I
don't think I am and I don't think he's
either but we're in dialogue whether we
find incredibly fascinating because we
are doing them and say that to me it's
not so much that the Nomad ology the
sort of Western Hinduism that these guys
percent it's all so much that it's wrong
just like Christianity isn't wrong but
it's just half the story
because you have to supplement the norm
at all and you with it of ontology
because otherwise it wouldn't make any
sense would we just be back in the Stone
Age back in the Stone Age back in stone
Gyeongsang and we are not clearly are
not yeah evidence of evidence of the
event but like Aristotle said the
evidence of the event is in the context
in our milieu which has developed for
good or bad and changed radically
whereas we as human beings are born
exactly the same as ten thousand years
ago because girls get drunk on a Friday
night fuck the wrong guy and have bad
children like there's no evolution there
it would be fascinating to hear hear you
talk about aunt Jungian of course who's
this kind of peripheral figure
peripheral I con for the alright but one
it also also speaks about technology
it's very interested in the price know I
was doing there you know why I do it she
just pointed that out so he's the
connection yeah you know an important
part to tie it to traditionalism good
Renee Kohn on wrote a fair bit about
technology actually people don't realize
that it's you know it was it was not
celebratory it was dismissive but he
discussed it a lot he's considered a
demonic mostly didn't hear of some he
considered it you know he considered it
to be the one thing that might actually
be progressing but it doesn't matters I
mean the difference that the simplistic
difference between what he said and what
say you're talking about Alex is is the
valuation of technology you know for him
this was part of the deception of the
Dark Age that you know the way that it
sells you the notion of progress is a
focus on technology so that we see
development in that sense but we were
blinded to the fact that we're devolving
as as spiritual beings but that's
exactly the trap though because of
Onegin on ends up in in Gnosticism here
and when you study Sufism you will
discover if you go deep on it you
discovered that it can both be modest
and it can both be and doing this right
so say you go to the the lerz in iran
and you study their Sufi traditions
they're very modest the various
two brahmanas Yogi's in India so so the
world is one everything is
interconnected so the idea that all
Sufism is Gnostics completely wrong
Khomeini is the ultimate Gnostic he says
Gnostic as Hitler was right so there's a
lot of Gnosticism in the released a
certainly in Islam and most of Sufism
probably would subscribe to it but the
problem for Regan on as an Egyptian
Sufis that does subscribe to that that
means that he only could look at his own
soul because the soul is separated from
the body and if the soul accept from the
body and of course our environment is
separated from your soul to the
environment is where your body belongs
where's your soul belongs to the heavens
or the skies and is separated from it so
you can regard your soul as being free
and high or he strive for so that's
where some of Technology Dalit modernity
of regular life right so what do you say
under well I said that that just gave me
an insight of why Kanaan might be
dismissive of technology as well because
yes because it's the body right kid
ology is the machine right it's the and
the guy who's really the guys struggling
with its course Heidegger because he's
torn between these two things he's he's
totally opposed to Plato he wants to go
towards a modest version of reality and
he works hard way that I think he
succeeds because he he also understands
in a very person since the ultimate God
is time you know that's what the person
Mystics were always concerned with and
that's irrefutable there's an arrow of
time you can't deny this the ultimate
God and it doesn't care about you but
you can't deny it he said everything you
can't even think outside of it and
that's what Heidegger struggles but I
think his dismissal technologies that he
wants to emphasize the Western soul
isn't ready for the technology that it's
developing and if that's his he
undoubtedly was correct I mean we we are
now stuck with technologies that are out
of hands we got atomic bombs all over
the place probably all over the planet
soon put on drones can you imagine the
havoc that will cause wait that stage is
to liberate our last book of the next 50
200 years expect um enormous amounts of
havoc
cause we cannot control technology but
the only way we can control technology
again is by creating even more
technology that's my point
and that's my of ontology where I want
to challenged all right cuz these guys
are too romantic
me but I think the dialogue can be
incredibly fruitful and interesting
because these guys are spiritual they
take human beings nor our spirituality
seriously and that's it's so refreshing
to going to be these Alltrack thinkers
today compared to the sort of nihilistic
draws you know the contemporary
political philosophies is full of I have
a question for Ben I don't know if it's
if there's a good segue here but I'm
wondering why these guys and while you
talked about the romanticism of let's
say the traditionalists and there's
there's does feel like there's a
romanticism there of the Golden Age and
all that and why is that tied to
anti-semitism so much why is there so
much anti-semitism and all right and
then you know and they always talk about
the Jewish Question and you know all
this sort of thing what's the why do
they make such a big deal about about
you know about Jews and and and got
blame end up using them as the ultimate
scapegoat for for modernity for you know
for the machine for the mmm-hmm could I
could I split Andrew could I split that
question up into two parts because you
serve but antis isn't first and then and
then we can talk about about Jews so it
it is deceptive I think I think they're
traditionalists are actually not
romantics there's a sort of futurism
masquerading as romanticism in in
traditionalism you know political
scientist
Roger Griffin has as a word he uses
describe it this is one of his
signatures for fascism I'm not sure I
totally agree but it's a compelling I
calls it Palin Genesis this notion of a
of a national rebirth but that's the you
know it's futurism and and romanticism
combined into one that's one of the
signatures of let's say Nazism is that
it wants its once its future to be its
golden age and in traditionalism that
that gets a slightly more elaborate
presentation of this notion that our
future is going to be our past again
because we live in this cyclic time and
thus that those distinctions between
future and past really disintegrate
in this in this world view where time is
at once you know your your Savior if
you're living in the Dark Age it's the
one weapon you have is the passage of
time you know for the acceleration
astride the tiger I remember using that
metaphor riding the tiger and we've all
as metaphor continue with our study of
discussion discussion of Evelyn to
characterize that but a lot of them
looking we're fatalistically will rely
on on time in one sense to deliver them
but and in the same breath they don't
really believe in time
alright time does not actually transfer
somebody from one past into a
fundamentally different present instead
it's all wrapped together so it's
important I think I think to have that
that view or that qualified view of
Romanticism if we want to use it use it
in those terms when it comes when it
comes to Jews of course I for the
traditionalist the at least the
philosophically theologically grounded
anti-semitism that we see there is one
that treats Jews as avatars of modernity
I mention in the book I I reference at
the em the protocols of the Elders of
Zion this this anti-semitic tract from
from the 19th century that a lot of the
features of the Jews there was were that
they were bankers in the same breath as
they were as they were communists they
were let's say you know religion
religious minority in the same breath as
they were secularists they they occupied
everything that seemed to be swirling
around the embattled entrenched native
parochial Christian majority culture in
in Europe that saw itself as being under
threat by mind by modernity and Jews
were kind of a perfect scapegoat to
again to be the the antithesis of that
everywhere so we see we see in
traditional is among among among other
ways of thinking Jews being you know
being a sort of personified opposition
to
you know culture the thing is is that
some later brands of traditionalism in
particular warrant weren't anti-semitic
as regards spiritual you know and
religiously zealous Jews necessarily you
know some have seen Israel as a sort of
beacon of globalization you know of kind
of global liberalism the way it relies
upon and instrumentalize its
relationship to the united states has
made the state suspect but but you know
religious minorities and israel have
been have been favored and they're
there's actually some personal and
organizational overlap between the
political traditions that i've studied
and you know in certain Jewish zealots I
mean Talmudic or you know Kabbalah you
know that brand of Judaism can can be
integrated into traditionalism as an
anti modern expression so you know that
this is one of the features of
anti-semitism in general that Jews can
represent a lot so many different things
basically anything they protect on the
other right whatever whatever type of
other you need at any particular moment
if it's the Communists if it's the
banker if it's the secular you know the
godless cosmopolitan if it's the
entrenched minority that will net will
not assimilate Jews can be all of these
things and traditionalism is pretty well
poised to to position itself against
that I used in the same way my work to
me the Jews are the only nation ever and
nationalism is Judaism obviously if you
if you say that there's no separation of
church and state and everything is
theology then Judaism is the most
successful attempt on the planet so far
to create nationalism and it's the
beginning of the International and I I
get agreement of course we saw Rastro
scholars where I come from because
they're interested in Empire theory know
why the cerasus were the first both the
first successful empires successfully
aligned with the Jews because the Jews
were the favorite nation within the
Persian Empire and that's exactly why
they do slay to become the favorite
nation when the Roman Empire and that's
what I'm working with now of course
because I'm working with anything that's
a bigger model of the tribe whatever how
we created in human history that worked
at least for a while and we only to form
a
for that destination and the empire and
that's why I for example here in Sweden
a very public according to debates with
Gustav Cassel stron with the leader of
the new alternative of Sweden party
which is of course an all tried party
considered extreme right know that we
have very deep philosophical high
daguerreian discussions in public here
they sort of shock people because I'm a
cosmopolitan philosopher and he is a
nationalist political activist he turns
out as I repeatedly say I represent the
Empire which is a bigger challenge to
construct than the nation the gusto
stands for but we agree on here is that
there's a spiritual crisis in our
society and the only way out of that is
basically to tear down the entire
political system assist today make all
the previous political ideologies
redundant and look back at how human
beings actually operate
anthropologically and then we will
discover we only have tribe nation
Empire to work with on which the third
Empire is the best model today for the
world as all but the most difficult one
to achieve it's also I mean not to
engage with that that last point but
when I mean when you think about Israel
as a nation or Jews as a nation the sort
of nation that would supersede or not
rely upon the state yeah per se you know
that that adds that adds certainly a bit
of force to this this particular
nationalism so oh yeah absolutely that's
the point it's stronger than the state
and I mean Hegel wrote this I mean we
built the European nation state that
followed the falling empires of Europe
the falling colonial empires that were
replaced by nation states all over
Europe in the 19th century especially
the early 20th century the road built on
Hegel said the other nations taking
Hegel wrote explicitly I mean shift and
Hegel they were all obsessed in the
setting of a Jewish nation would in the
state and how wonderful that was and how
it actually worked really well and and
and the Jewish nation is not my ID it's
a session Hague alien idea that I take
back now what I try to do a proper sort
of global Empire Theory what would that
be so that's where I come into this
where I find is dialogue incredibly
fruitful but you know been to the
traditions you discussed you've
obviously had confusing ideas of empire
nation because for example you speak of
Dogon and and the Russians Russia is one
of those weird examples of it's this
national
or is this imperialism and some other
Russians have always tried to play out
the two against each other whenever it
suited them
so did Lenin and Stalin too and
certainly pudding today but when it
comes to doing in a sort of at least a
dominant nationalist philosopher in
Russia today I mean where does he fit
into this idea of empire and nation and
the repetition of the same and maybe
meta politics - that was another
important term now we can go to that
next but I'd like to see Ben stay condo
game very dogged he sat in terms of
these ideas we just discussed could we
go back to the - kind of the history
we're telling a traditionalism I work we
kind of left things off where we were
talking about Avila being excited by by
by Mussolini and Hitler of course and
seeing them of you know potentially
turning the time cycle that's kind of
where we left things off of course
Hitler Mussolini they it all crashes and
and Evelyn after the war starts to
interpret that moment as having been
just a brief let's say a catching of
breath before propelling forward in the
time cycle and you know we got a you
know the time cycle gave us a brief
glimpse of the past and it ended and so
we just have to resign ourselves to
going into darkness you know Hitler
Europe becomes divided between democracy
and communism these are political
ideologies of the masses that's a
signature of the Dark Age that's that's
where we're headed and so evil eye
becomes resigned he becomes withdrawn he
he doesn't want to see people put
themselves investing too much in
politics because it's faded to be to be
bad so this is where his metaphor of
riding the tiger just biding your time
keeping yourself safe rather than
confronting a wild beast that can eat
you and and hoping that you live to see
live to see time turn around so after
after that war era traditionalism really
goes underground there's there are a
couple figures
Fujio shown starts starts a sort of
global Sufi tariqa school order that
that manifests in a number of places but
traditionalism really becomes this this
underground peripheral movement it has
you know some of those flash points and
cult you know American in North American
and European cult practices but that's
that's it until Alexandra Dugan comes
along and for those who don't know I
mean I'm not gonna be able to summarize
or even carry looks like me he looks
he's not as beautiful oh but I look like
a Russian monk so they look like a
Russian monk I think it's the best way
to look if you're a perfect so there you
go he looks like me if you don't have to
actually google his picture right now
you can actually keep listening to Ben's
beautiful explanations he has the long
beard going here sort of sort of look to
him and he's a philosopher he's a
political operative he's a he's a
journalist he's a professor a teacher
he's a very interested in theater he
does lots of things but he he eventually
in the 90s he starts to see the
opposition between the Soviet Union
Russia even were deeper than that in the
United States as having manifest what
traditionalism spoke of as the
opposition between tradition and
modernity the United States representing
modernity being its absolute vanguard in
world history and Eurasia in Russia
representing the antithesis and so
whereas he grew up really hating the
Soviet Union and hating Russia and
celebrating even Nazism as a as a
counterweight you know somewhat in so
much shallow ways as a counterweight to
the Soviet Union he starts to become a
patriot for Russia and and by the time
we get to the late late 90s when Russia
is grappling that's what its new role is
going to be in the world as when when
liberalism is essentially won he starts
formulating theories also geopolitical
doctrines for Russia had to regain its
prominence regain its role in history
and to oppose the United States and and
it's not just a matter of dry political
maneuvering for power he sees Russia as
as having the potential to unite other
anti liberal anti-modern actors around
old and and crush crush modernity and
return you know return
you know return world society to its
traditional roots so that's what he he
spends most of his time doing
strategizing ways to undermine the
United States um it's quite I think one
of the paradoxes of the story to be told
about traditionalism that eventually he
finds a sort of potential ally
complicated strained ally or potential
ally in Steve man and one of the main
ideological forces behind Trump an
American patriot self self-described
the complication complicated nature of
that is of course something I try to
work out in the book but that's to
introduce Dugan that's that's how he's
starting to see the world in those terms
there's more to say I'm just realizing
that but I'll take it I'll catch my
breath here to let you jump in well we
should say also these guys also got very
popular because they were perfect for
the internet so so say ok that's the
paradox right yeah technology and
traditionalism very often they're so
very often so they're very often the
people who hate technology the most
right right using the latest
technologies and things like that
but but that's that's also maybe how
technology uses us and we're not aware
of it but it's alright but anyway so the
internet here cause in the picture
because today with the chaos we have
today this is this is 2020 we come in
coming out of the COBE nineteen months
and chaos is everywhere right and it's
gonna get worse and in your mind is
chaotic if you're a woman you probably
take to astrology because you want
something out there to control the kind
of world and if you just add to star
stone to astrology you get conspiracy
theories right because that's what men
get into this like nobody somebody has
to be control it of course this is very
simple Freud it's just that the guys who
get engaged in conspiracy theories are
really terrified of there not being any
conspiracy at all you know it's just
like you know if God does not exist I'll
be the ultimate terror so if there's no
order anywhere in the scales then he
really is cares right so the guys take
to this idea and then you got the
internet and you get alternative media
and you get a very simple story like
this you never heard this before because
commanders
you couldn't hear it and basically after
1945 you get this idea that all of this
has been banned and censored and you
could read it and it's only being a cult
or or you know chaos magic or whatever
and suddenly pops up and these guys like
Steve banning in America you know
working-class guy very clear sharp and
all that in Dogon in Russia these guys
pop up and with the internet they are
obviously the first guys that aboard
computer game guy young guy would look
at and finally come in live and say that
I want to do shit because these guys are
basically presenting the opposite of the
conspiracy theory where I think is
traditionalism is really strong it's
just like conspiracy theories if there
are conspiracies out there you'd
probably be like Ben Teitelbaum if
you're smart you go out there check them
out do you write a book about so you go
into the actual conspiracies you become
part of them by engaging with a guy like
Baron or Dover there's some excess you
guys etcetera like so many young men
jump onto these guys and why the ultras
has exploded so quickly and why even
cause brexit you drove brexit to be
honest and it's gonna change you know
world politics in certainly the next 20
50 years is no it's not marginally
longer and it's precisely powerful among
young men which is always a radical
change it's also because the politicians
that are being presented to us are such
weak figures that that when you hear a
guy like Ben and speak he's very
compelling I mean I I find him as a
compelling speaker like he has a he has
a gravity and a magnetism and that kind
of thing which a lot of the politicians
who are who who are around don't have so
there's there's a charisma there there
are - yeah the company's real with me
with that is that combination the
combination of depth and accessibility
it's the Jordan Peterson's charisma to
see if you got somebody who's deep and
learned but could still explain to you
in the Union simple ways things mr.
genius of that he's really great even
though there's a way in which Bannon is
sort of a he's sort of a moral ISA he's
sort of there's something about him that
is like
I don't be Sky's immoral well in your
book you described about how he's
talking about the separation of children
at the border and all that and he was
like sort of almost cheering it on or
something like that you know now this it
seems like he's ready for anything to
happen to get us into this Dark Age of
the Kali Yuga and fragmentation no one
is looking for chaos I disagree if I can
put in a ban on there okay this is a
very common misconception that this is
over typically American overemphasis on
sentimentality he says my hate watching
American television cuz everything is
cement sentimentalized and you can't
believe it it's just just like oh dear
Sears or somebody feel something tears
all the time and I think Bannon is one
of these guys who goes for the opposite
thing he's definitely goes for the
working class he's you know it's totally
passionate about it he's passionate
about what he's passionate about and
that's real but he puts it like fatherly
it's just like yeah I'm passionate about
your success thirty or fifty years from
now not about being sentimental with you
here but we're so now drenched in in
instant sentimentality as the dominant
mode of media and of communication you
have to get you sick and tired of it
speaking of accelerations you have to
get sick and tired of that like American
television sentimentality Oprah Winfrey
life can't stand it but once you're past
that you go looking for the phallic
father and the phallic father guide this
case for any working class guy I mean
when I saw Banham before the 2016
election I realized Trump was gonna win
especially when Hillary Clinton to be
honest ejc on the stage last weekend
exercise I would know that a
working-class guy in Michigan or
Wisconsin or Pennsylvania any
working-class guy there would stick with
ban on as a father figure and would
think of Hillary Clinton as a mother who
just pissed on them right so he would
win the election he's there already it
was there already right you see what I
mean I know what you say Ben I'm a
characterization of been in here oh
you've met him and I actually gentlemen
I am so sorry about this my I'm going to
need to run
runnings mic just drain my battery is
there a way we could take her
brief pause and I can take care of a
technical situation here okay am i back
and you can hear me yeah yeah we're good
yeah so yet so you it was it was
fascinating with some of the tube you
talk about Bannen you know and I'm
somewhere in between the two of you I'm
perhaps perhaps I am one of the
sentimental Americans Alex that you
mentioned but you know I the book that I
wrote about him and my take on him is
not free of criticism right or a
reaction I was accused of you know of
being all hot for Bannen and the whole
thing is just a tribute to him but as as
Andrew as you point out there's a lot of
there's a lot of critical material in
the book it's just not critical tone
yeah I thought that Guardian article was
in bad faith you know I think your can
have your conclusion of course having
you can't read the Guardian you must be
banned and the Guardian died when they
fired strawberry shake that's over they
shot them in the head there are
definitely a hundred thousand better
news sources of the world The Guardian
that was the only review I've read of
Ben's book and and they call them a sort
of fanboy of been a nerd that was the
accusation of the Guardian is I told you
it's somewhat you know it's not
interesting it's not interesting to
listen or enough to respond to reviews
but it is kind of curious to me we I've
had exclusively positive commentary from
the Brazilian left and the left in the
UK it's been it's been iffy and I happen
to think that one of them is a little
bit more invested in this in symbolic
politics and the other one happens to be
more invested in in actual tangible
information the British the British
press has has reacted the fact that I
don't call Bannon dirty names and that I
call him Steve yeah yeah I know they
don't you know they they're the word
England lost both his sense of humor and
his sense of journalism and thereby it
has no purpose any longer
can you just get over the British Empire
and éclairs Scotland free independence
of scan
I can have it cause Britain is so
fucking over I mean read I live in
Europe and I love brexit and I love
Katie Hopkins legs okay but no I love
her I love Katie Milo you know but
outside of that Britain is dead
they banned Little Britain Fawlty Towers
this week on the BBC it's just dead yeah
that's just social justice warrior
mayhem and and as far as I'm concerned
yeah I don't know could they ban Fawlty
Towers how could they do that and still
estates exist as a country stupid social
justice warriors every one of them it's
a talkies the best thing ever did is
failure towers I have this theory
because of my South African Scandinavian
background I have this theory Oh
Alexander after 1945 are you sure
they're yeah we're good you froze just
for a second very so I have this theory
that all the men in the Empire after
1945 stayed in the colonies when they
were independent so they became South
Africans Canadians Australia like you
tomatoes Australians New Zealanders
whatever you like you know but but none
of them wanted to go back home so
England became basically an infested
bitch nest and infested bitch nest can
I'm very traditionalist here realize
that and infested bitch nest can
enduring a silver or or Bronze Age phase
produce great things like humor anise
and you know in good journalism but you
haven't been able really to read The
Economist of the last 15 years he's gone
terribly bad and you know this is humor
is gone and now banned even in England
so Monty Python wouldn't exist today
just get over he's just a dead end it's
just a culturally least interesting
place on the planet today except for
Katie Hopkins legs proper and your your
your impression of that and I don't know
if you finished sort of elaborating on
well yeah because when one reason it's
really refreshing to speak to both of
you is I don't feel this pressure to to
issue a full throttle you know
denunciation of it
we're not my politics are pretty boring
it could be because I'm
United States and I'm more interested in
kind of basic political questions like
health care and things like that but you
know so he's not he's not someone who
I'm prepped to sympathize with I find
him so fascinating in and do not in
resent the fact that by saying that in a
lot of people's minds I'm paying him
some political compliment or endorsing
his political you know his political
program he this is a person who almost
on his own Alexandra Dugan is right
about some characterizations abandoned
this is someone who on his own growing
up in working-class Richmond in Virginia
in in a pretty white bread as we like to
say Millia goes out breaks out on his
own in secrecy becomes interested in
alternative spirituality becomes you
know ingrained with kerchief ian studies
and then eventually finds his way to
traditionalism at the same time as he's
becoming this populist firebrand he's
excited about the Tea Party he's
incredibly wealthy he's working on Wall
Street this is not a normal person this
is not a charlatan either he has
charlatan tendencies to him he can be
blue v8 he's he's addicted to attention
he's also fascinating it's one things
that I say I've been saying to people
and what I've been doing radio
interviews is that you have to desperate
narratives about man in the United
States I'm not really invested in either
of them although I'm struck by their
existence one is that you know he is
this puppet master and he's
orchestrating the world he's devious
he's a devil Satan figure and you know
he's the brains that Trump doesn't have
that mainstream America especially
liberal America has wanted to you know
have some anchoring for how could this
happen how could crazy Trump have
managed this well ban it as the answer
and he's evil and then you have you have
this other interpretation which is that
he is completely phony and that he
shallow and he's just out for attention
you know my response to that is not that
the truth of Bannon is in between these
two polls
it's that both of the polls are active
at once he's a paradoxical figure he's
both extremes at once he can be shallow
and attention-seeking but there's also a
remarkable amount of content
to here and really as as a commentator
as a journalist or as a scholar you can
parachute in on Bannen at any moment in
time see one of these two alternatives
and and run off right your piece and
misunderstand everything misunderstand I
was surprised that he kind of went
through you know a Zen period and he
went through a Gerty vien period he went
through like a a real progressive you
know he kind of like it reminds me of my
twenties in a way you know what I was
doing and then that he went populism
from from there rather than going
populism from let's say fundamentalist
yeah but that's what that's because we
have this silly assumption that populism
is not something you can arrive at
through an intellectual discourse that's
ridiculous I mean you know the left even
though the little the left equivalent of
him today I mean the only decent thinker
in identitarian politics when it becomes
becomes leftist identitarian at least
he's a cold Santa loose instructor move
I tell about if you won't have a
strategy for the left today why not go
populism and she arrives at this very
thoroughly over a period of 30 years and
she finally writes this was manifesto
for leftist populism and I think a
mclubbe offering these you know a lot of
these guys that I think a very decent on
love today are big fans of Chantal muth
so that's populism to it and where does
this idea come from you can't arrive at
populism through a properly intellectual
process in your own personal and
spiritual journey
I think this precisely my banner was
unique when he came forward and got this
credibility with young clever
working-class lads so yeah if you
weren't living club you had the clever
guy but the working-class guy say
Michigan or something like that you
loved that he'd be he'd be like your
long missed uncle and you would go to
Breitbart and you would love to see bad
on all the time you would even say gay
guys weren't that dangerous you've the
whereas funny is mildly on Napoli's and
suddenly that opened up a whole new
space this business an open-minded a you
know adventure for loads of people to
open up their minds towards more
tolerant multicultural world view job
honest about yeah that's exactly the
Attic succeeded without the axe the
exact opposite of how
everybody thinks of the whole thing
right why the left was just boring and
bland and torn apart with his own old
sick quarrels and nothing radical and
nothing new came out of the left of
course banner was the most refreshing
thing to happen in America in the early
21st century that was obvious
well this is you know it's something
actually telling the story of Bannon
Dugan but especially Bannon in a la boda
Kabongo whose bolson arroz who has been
the influence of Wilson around Brazil
huh is that when you look at their
background it can look like a secession
a succession of kind of gimmicks and
kind of capricious swings back and forth
but I think it's instructive in you know
in productive rather to ponder the ways
that the firebrand populist of today is
actually kind of the same person as the
Sufi mystic how they might actually be
the same personas in a certain sense
exactly what a seeker or the you know
the the the Buddhists a college student
Heather how there actually might be
consistency across those oh absolutely
and Sufism is populist I mean you go to
Pakistan you trust the Sufis Crysta with
the people but they're like these
shaman's walk into the village and they
totally with the working-class guys and
and and they devote themselves to them
and they go up against them or laws or
the Imams they're like you know the
heads of the Ummah so that's exactly
what is the constant struggle between
Islam and Sufism and why Sufism has
obviously pre-islamic origins its surest
on ISM Buddhism originally and it has
this came out of Central Asia came down
to Babylon and then spread and then
eventually became is surmised formally
but of course the Sufis are populist
that with the people I would say today's
Sufis are more people like Camille
Paglia
you know she's she's a populist with the
working-class women I always speak to
there forever and she's aggressively
going against the sort of posh
middle-class nervousness and up know a
bit like me in Scandinavia in that I'm
totally totally popping in with the
working-class
I'm totally popular and waiting with the
tech people and with some old classic
intellectuals and then I got a mage or a
problem which is fun to do which is the
middle class sort of media elite
essentially these states just a nervous
lynch mob that doesn't know where it's
going so in that sense sufi yes I love
Sufism for the simple reason when you
work in Kurdistan or some like that the
Sufis are the ones you trust was there
with the people huh very popular yeah is
that the point you were trying to make I
thought there's a bit there's something
else to your point is there is there
well it's because you can look at it
both ways actually that could be a point
Andrew is that you know I'm interested
also in kind of the obscures Western
sophist which is which it just which to
say like you know a westerner who is
committed to alternative spiritualities
which Sufism is going to be an off the
beaten path sort of thing to do in in
the West especially let's say at CPAC
and they're you know Republican
Republican Party to have some affinities
for Sufism is a very strange thing and
you could look at the content of Sufism
which was what Alex was just doing I
think there's a there's a point to be
made there to no doubt but also also the
be the dissidents
the contrarian the person who opts out
the person who is seeking for some
alternative to to the status quo
there are affinities between that brand
of alternative spirituality that that
modality and and populism that is
anti-establishment that is that is
saying we I'm going to break from
whatever that's established if you see
it represented in the middle class media
market in in Scandinavia there there's a
there's a very simple more basic
commonality there that that makes a
union between you know a contemporary to
alternatives spiritualist and and
right-wing populism more intuitive than
I think it might originally or initially
appear to to an onlooker a deeper level
yeah week ago we can go more Hegelian
here especially I believe at least you
know better better than me but we both
read him and study him carefully for
years and to me his response to the
establishment was to understand
establishment had gone so corrupt that
at the time where he lived he had to be
contrarian his contrarian ISM is not
something he was born with like a
trickster would be who always tries to
be contrarian
this was a time when Washington DC and
establishment to become so corrupt and
people were sensing it and they it was
there was a radical sense of wisdom
coming out of the working-class that
banner really believes and he believes
in working-class collective wisdom and
any what it's a tapping to that and just
gave voice to that and then he just
exploded which for him probably was the
yeah I thought so but oh yeah I was
right yes yes trumpeting came along as
that's not bad on that's their just
balance okay why don't we go for Trump
just to go against establishment because
that's not the end of the story at all
obviously if a ban on or ban on this and
Trump is just possibly a bastard or
opener to something different that would
be better later on but the Trump was
better than anything else because he was
basically in his narcissism in by
peeking Cartman from South Park as
president of the United States you you
would use piss off the stablishment as
much as you possibly could and you would
even probably this year make to make the
same mistake all over again 2016 as
tragedy 2020 probably as farce so yeah
it's it's just that I think banner could
banner leaving the White House as early
as it did wasn't a problem for him at
all it was just that he was inside the
door and once he did what he wanted to
do and you we can leave the rest to
trump because I'm gonna do more
important things outside of the White
House it just left like take down China
which is his present occupation right
and I agree
hey one quick quick thing that actually
I didn't I didn't get to that much in
the book it comes up briefly in a couple
chapters but Bannon has also a critique
of intelligence and have alerted nests
and of mathematize ation and
organization that doesn't always always
appear to appear to everybody and it's
it's I think it's easily
mischaracterized but one reason he does
not he rallies behind the working class
and he wants manufacturing to come back
to the United States is that he does not
want a society that is exclusively
valuing people based on based on their
their lerton as' and they're they're
officially you know mathematize and
tracks intelligence that he he he speaks
a lot about human beings as having a
being beyond what they
and that we are not simply simply a you
know a sort of collection of
intelligence and I've heard you speak in
the past Alex and purty in fact with
with Andrew on this show about you know
about the what do you call the post
rational or the super rational or the
the sort of being that we rational is
the term is right trans rational trans
rational yes and for him I see a sort of
linkage there between the sufism of the
way that you were just talking about an
Alex and right-wing populism and the
fact that you know let's let's create a
society that is not going to be an
exclusive benefit to the technocrats in
Silicon Valley but that but that looks
to human beings as being you know being
something beyond that a that a
manufacturing economy act in his mind
absent - this is very Marxist as well
isn't that that's it that's almost the
Marxist kind of means of production and
all that no no no no production is
neutral and that says no I agree with
battle here strongly if you're gonna
find Steve banner quotes in the next
book for me inside of Chris is gonna be
at this department because that's
strongly gradient besides that we hate
seeing pain right because these did you
hit her
but yeah leave a shadow Hong Kong this
week was the invasion of Poland 1939
repeated so but back to America I agree
with him strongly this is pathos so I
wouldn't say it's an attack on
intelligence because it's a law dr.
winter
this is it tackle logos and that's
attack on Platonism the problem with the
Silicon Valley phenomenon with all the
young little pillar Saints boy far I was
like the super burgers of the world you
know who are terrorists essentially the
way they operate the they aren't logos
obsessed that's what my old students
like Nick Bostrom became like his super
philosopher in Silicon Valley because
he's like Nick Bostrom never understood
Nietzsche but he's very good at
mathematics and he's a plate honest
so in max tegmark plate Ernest coming on
as Canadia got popular with the Silicon
Valley crew this is the worship of logos
and goods ban and correctly opposes is
the pathos against the logos and I
probably my studies of the relationship
of human beings technology news because
if you
three narratives rather than two
Americas always obsessed with Lobos
versus myth it's really three logos
mythos and pastels whenever in America
says there's no path I said will you
watch pornography don't you okay
pathos you watch an action warfare
people actually kill each other around
these pretend to kill each other pathos
right
so powerful is there's a third story and
I think banner and I are a very obsessed
with the human body and very modest yes
so you have a dick you're a man you've
got a dick you got to be horny you can
go to beguile as the German say meaning
you want to live live it up right and he
sees him the American worker a little
bit of libido libido yeah you know
libidinal guy opposed to a guy who's
only in his mind and his brain and doing
the numbers and it's not really to save
us from all being mathematics or
whatever it's really that we're human
and the math imagination of the world
can be done by the computers eventually
so why would we go back to interacting
with materials and and be proper fish or
logical workers that's what you said in
your book didn't you Ben you said didn't
that's what he said he said it he said
he what he saw in the working class was
they're fighters right there they want
to fight for something they're there
well he says the latest people are
really they won't they don't fight they
don't have this pathos they don't have
this libido this is part of it I mean he
he thinks that actual authentic
incarnations of all of those all the
Hindu and indo-european castes are
actually all embedded secretly in the
working class today that you will find
actual warriors and actual priests and
actual merchants in in the working class
hidden and that you will not find those
you will not find those persona in
official priests official warriors
you know the military class the you know
the priesthood in the Catholic Church
you know that they're all essentially
simulations you know facades for the
prevailing modality which is which is
materialistic you know a sort of slave
caste but if you look at the
working-class distance from identity
you'll actually you'll actually see real
slaves real or excuse me real priests in
real war
so yeah he sees that you know but this
this you know a phrase that I've heard
you used before Alex that you know what
we need today is not a new enlightenment
we need a new Renaissance we need a new
a new investments in in pathos a new
investment in humanity and what what you
know what it means to be to be a human
human being in this age of technological
advance those are all things that Bannen
also would I know that he would get
behind and I know I know he feels the
exact same way that you know pushing
back a technocratic and essentially
secular and materialistic as he sees it
paradigm to be replaced by some new
investment in the peculiarities of human
beings and the human body is is is what
is called for absolutely
I know there's some differences there in
the way that you each think of time yeah
Andrew and I do other three zooms - for
example Thomas Hamrick who's those you
know professor of artificial
intelligence and vice Riaan mathematics
and in it he's also Tantra teacher so
we're doing a lot of research here on
Tantra Sutra sexuality you know the body
so go go back into the body and of
course our is also very powerful so now
I think to me for me philosophically
speaking III want to prepare humanity
for the day when the machine steps
forward in its full glory and asks us
okay so your humans what the fuck is
that so
you know I work with technology and my
work of a 30 years it started with
technology and obsession with technology
but it's almost not what I talk about
all along I talk about humans all the
time and and in using technology now
through date down through ecology to go
into and see how we originally lived and
this is where they're trying to get on
and the religion there was certainly
because during a period of 60 to 70
thousand years essentially we were all
the same around the planet wandered
around went into warfare with each other
now and then and all these different
types shamanic castes matriarchy
Patriarca inner outer circle all these
models that we use are verifying data
both from anthropology and say New
Guinea Brazil Northern cannot
and from the temple human beings on a
massive scale so we can prove that
there's was a sociology in the original
tried and out of that we're not trying
to deduce the narrative this tribe would
have told itself about itself and it
turns out to be nominal adji and there's
exact of a traditionalist and fits in so
well because that's exactly what
traditionalism is except technology
arrived five thousand years ago and my
argument is you can't stop there because
you only get half the story and that's
why I think Dugan of these guys maybe
not better but Dugan these guys are
gonna fail and fold into some kind of
romantic trap and that will lead to war
and then chaos because actually there's
a storm do gonna be so I mean doesn't
tie into the global Empire that a talk
about what the machine is all over the
place and we have Asus or Chris you know
that he doesn't really discuss that he
just went to voice out of that
completely seems to want to go to war
with modernity yeah but without weapons
they're much more explicit way than
let's say the meta politics of but who's
gonna build the bombs because that
requires high in technology again again
because Russia's failed a technology
because they're still organized did you
know with NASA Putin money from the top
and they did terrible and of course
what's up and telegram were invented in
Eastern Europe but they both went to
America right away so Russia's
completely completely failed in
technology its culture and of course
then it's only natural after 30 years of
failure there the Russian now turns
inwards and goes more romantic goes more
Russian Orthodox and there I think Dugan
has to come rather the philosopher
something that points forward he's
become philosopher return to something
in nostalgic and I think that's where
you fail why is he so enamored with the
Chinese at the moment I'm not sure if I
understand that like he's tryna yeah I
mean they're they're practical and
ideological reasons I mean there's
there's his long-standing belief that
any opponent of liberalism and any
opponent of the United States
liberalism's Avatar is is a friend of
his and a friend of Russia's and should
be brought in I mean he said similar
things about Mujahideen as well you know
wanting to see a union between you know
Nazis communists so he's sort of fixated
in this anti Americanism
yes play a game - to fight America yeah
except my folds filers are not an
authentic father so this if you take
digital libido and the difference in
authentic fathers are false well this is
exactly where we were gearing towards
banner being authentically phallic and
we're gearing towards dog of being false
valid in the sense that Dorgan always
tries to find an abject to unify around
and that's why schedule this fight comes
up with these absurd collaborations that
could work but only if the abject is at
the center that's of course it's much
more dangerous work well I think maybe
maybe Benin has a more a wider picture
of the whole game
something just sweetly I have to jump in
there's there's yes sorry but it's
mainly from from ev Allah but the you
know what you're talking about is you
know false versus authentic phallus
everyone might one might want to say
that that's being described as a solar
presence versus a lunar presents one
thing that is an actual source of light
itself and the other thing that reflects
and you know in sort of an mean imposter
of another source of light at best yes
sometimes about ever loved was obviously
wrong with something so you know
sometimes sometimes the fake is just too
fake
usually if usual Rene Girard right it
would be like okay if something mimics
something else watch out right and most
of the time things are nothing but
mimicry but if it's integrated that adds
some kind of value you could get more
interesting but if it comes out of some
kind of weird chaotic source say like
crazy wisdom which would you do in
Tantra the reason why the ultimate
teacher is a crazy wisdom teacher mm-hmm
an absolute asshole it's because you
can't mimic him you have to so then his
is been in a crazy wisdom teacher or is
he a a fraud or what does he have to say
he's too popular for that Andrew that's
not that is not as easy is he a crazy
wisdom teacher but is he okay I guess
he's is he a is he a genuinely original
or is he ariza imitator
is he imitating some nostalgic model
from traditional
or is he a real as he is he innovating
something here you know I don't see him
mimicking that many people he's that's
why I'm getting the whether I like them
or not I'm not sure he's authentic
fidelity to him you know I think he's
deceptively authentic I would say
deceptively because he's not he's not
totally above trying to put himself into
certain categories and narratives you
know for the sake of commentators in
many cases and for the sake of history
writers but I think that despite that he
actually is is beyond a lot of those
comparisons and can ask you a question
about you living in America can a
sequester vary favor okay okay
even my favorite Americans lie in order
on purpose right
Peter Thiel for example I love Peter
Thiel he you know share a lot of come
you know personality traits and probably
collaborators in the future but in Peter
Thiel says that he believes the cries
died it was resurrected on the third day
and he looks like Bill Clinton talked
about Monica Lewinsky with assassin okay
so that's do you need the whole
restitution money so badly you have to
lie in public like that Peter Thiel I
mean during European person it's just
why can't you just tell the truth or
shut the fuck up it's just like do you
think bad on in this American mode
without realizing it actually sometimes
think that he could serve his overall
interest to cynically lie to people well
he's a Catholic isn't he tosses what are
we talking about defenses of Trump no
more like more like it could you know
instead of telling the truth at all
times I serve a higher purpose where
people will get what's right if I
actually lie yes okay so when you hype
something for example I mean story time
you do mythos you have to hike you have
to make it a little bit more grandiose
than it actually so you leave go go some
over to missus and that's the sort of
lying right you spice it up right it's
otherwise you you won't get your Netflix
script published unless you're spice it
up a bit so you can't tell the real
story because it's do boring now that
that to me motivates the kid they could
be
perfect ethical motivation while you
would lie in that sense but to me the
striking thing with Americans even the
more low-key people who don't go to the
hype don't do the sentiment tell any
game you know a Peter Thiel he's very
genuine probably because the German as
well but you know we'd ban on I've got
I've got a sense that what he did what
is he's decided to do is that things are
moving so fast but he trust that some of
these clever working-class guys will
figure out what he actually means so
he's actually heading because that's
pathos he has a certain passion where
he's going and that's his determination
rather than the logical or explanation
of what is the right thing to do and he
definitely intuitive like mad genial
intuitive that that to me proceeds a
plastic character and and that's a zero
and in this sense it's just like you
just making it up as he goes along no no
no no no no rendered my conscious is
rather what you just said it's more like
the crazy wisdom in him is something
that the glitters what is does with in
that he will not do anything in a
predictable straightforward manner
because that will make you lace in
interpreting what he does blog that
he'll move around very quickly here and
there but he will actually know what
he's doing and he wouldn't mind a little
white lie now and then for you to figure
out the password maybe is more of a
trickster character than yeah this'n
element to that yes in this sense yeah
absolutely absolutely under I you're
gonna hate me for for kind of retreating
to a sort of answer of scientific remove
here but I will say this to tell example
that especially coming from his
traditionalism there is a tension of
whether or not anything anybody does
means anything because because he does
whole illusion right so Maya yeah but
there's also there's also a schedule
there's where fate is carrying us in a
particular direction regardless of what
we do you know Bannon moves in and out
of that of that narrative in ways that
can be confusing but when he isn't when
he is part of it it's not a stretch for
us trying to understand what he's doing
to say
that that would lead to some weakening
of investment in the words that are
spoken in the actions that someone takes
because they don't matter that much or
made or maybe that could not actively
turn around and become credibility in
the long run because what we all realize
these days we even have the cameras and
the microphones after each other
tomorrow right all the time is that just
stop pretending you can control or
contain your purse anyway you're being
perceived like okay so yes oh but that's
acceptable real soreness and it's a
wrong these days because we're soreness
is that you're actually responsible for
the understanding of what you just did
or the outcome of your actions yes
really we are going back rather towards
them no I'm responsible for my
intentions because I have to operate a
certain intuition I'm only responsible
for how talented I am intuitively and
therefore I intuitively act on along an
emotional pattern which i think is the
right thing to do and then whatever
happens the next day oh it's that how
was perceived always doctor tweet the
spread was that what we've got because
there's no way you can predict how your
behavior will be interpreted so that's
what you lose to fate these days you
just loosen it out to these millions of
people in their interpretation and you
just have to let go that you can't
control yes
you have no idea how much I would love
to talk about Kierkegaard's and all this
the the organisation of intention over
you know the importance of intention
over almost everything else is key here
but absolutely the the the notion
however though with Bannen that that
everything that is happening is
basically going to happen regardless of
what we do that does come in and out it
has been also fueled by the corona virus
epidemic I've had a lot of conversations
with Bannen a you know since writing the
book about corona virus I've spoken to
Dugan about it to where you know where
he has looked at this you know what he
sees as a breakdown and also sort of
poisoning of globalization and the mass
movement of people's you know as being
something and also a rebuke against
globalism as he sees as being the sort
of thing that he doesn't even need to
you know I had a big long interview with
him ahead of an article I wrote where
where he's you know he was giving me all
these explanations about the corona
virus they're they're very interesting
of course a lot was focusing on China
that's his that's his main focus these
days you know but as for global as
globalization globalism I said well
isn't this punishing global and he was
like oh yeah of course you know he
didn't he didn't even really want it was
it was given for him that globalism is
being picked apart right now and this is
a tool of it but he didn't need to you
need to say anything about it's just
gonna happen and I I think that you know
where's a lot of commentators will see
you know transparent dishonesty
sometimes playing with the facts when
you especially when he's talking about
Trump there can be a deeper motivation
here that's a lot of what this study a
lot of what my book is about is really
about motivations it's not so much it's
it's really a book of ideas masquerading
as one about actions yeah but there can
be a deeper motivation here and that yes
he doesn't he doesn't actually care that
much about the detail you know the
surface level of what he's saying it is
a bigger picture narrative so one you
know one thing I end up I wanted to
bring this up Alex because Sweden comes
into comes into the story a little bit
as well I don't give the name of the
figure but I do speak to someone in
Sweden who talks about the fact that the
Sweden Democrats the the populist
nationalist party especially after the
after the elections in 2018 they were
outmaneuvered by the the kind of free
market forces and the socialist forces
coming together to unite and keep them
out of power
the you know the far right and the
person that I was speaking to in the
Sweden Democrats thought that this was a
great thing actually yes they lost power
they didn't get they don't have they're
not part of the government in Sweden at
all even though they were they were one
of the largest parties in the country
and they're they're growing quickly what
he was so excited about was that he saw
materialism he saw economics socialism
versus capitalism he saw that
primary what had been the definitive
issue in Western politics for so long he
saw that disintegrate in its place in
materialism and spirituality going by a
different name had come to the fore it
was you know are you for solidarity and
intolerance and open borders or are you
for nationalism that that deeper level
transition politics you know to him
meant not necessarily the political
spectrum was moving to the left or to
the right but that it essentially moved
up right materialism up in the hierarchy
towards he's got to be exciting here
miss Condon had to fall at the next ten
years I'm a member of the citizens
gathering which is the next new party
and they we've got they'll turn it to
Sweden and the citizens gathering it's
like we take on a cosmopolitan liberal
approach but with the integration
policies have to work very fragmented
approach and we hate political
correctness which is very refreshing so
it's like if your political correct
don't even bother to join us totally
opposed to de stablishment parts and
again it's the is a population against
establishment so basically the citizens
gatherings got gonna go for the educated
middle classes who are bored with the
system and then Sweden Democrats are
picked up the working class and they're
basically sweeping away the Social
Democrats and they probably will in the
next election and then the third force
is the one this little the ultimate old
right alternative Sweden but we can be
in conversation so it's just like yeah
you know you have to eventually have to
run politics to some kind of compromise
but this is like a spiritual awakening
that it's not afraid to speak about
spirituality tied to politics yeah it's
happening in Scandinavia the most
nihilistic supposedly secular part of
the world well you know feminism has
become a religion and in I'd you know
it's fundamentalist religion too because
people think they're not religious and
you know in an intersectional ISM I mean
nobody's just forget about California
you come to eat it's just like it is a
state religion you must obey and so the
reaction against this will of course be
incredibly forceful and those are the
Sweden Democrats are there already
because they've got my 25% of the
population behind them and they're not
leading so it's gonna be very
interesting to see what happens here in
this
in this part of the world Scandinavia is
really interesting the next ten years
see what's going oh absolutely
absolutely and in fur Bannon though I
think as as for the Sweden Democrat I
mean I do think that he is looking at
those higher-level changes that it's you
know if you see a political spectrum
move in some some different
fundamentally different direction I
think you'll be on favor of it I report
that he was enthusiastic about a
Democratic presidential candidate that
existed just briefly her name was Miriam
Williamson um you know some of you might
remember she she really didn't get a lot
of traction but she spoke about dark
suck psychic forces she was referring to
Trump and maybe abandon himself it
mattered him he liked that she was
speaking about a sort of immaterial
spiritual politics that it wasn't just
about what's the tax rate gonna be you
know how should how much good should we
tack should we tax our you know or
exports and our imports and so she was
talking about about these these bigger
bigger pictures he didn't care that she
was a Democrat that's it maybe he
embraces his enemies on some level
that's kind of another thing that he
does that's why he talks about you know
Lenin or something like that
okay it doesn't care if you're good it's
an elegant priest you point out an enemy
and everybody follows you they look up
to the enemy and then you shock
everybody about having a debate with the
enemy the next day and completely you
expose who was a fraud and who was
genuine because those of you I D are
genuine or those who just follow you are
gone right so this this is an old tactic
and ban on this expert at it and he
doesn't care about these parties or
anything he knows he could walk into
room and found an ally he was supposed
to these opponent that's just
intelligent that just just stands above
the old sort of you're in this ditch
here you must behave as if you're in
this stage rather than we know now that
that's completely untrue yeah you become
intelligent these days tagging II yeah
you become fools yeah if you stay in the
echo chamber speaking 2010 if you stay
and they could chamber you're dead
you're the digital underclass if you get
out of they could chamber and look
around say hey please can I have an
opponent and arguing because that makes
me smarter you're in what I call the
mode of antagony integrity you you want
to be in
agony you want to be an antagonism
that's exactly we sear in Scandinavia
all these Kirby's you're wrong and
immigrant kids come here they don't
watch Swedish television they do their
own talk shows and YouTube and they just
invite guys from the opposite side and
these shows are pulling the entire
audience now you know it's it's a no I
think that's refreshing I think Bannen
will be looked at in inside he looked as
prophetic and I think ultimately he he
was to want to point it out that seeing
things decision six years ago to become
the dictator of China for life was
probably the most profound decision made
the last fifty years in the most tragic
one even for the Chinese and I think
we're heading towards with invasion of
Hong Kong as I call it this summer I
think we're heading towards a real
battle here between not China in the
United States but clearly India Japan
Korea Taiwan are all uniting and that's
where I want to work the next few years
as well to figure out how they relate to
these Chinese monolith which is nothing
but a massive or rebellion horror State
yeah that the Chinese are creating and
and they the swept away the Taoism of
the Buddhism and just complete this day
with some kind of vulgar Confucian as'
and the most vulgar version of it just
basically tea and ping looking himself
of the new Mao but even Mao was smarter
this is really dangerous right so I
think banner will be remembered as the
guy who came from the West United the
working-class guys and made them figure
out that China was the enemy not the
Chinese but the China so I think that's
that's the next 20-30 years it's gonna
be his biggest contribution did you
agree with that and you it could be yes
I mean he as if we focus on that point I
you know I did want to kind of put a bow
on what we were speaking out before just
just to underline the fact that there
there can be a lot of deceptive strategy
in the moves that Bannon is making that
are lost to commentators but when it
comes to his opposition to China I mean
I would note that he has been identified
as a threat to them if this received
very little coverage I tried to get
covered for it it really upset me that
no one seemed to care but
you know the CCP devoted a full two
minutes on their main primetime
television network
you know it's watched by 100 million
people some some unbelievable amount of
yours to tearing Bannen down a couple
weeks ago you know they gave an
editorial about what a terrible person
was and they said specifically he's an
agent of chaos you know we are agents of
order they are threatened by him in some
sense oh yeah and and this is not
someone this is I you know I hate
because there's this narrative about you
know people building ban enough and you
don't want to be the one who's
contributing to his you know to his ego
and his network
he is doing something that that bothers
them right now and if nothing else they
also could they also view him in
criticism of him as being a profitable
tool and something that they can they
can use this is not someone who's
irrelevant I think I think the Chinese
regard Steve ban as a single most
important opinion maker in the United
States and defense of Taiwan in case of
a conflict okay case Taiwan we need to
be defended if the Chinese do attack
which is not unlikely any longer
Taiwan has the bastion of the free
Chinese and the Democratic Chinese
people all over the world and of decent
Chinese people you know is incredibly
important in the sense and that America
would then put resources on to Taiwan to
actually defend its against the Chinese
army I think Steve banner would be the
single most important opinion maker in
the United States today to devote
America to that cause that makes perfect
sense
who else would be exactly so that's
would be the guy it's what you're saying
is certainly intuitive it's it's so
interesting and and I have to say
refreshing to hear you say this though
because as I've said there's been this
desperate attempt it's been religious
actually spiritual in the United States
to declare ban and dead after he left
the White House into seee see how some
of his projects in Europe have faltered
you know the movement and everything you
know the Academy in Italy which suddenly
is is alive again
not many people reported that but he now
he is going to do that ice and light
again mm-hmm yep it's a it's a lot of be
good it is this is just a couple weeks
ago if especially if you take the broad
picture looking at bannon's career it
has been a story of boom and bust it has
ebbed and flowed and I think that a lot
of commentators are looking at him right
now with this this narrow lens and
saying AHA he fell out with Trump he
kind of bounced out of the White House
he went to Europe things didn't work out
well he's done and they keep saying I
would point this out too they have been
driving that narrative about him for
three years and they've been driving it
actively for three years and that ought
to tell you something he's he's easy but
he's preparing for a win of some kind
he's gonna get I know I don't I'm less
interested in Bannon actually than I am
I'm less interested in Bannon than I am
the the journalists who have been
frantically saying this about him for
three years if you have to declare
someone dead for three years
it sounds like CNN like to see an end
Trump relationship it's just like to CNN
talked about nothing solid Trump all day
long and say no finally he made this
biggest mistake and I was gonna fall and
they said it oh so many hundreds of
times it's just like no you still only
talk about Trump you're not even talking
about buying it you know some Trump win
another election CNN this is like that's
America right and really this goes back
to something you said the very very
beginning of our talk here Alex that and
it's true I wish people would get it
about the book - the book is actually
not about Steve man and Alexandra doing
in the milometer cabal it's about what
is going on in the zeitgeist right now
why did we have this philosophy that was
so marginalized disappeared it's the
margins of the margins is what this was
suddenly it comes up in these these
ideologues these positions of power
different parts of the world what is
going on in a similar sense I'm I am
interested not so much in whether ban in
is relevant or not but why this figure
has sparked such a reaction why media is
so obsessed with advancing a narrative
about him in why the left media in the
United States and Britain in particular
is so frantic urgent to declare him dead
why is that
because because God mechanism they're
looking for him as the ultimate evil
person no no no no no he's stealing
their agenda he's taking away Marxist
class analysis from them he's at
blacklivesmatter I'm strongly opposed of
my class matters no secret why because
George Floyd is all about class it's not
about race okay it wasn't a wealthy
black guy was killed it was a poor black
guy would you know this police guy and
of course was horrible but he was a
class issue and the only the only people
who talk about class in America these
days are people like Steve Patton and
Camille Paglia
they actually way more Marxist than they
think or maybe bana would secretly agree
because the Marxists are no longer
around and the left has gone into
complete rasayan lynch mob social
justice warrior populism it's all victim
of cults now it's all victim it calls
victimhood calls all the time which can
never win that can only cause havoc so
it's all about the tension game now it's
all about whatever is in the media and
that's like a tension up you know it's
kind of Oregon's gonna go towards Lisa's
limited civil war in the next year you
know he said this it's talked about this
for years the American Dream is over
it's dead America split and it split
into camps now officially called Trump
abide but below those are the real
struggles and one side will be terribly
disappointed in November 2020 and
they're certainly gonna pick up guns
this time around so in this bigger
picture uh I would say banner has stolen
it's always when you're really close to
the other guys but actually take what
they were supposed to defend you take it
from them cause you actually do better
than they do I think American working
class people genuinely believes dibalans
more on their stolen the doing any any
academic you know political academic out
there he's more credible in their eyes
than any of them are so he's basically
he's basically the most credible guy in
America cause you can't take that away
from unless somebody else comes along
but bands on the Bernie Sanders
revolution hasn't he sort as he's sort
of stolen no I think they work in
parallel I think Sanders is another guy
to remind my people of the thing that
knowled smart clever funny guy like that
can do a lot of good and
it cost creative havoc I think they're
both that I don't think this each others
node opponents see they both opponents
to the establishment they see Joseph
Biden as an incredibly corrupt guy in
with the Chinese and opposed to him is a
narcissist who's Cartman from South Park
and a pretty much an idiot who only goes
between his own tweet feeds and its own
mirror image right is it okay to Corona
corpses are fighting over is gonna be
the next u.s. president that's not the
end of the story surely it's another
four years old cares but after that
something better can hopefully come
along and I think ban is preparing for
that mm-hmm and he's got a lot of power
in that case a lot of influence pressure
over the Republicans when you come to
that point yeah it'll be interesting to
see as I say you were you are much more
interested Alex and I mean you mean you
talk about futurology I mean I know that
you're very interested in pondering you
know predictions and in the future
that's not so much the way that I think
but it's I I certainly went whenever I
hear someone offer an explanation of him
that is simplistic in terms of his
personality his character but also about
his past impact in his in his potential
impacts I recoil you know that this is
there there's there's a lot going on
here he does have he does have a sense
and ability also to read the tea leaves
as we say this could be a product know
if it's a product of him personally but
also the fact that he's he's also
engaged in so many different areas of
social life if it's economics of its
culture if it's politics if you know all
of those things have been arenas he's
worked in the past I'll tell you I'll
tell you about over here Europe at least
it's the same guys for love Eric von
stein who loves the banner okay okay
yeah uh-huh
they use them as parallax's to see the
world through both eyes and think they
get a pretty correct you especially in
the United States and if you see if
you're not stay through wine Stein's
eyes and through ban on size you get a
pretty good picture of what it's like
you probably get let me get a good bet
who's gonna win the election by having
exactly those two parallels yes yes who
do you think
like do you have predictions about about
the US I well okay let's admit we're
mid-tier a lot of shit can happen people
can even die right so I'd say that I
think Biden was jumping look too quickly
on to the black lives matter bandwagon
full-scale by distancing himself from
the u.s. police force I can't see
anybody ever win a u.s. election being
opposed to or or in favor of defunding
the u.s. police force especially not
when America's got a more chaotic and
it's gonna burn all summer I think that
was a terrible mistake on Biden's part
and Biden has only gone up when he's
kept his mouth shut
and he goes down every time he opens his
mouth now I don't think you can win a
use election or when the debates that
actually are there before because Trump
will just go in the repeat his mantra
that's what he always does and I think
you can beat Biden quite easily by doing
that because Biden doesn't have a spine
at all it's nothing but a power play
I thought Amy Klobuchar was fantastic we
both met her in Colorado last year and
and and yeah why not pick the gay guy
who run Indiana successfully whatever
Pete buddy but the Democrats lost and
completely you know he just got back to
the old establishment horrible feuds and
things so finally they pick what Biden
god it's just like up against Trump is
like it's Trump's election to lose let's
put it that way okay part of what it
what did Ben and how did Ben and
describe Trump in the book I remember he
described Trump in this very what does
he think of Trump well it's I I get a
different command of action was that the
the phrase I'm looking for a man in time
man in time that's it yeah do the second
phrase I mean a tiptoe the way that I
wrote this the the phrase itself in the
way that he was speaking about Trump
pointed me to a very very dark
traditionalist named Sumitra Devi who
was this this also is not a common
phrase that you hear in political
science classes she was a an esoteric
Hitler wrist
look that up she and he just threw that
in there and in a casual conversation or
something that's yes you know it's a
phase that we all move through but I
guess I did that to have a few months to
be honest about it but I've tried
everything everyone did you gotta try
everything yeah you know she she looked
at that time cycle and thought okay the
way that you actually advanced through
it human beings can be actors in this in
this otherwise fatalistic time cycle the
way you do it is you propel it forward
through destruction and if you were a
force who destroys and has more violent
than the average person then you are
actually participating in time more than
others you were distinguished and you
are a man in time all these figures were
men she thought and so she thought
Hitler was a man in time because he was
able to use use use violence to push
things forward if you are not only
someone who understands the truth of
time but also participates in
destruction then you can be a man
against time that was part of her
typology a man above time as someone who
simply simply knows what's going on but
doesn't participate a man in time as
someone who doesn't know what's going on
but participates bannin he not only
dropped the phrase to me describing
Trump as the man in time but then went
on to say you know Trump's function and
this is his ability to break down
disrupt and destroy he doesn't know why
and this was the key is that you know he
destroys he is this incredible force for
destruction but he doesn't quite
understand his role in history that is a
man in time that's how Savitri Devi
describes it Wow so and implicitly in
all this someone who is participating in
the disruption a destruction but knows
what it is that's a man against time
again so I I have a conversation in the
book I relay this conversation I have
with man and where he and I are going
back and forth about this and it's
implied that he is framing himself as a
man against time he said man against
time
whereas Trump is just a man in time
mm-hmm
yeah yeah well I guess a traditionalist
by definition would be a man against
time wouldn't wouldn't he know
necessarily renege oh no one would be a
man in time someone you know who has the
removed the person writing the tiger
that you okay you know things are
destined to be bad there's nothing I can
do about it I'm just gonna sit back keep
myself preserved but you're at a room
right on some level
where's the man in time is sort of his
sort of doesn't this ties into deep
shamanic traditions like if you've got a
very unique Orkut I'd say you're the
Messiah right most most most people who
get a really unique archetype never
realize I'm not going to be that because
it's not going to be required or there's
no time for it and the time we live now
buuut Apple but what I do sort of when I
do sort of Marxism I refer to some
incredulous book at the faith of
faithless because I'm a quick saw says
this is not a time of revolution it
revolution today lasts for three days
becomes a t-shirt and Instagram picture
is over yes and the people you try to
really Lucian eyes against will laugh at
you that's like Occupy Wall Street so I
think that Simon Christian I refuse to
participate because it's ridiculous
no this is a time of retraction that
means over the next few decades you
retract you're moving to monasteries you
move probably then against time in this
case you move out of it because the
times now are not the time so you step
into the arena and put on the robe and
the shame and becomes a priest yes this
is number one you have to have a
complete view and know exactly what's
going on before you do that you got to
put on the proper robe and there has to
be the exact time when you do it and
then you walk in you do it with the kind
of disinterest like okay this happened
to be the time when somebody like me
would actually do this and I then become
my archetype and I deliver and you can
throw rocks at me do you think I care
it's just a job that had to be done and
I think that that's something I love the
traditions love to in the sense that
it's no matter logical this is deeply
deeply human they do understand your
archetype that way and that's exactly I
being in time or against time can also
be well am I in a culture and at a time
in history when I should be in or again
the open question what role your
archetype ASCII and Steve Benny kind of
moves in and out of those two roles
doesn't he he kind of a little bit but
what I mean of course what is the times
that demand our attention is is when he
is out of that role I did we had an
interesting I don't know if either of
you if you know who rod Dreier is he's
the editor of the American Conservative
but he wrote a book called the Benedict
option which was a call to American
Christians which says exactly what you
were talking about Alex that you know
now is a time we've lost the cultural
wars that the tide of time is against us
what we need to do is hunker down and
wait yeah yeah very interesting you know
an interesting call to American
Christians ban and of course if you ask
him in the parts that demand that make
him who he is is the is you know those
areas those moments when he says no that
actually you know what we are living at
the end of the cycle right now yes this
is sick with time but we are at the tail
end of it we need to get active no more
riding the tiger no more withdrawal into
our monastic communities this is the
moment I think that clearly Aleksandr
Dugan thinks that as well
the Brazilian figure allowable to
Cavallo kind of waffles around it it
doesn't there's more lands on the fact
that things are going to be bad
Brazilians do and it's me over here left
my big TV shows wins Got Talent on
Saturday to become a political activist
yes seriously now I'm joined officially
a political I'm officially political
activist possibly even a candidate next
election you wait not with the Sweden
Democrats with the citizens gathering
yeah yeah let's me aboard a leave
something okay yes exactly yes guys I'm
off we chose Russell in two minutes with
Tom and that okay I love this and I know
threesomes and I think we are magic and
I'd love to record more of this Andrew
can believe anything to you for this
time and then we find another
opportunity to speak all three of us of
course with pleasure any time mom I'm
getting a big you know a big
conversation an important conversation
yeah oh yeah
let's put this out there see what
happened see some comments coming in and
then find another time for another
threesome magic love yes yes
great thank you both
thanks so much it was awesome and we'll
do everything we possibly can to get war
for eternity out there and I'm not
meaning to sound like an American talk
show host I mean it I never say that to
anybody you know it's that so it's a
patreon - it's an important it's also
flattering for me both I appreciate it
ok thanks so much take care stay safe
both and pick up your families yes