the magnitude of the thing that we're
dealing with the magnitude of what we
have to be capable of responding to if
you want to be able to deal with it is
the biggest thing humanity has ever
faced by a large margin
so it's as challenging as the process of
becoming human at all and maybe even
bigger than that Jordan Hall is a tech
entrepreneur futurist and culture hacker
his essay after the Trump election deep
code situational assessment went viral
in it he described models and frameworks
he built up over many years he's
convinced that the game that
civilization has been playing for
millennia is coming to an end and
something fundamental needs to shift
this is that story
[Music]
the first thing to kind of allow
yourself to accept as something that is
real is the phrase that I've used as
history happens it's very odd to me
actually the people who are perfectly
capable of knowing that for example the
Roman Empire rose and fell it actually
happened there's no question that
occurred in reality somehow are
incapable of perceiving the notion that
therefore it might happen again so let's
just accept the notion that that kind of
thing happens on occasion all right be
open to the possibility okay next okay
well how how do those kinds of things
show up
well there's and I'm not going to go
through this in detail we can if you
like but there's certain characteristics
that we can actually begin to take a
look at they give us a sense of when
where things are and well where we are
is actually rather challenging now we're
in a situation which is definitely not
awesome and probably it's quite bad okay
well how bad how big an order of
magnitude trouble are we looking at well
let's just take a couple of examples to
kind of gauge the order of magnitude
let's just start with one everybody's
involved the whole world every single
human on the planet is involved in this
door that has never happened before
before right now any time any trouble
has emerged it's been a tiny tiny
fraction of the human family the biggest
collapse of all time the bronze age
collapse happened right there and hit
you know 15 percent most of the cities
but 15 percent of the people now
everybody's involved so if anything goes
sideways that is vaguely the order of
magnitude of something of that kind it's
going to be a lot bigger like a lot lot
bigger because these things reinforce
each other you mean notice that when
things go south people become less good
at dealing with each other gently which
makes it worse let's try another one
we have nukes lots of us have nukes and
we're getting better at making new so
more of us are going to have news and we
don't just have nukes we also have
CRISPR which means that people can start
making genetic weapons that are nucleic
in capacity and ink over time not too
long from now we're also going to have
micro drones that can target assassinate
pretty much anybody on Khan
fill-in-the-blank wish to say that up
until now no matter how hard we tried we
couldn't really kill that many of us we
tried really hard we had guns and
bullets and gas and still didn't kill
that many of us to take a look at the
human population even the Black Plague
is like a little divot now we can't in
fact kill everybody or at least mostly
everybody okay next technological change
I don't know if you've seen the charts
to show the pace of technological change
but if you look at a graph that goes
like this and you're here things are
different than they were when you were
here and the 1940s was like here in
terms of the pace of change that was
going on you know the in the the degree
to which our actuation convention is our
capacity to do things in the world is
accelerating is really not
comprehensible to anyone I wrote an
essay called the generation Omega where
I talked about if the amount of change
is continuing to move to current pace
then the capacity of the people who are
in the current generation I think it's
like 30 years from now will be 1 million
times more than now and I kind of get a
sense of that that's like going from
inventing language to the computer in a
single generation right and of course we
already have computers so what that
looked like that's big Shh
let me think there's like three or four
more oh sorry climate we've got the
whole world every single one of our
activities has a characteristic that it
generates an externality it is not well
processed by the complex environment
when we're relatively lightweight
there's not many of us and we're not
engaging a lot of those activities the
complex environment can still process it
sometimes heavy metals not so much well
there's a lot of us and we have
increasingly intensive activities so I'm
not really talking about climate change
which has kind of been scary but it's
like this big on the scale I'm talking
about comprehensive destruction of the
entire complex web of the ecosystem
across every single bind I'm talking
about concentration of heavy metals
hormones I'm talking about the complete
depletion of oxygen in oceans I mean
it's a
shitshow and it's n-dimensional it's all
over the place and each one reinforces
the others so it's at some point only is
a little tipping point here then you get
cascade effects that run all over the
place I can go on by the way there's
about 500 of these each one of which
tells the same story it's big the order
of magnitude is at least a thousand
years and probably on the order of a
million years we're talking about the
origin of humanity big and maybe even
bigger than that so now the question is
how in God's name do we deal with that
well we probably having a slightest idea
and we're as human beings we're we live
a hundred years and most of that is like
in a thirty year window
we're actually identically acting out in
the world so we're not really wired to
deal with things that are magnitudes
larger than that we aren't well designed
to perceive things that are much bigger
than us from are smaller than us in
scale space or time so then we have to
ask ourselves what might be what kind of
thing might be we'd be part of or be in
relationship with that is the kind of
thing that ordeals and orders of
magnitude that are even vaguely in the
size that we're dealing with and so the
proposition is that perhaps it's
something like culture maybe even
something deeper than culture like the
generator functionally gives rise to
culture itself like innovation in
evolution it's something in that order
so when I say culture what I mean is we
create artifacts institutions stories
technologies that actuate our capacity
increase our capacity to think and to do
in the world and that change us and so
we create them they create us and
together we Co evolve but they're
artifacts that are produced by us
through our intelligence through our
hands and our capacity to do things in
the world of this one of the things that
we do is we we tell stories and when we
tell stories we will often find that our
stories are built around these
mythopoetic archetypes now there's two
possible ways of grasping this notion of
mythopoetic archetype well three one is
to say that it's nonsense but I'm going
to ignore that one the second is the
most common is to say well it's an
artifact of culture that cultures
telling stories for a long time and to
the degree to which certain stories have
been showing up over and over again
which means that there in cultures had
been around or they keep showing up in
culture it's one of the two they have a
density to them they have a perennial
nough stew them and so they were kind of
thing that you might want to consider
counting on when things get squishy so
that's one way of taking a look at it so
if we're doing that something that's in
the order of magnitude say a thousand
years that by itself is enough if we're
going to be trying to search for what
are the kinds of things that pass on
through thousand year cycles we're gonna
have to be looking for the deep
mythopoetic locations in our stories and
by the way in our bodies so let's talk
about our bodies because the same threat
works at a longer scale our bodies are
narratives in a sense meaning that the
kinds of things that have been showing
up for now thousands of generations the
things have been showing that made us
Homo sapiens sapiens instincts that are
wired into us at a very deep level at a
precognitive level are still mythopoetic
in the deeper sense meaning that they
are the kinds of things that showed up
because they continue to show up protect
your young is a mythopoetic this is in
the body it is physical because
obviously any being that has young that
are not fish and being it has a small
number of young that are relatively
vulnerable and doesn't embody protect
your young is quickly extinguished now
of course we can be conscious of that
and have it as a virtue but our body
naturally expresses it and so that
process is even deeper it's because okay
well what is that what's happening there
is there a story in that are there deep
threads that are actually showing up
that brings us to where we are now now I
can say well the mythopoetic stories are
both they're both narratives that have
happened to keep showing up and they are
also wisdom that has been endeavoring to
find the deepest threads that have been
showing up in our bodies that are as
deep as we can go and to reify them into
things that can be made available to
consciousness so they can we find them
and do them well that is the ground upon
which you can build something they might
endure
could you talk a bit about your personal
background your personal history and how
it relates to the models that you've
constructed to understand the world over
the last 20 years or so if you if you
notice that what we're engaging is a
very interesting inquiry because we're
in tempting to do sense making about
sense making and for me with that ends
if I was doing is creating many
different layers of awareness of what's
happening so even trying to figure out
how to tell the story of how my personal
history leads to the inquiry into sense
makings of course making sense of my
story but broadly speaking it shows up
as I was born in 1971 in Texas and my
father was in the military but we didn't
move around too much and my mom was
college-educated went on to a career in
psychology and education and ultimate
politics and for me there's if you know
anything about the culture of Texas in
the 70s just assume that's if you
watched the movie boyhood or dazed and
confused just assume that that's the
context and then later on the fact that
I was participating in boy nerd culture
in that time so comic books science
fiction fantasy a really OCD level of
pop culture of film and television
computers and role-playing games and
again pretty obsessively like a lot and
so this is impresses itself upon my
psychology lots of different kinds of
artifacts things like not just the the
notion of say the way that a person who
grew up playing chess thinks about life
in the model or the framework of chess
but actually growing up playing every
game and thinking about the meta
structure that gives rise to games
intuitively
you can drop into any game and be able
to derive what it is if we sort of fast
forward to college this put me in a
place where for example I didn't really
have any particular notion of a major
because that's just a story and it's not
a story that worked for what I was
trying to accomplish so I just hacked
that it was nice that the concept of
hacking had become somewhat meaningful
in that timeframe and I had participated
in hacker culture so broad like broadly
applying the hacker ethos - whatever
happened to be there you're in
relationship with the power of structure
that's stronger than you but if you can
use a combination of cleverness and
elegance you can figure out how to
actually make it do the things you want
to do and get away with it this is kind
of like the very gen-x temporary
autonomous zone hacker cipher freek
ethos we can create a space for autonomy
and then when I graduated moved out to
California it had no idea by the way how
the tech industry worked at all like a
zero experience and for example didn't
know how that San Francisco was the
place to go I just mean the kind of West
was a good good directionality and in
San Diego ended up getting involved in
the high tech scene and that being
involved in the startup of three
companies in a row pretty quickly right
at the froth stage of the dot-com boom
something called mp3 and then the third
company was DivX which I was the founder
and CEO of and rode that through the
bubble popping and then all the way up
to the financial crisis of 2008 but as
nice like I actually got on the one hand
to apply the underlying theory refining
the theory and practice like really
seeing firsthand how a lot of these
things emerged and went through their
arc it's like from inception all the way
to maturity through that through the
pace and ended up with enough resources
that I could more or less do what I
wanted to so so then I did and I spent
two glorious years doing exactly what I
wanted to and in the process of that but
largely what I want to do is like spend
time at a place called the Santa Fe
Institute and by the way another place
called Necker Islands like two very
different versions of what I want to but
continued by the way basic under the
heading of
a better sense of what's exactly going
on like our who are these rich people
we've heard of and who at the global
elite did we first so much about oh I
would just meet them and find out so I
did and in the context of science art
we're the smartest people do the most
interesting work in the broadest way oh
they're here okay cool let's go spend
time with them as well but then the
financial crisis hit and I happen to be
just sitting there at a place where I
could ask questions and so I start
asking questions and I was in this
really interesting place where I was
literally at a conference at SFI when I
think like the Dow dropped 800 points
900 points and a thousand points like
day after day after day which had the
consequence of getting a lot of
attention and I was able to watch the
story that was being told through MSNBC
and through official channels I was able
to ask the actual Nobel prize-winning
economists who just happened to be like
right there what's actually going on and
as they believed then witnessed the gap
between the official story what was
really happening and the fact the
economists had no idea there
even their underlying models were just
whack so I got interested and so I
started digging and I just more or less
followed my nose you know I tried to
read all the books on money theory for
example and David Graeber book by the
way is fantastic and blows a lot of
concepts particularly the legitimacy of
the economic discipline out of the water
and of course also about other things
like complexity economics but didn't you
know that did you know it didn't stop
there what you start getting into
complexity the first thing you learn is
that everything's connected everything
else so if you want to do economics you
also have to look at the interface
between economics and politics I think
yesterday we talked about the four layer
model that talks about the path you can
you can for example model finance
economics politics and cultures being
distinct layers that feed back into the
very complex fashion but that if you
have a financial crisis you can actually
allow that financial crisis to happen at
the finance level and while it will have
impacts at the economic level it may not
necessarily have any meaningful impact
at the political level
even strengthen the political level or
you can do what we did which was you can
actually more or less bail out well both
metaphorically and practically bail out
the financial level by spending cultural
currency meaning breaking people's
underlying trust at the political level
and then ultimately even at the cultural
level which is to say people's sense of
being part of the same cultural fabric
Greece for example I think has had a lot
of that then of course again watching
that in real time so again at a place of
being able to be front and center with
the unfurling of reality and by the way
having skin in the game my large pile of
money that I'd made by being a tech
entrepreneur became a smaller pile of
money as a result of the financial
crisis I wasn't with the red terminus
interest
I was not disinterested I was quite
interested in a bit pissed off to be
perfectly frank and I got even more
pissed off as I continued watched him
what was happening because it was to me
at least now increasingly obvious that
the choices that we were being made at
the level of how our collective choice
making worked let's say for example at
the level politics were bad like
actually bad like they would have
long-term negative consequences and just
kept on going deeper and then I found
myself in a situation where I had a
series of significant oh where I
would have conversations with people who
were really like the expert in some
particular domain of interest say for
example nuclear proliferation or the
concentration of estrogen in amphibians
like very narrow specific domains and I
had probably overpaid about a year a
series of conversations each one of
which was things are really terrible
like there's something going on that is
way bad like but nuclear proliferation
the likelihood that we will be able to
to keep the world from having a quite
significant bad nuclear event of the
next decade is very low like 5% like
sitting there was like the three experts
in the world on that question they're
all a lot not in their heads saying yeah
this is like they were this is
really a serious
and then it's taking literally one step
back and noticing that that fact does
not seem to propagate out of that room
and then beginning to you know get my
metamodel relationship between culture
and technology now just plugging more in
in a relationship between politics and
technology in between communications and
politics in between environmental and
between you the whole thing and
beginning to notice that I seem to be
one of the very few people who was
talking to all these different groups
and trying to see you know how the chain
fit together from beginning to end top
to bottom and how the thing everything
synthesized and what happens when you
turn thinking about changes in rainfall
and temperature impact on food with
populations and politics what impact is
migration have on political stability
what impact his political stability have
on financial stability like you know
watching the Cascade effects and
somewhere around I guess 2012 came to
the conclusion that the thing that we're
operating in whatever the container is
that keeps the world held in a somewhat
functioning system is end of life and
there's theoretical ways to describe
exactly why exactly what it is exactly
why and exactly what we might be able to
do about which by the way is very little
in the context of itself right so we've
reached the end of life of a deep
premise on how to go about being humans
together in relationship to the world
and we're seeing this come to fruition
everywhere by the way I mean everywhere
you can even literally describe
Hollywood blockbuster films in this
model and video games so ok so then the
next couple of years was given that just
get back to actuation so in a sense
making let's take what might we be able
to do and this gave rise to a project
that became called game B which some
people have heard about which is
actually kind of neat because they were
ultimately about 30 or 40 people who
were involved in that project and we
weren't able to get to where it needed
to get to in and of itself so you
dissolved the project in I think 2013 or
so maybe 2014
and the fact that the concepts have
propagated out is actually very
interesting reality but not vastly and
[Music]
means that kind of gets this more or
less where we are in the church as had
talked about it in the context of rowing
a boat so in the beginning let's say
you're trying to canoe so you have from
one oar and you have to have the effort
of getting the physical motion to put
into one the water and pulling it not
tipping over the boat so that's a a set
of functions a set of different kinds of
perception and actuation capacity share
to have some sensitivity to how your
weight is affecting the way to the boat
and how to buy higher arms and moving
the orange the water but as individual
as it as a body which is coherent it's a
relatively straightforward thing to do
and you can notice this when you go from
one order to you go from a canoe to a
rowboat but once you add the second war
it takes a little bit of time to figure
out how to get them all together but not
too long
you can become coherent you can bring
two oars into coherence you can take the
the sensitive sense sensing of muscle to
or feeling when they're in the water and
pulling it in the motion the boat you
integrate it integrating integrate it
and it pops you have an insight which to
say you bring into your by to the
wholeness of that you've integrated that
into a coherent whole
you can now actuate ruin the boat but
now you add another person into the boat
and notice that there's a significant
difference there that two people rowing
a boat is it hard a thing that you have
to use communication you have to
actually practice substantially more if
you get a sense an embodied sense and
feeling and say so you just wrote a
canoe it's a little bit easier the
person in the front the person in the
back you may even have official
divisions of labor the person in the
back is steering well the person in the
front is you know just throwing the
person in the back in charge like
there's a big bunch of stuff that has to
happen that enables two people to come
into coherence and you may be able to
scale that to say three people but at a
certain point you actually start seeing
a phase transition where I'm
particularly now so we switch it to
Rowan with two or so you've got three
people in the boat you really do have to
start doing division of labor to
maintain that you have to actually have
the guy
front I suppose who's yelling stroke
because otherwise the ability of the
individuals to stay coordinated to stay
perception linked to action in a fashion
that is acting as an integrated whole is
not up to snuff
but we as humans haven't got the
capacity to be able to maintain that
much complexity with our embodied since
or him without trying to simplify the
task so we do we simplify agency we
actually compressed the agency and the
perception and the actuation agency so
what happens is you now become a
instrument you no longer have full
agency over your choice making or your
perception you don't decide when to
stroke you just do it when told and if
everybody now is acting in that
actuation function and you and the
person up front is doing at least a
mediocre job of keeping a good rhythm
suddenly you're now coherent again and
able to go much much faster
hence the trireme you know the big guy
with the drums that's my vision I'm not
British so I don't have the Oxford
notion okay so that's a framework and
the reason why I want to roll out that
framework is that this this dynamic
between complex coherence your body
integrated as a whole and what I'm gonna
call complicated coherence which is this
relation of simplification and actuation
through some kind of structure is a big
part of the rollout of what I've come to
call game a which we might also call
civilization if you want to sort of
start at fifteen twenty thousand years
and up to ten years from now that story
and it's a story where just like moving
from one person to three people to seven
people and moving from one art of tours
is a story of an increase in the the
nature of the lived environment that are
structures of sense making and choice
making and actuation are endeavouring to
be coherent in into therefore give us
the capacity to operate in effectively
as a group
the blue church emerged in the context
of having to figure out how to navigate
all of these changes in generate
coherence how do we get all of these
people with these new capacities to be
able to make sense of the world in some
fashion that is able to then make
choices together and to act effectively
right that's the question and the blue
church developed to be the answer to
that question and so it developed the
ability to say for example use the
education system to establish an
embodied sense of vertical meritocratic
hierarchy the idea that some people are
better at others in knowing certain
kinds of things we can find them and
then we empower them to have
hierarchical Authority in the structure
that we're in and I should say this by
the way both formally and informally you
know the role of being in class is
teaching that whether the content of the
story of the of the class whatever the
 in the class is the experience of
the student is the teachers in charge
our job is just to listen and some of us
are smart and they get to be teachers or
in charge right that's kind of that's
the story of school it's very important
that first part that there's a
relationship between authority and
receptor that has a broadcast modality
so the blue church is very broadcast
across its entire mode so what I mean by
a broadcast of course is exemplified in
television which is to say that some
small number of people get to speak and
a very very large number of people get
to listen this is very different and
then say but we're doing right here and
it's it's symmetric well of course I'm
the one speaking in principle there's
nothing about this conversation that
couldn't be perfectly symmetric but in
television and any kind of broadcast
modality structurally that way so Walter
Cronkite tells the news and everybody
else watches it and there's a lot of
passivity there like my job is not to
perceive what's going on make sense of
it and then express it in the world my
job is to see the story that I'm being
and be able to then express that story
effectively in the society that I'm in
and I call this good sense the emergence
of good sense and you see an emerging
mesh of good sense you know who are the
authoritative speakers whether they're
NBC News or they're the New York Times
and there's a diversity of course
there's a variety of different
perspectives in the authoritative
frameworks the blue church recognizes
the necessity of having eyes and ears
but it also recognizes the necessity of
having coherence so there's a diversity
but there's a diversity within a
particular boundary and so when you show
up in society if you are speaking good
sense if your expressions are of the
sort that everybody else has broadly
been hearing or the authoritative
statements then you're showing up well
and if you aren't then you're showing up
poorly and you'll notice that I can you
begin to say things that are contour
narrative in a deep way even today much
less so now though than like 30 years
ago then you will notice an discomfort
people get uncomfortable viscerally
physically and you will notice that
discomfort of this we physically and
then you'll stop doing it and so there's
a nice policing mechanism it just at the
cocktail party set particularly in cases
like say New York Los Angeles Chicago
San Francisco or the the elite cachet is
the most important where the choice of
social success is the choice between
being elevated in the hierarchy or not
then good sense becomes even more
selfless and so a good opinion it's very
good opinion thank you thank you good
opinion and it's actually interesting to
make that distinction because the effort
of the blue church is actually provide
good sense and what is the truth about
the war in Vietnam but of course what it
currently produces good opinion what is
our perspective and then make sure
everybody more or less has that because
then you can actually have choices you
can actually make choices together if we
all more or less agree this is the
nature of reality and we more or less
agree that these kinds of actions will
lead to effective results then where
we're rowing the boat to the coxswains
yeah we're pushing we have a menu that
has six buttons pick which button you'd
like to push you have choice no question
but it's in a constraint
it's within a boundary condition that
works and then what happens is when you
push the button it actuates a whole lot
of stuff we've all decided that we're
going to have a war on poverty so we
turned the dial on the world war 2 era
bureaucratic machinery that took us to
the moon that built the interstate
highway system and we say ok go out and
point that engine at poverty we're gonna
start building the welfare state go
right and that's what they did and they
sometimes it worked you pointed it at
the moon it goes to the moon imported
poverty and it didn't work wonderfully
created a mess and that tells us a lot
by the way so I guess kind of that's
that like that's the blue church and
there's an in treatment because this
structure has Harvard is kind of at the
top and then you have the rest of the
Ivy League and Oxford and Cambridge I'm
sad to say that the UK lost their
position the Victorian synthesis of the
UK centric the blue church was a
us-centric
global sense making system and it was
broadly global of course through the
first three quarters there was the
Eastern Bloc that was doing their own
thing but starting in the late 80s
totally global and for a little bit of
time that in fact actually functionally
global when that period from 88 to maybe
1999 was a period where the blue church
was a true hegemon and was doing stuff
well constitutes the blue church he
mentioned Harvard but it could just a
sketch out who's part of it who who has
hierarchy in the blue church I think
it's the question you're asking who is
thought of Harvard Ivy League's
universities some of the sort of bigger
think tanks the RAND Corporation
significant governmental entities like
the Department of Defense NASA the CIA
in different domains large corporations
in GM G back in the day and that was
like when it's good for General Motors
is good for America it's a very blue
church kind of concept gifted to the
tech sector for a little bit Microsoft
and Apple and that kind of a thing had a
little bit of cachet some of the media
structures like the New York Times The
Washington Post really called the paper
occurred the more formal authoritative
broadcast television programs NBC ABC
CBS CNN for a while like in the heyday
by the way just to add the Federal
Reserve is a big one
the IMF is a big one as part of the blue
church the Council on Foreign Relations
is a big one and by the way this is just
like real things like the CFR is
something that was started in the 1930s
it's a bunch of smart people in New York
thought hey if we get together we can
make things happen that are better than
the then if we don't and just kind of
iterate on that and that kind of upped
the cocktail party set but there's a
feedback loop remember I mentioned that
actually did some case studies I
actually just went to places where fancy
rich people hung out mostly Aspen and
nekker
and other places like Hollywood and what
I managed to lose my first person
experience was that there is absolutely
for sure an elite conspiracy which is
just they all kind of hang out in the
same place in like each other but it has
a characteristic you know if three four
people one of whom happens to be in
charge of Deutsche Telekom one of them
happens to be in charge of British
Telecom one of them happens to be in
charge of a global investment bank one
of whom happens to be a successful
entrepreneur who just is looking for
something to do and they're hanging out
at a dinner table in Aspen and they just
start shooting the they'd have a
lot to talk about because there's only
certain things that they actually do
which is business and politics but
mostly business so they start talking
about business and it turns out that if
there's an opportunity for Deutsche
Telekom and British Telecom to sell
there they're so mobile divisions into a
new company that the bank will fund and
this guy will run you'd be surprised how
rapidly that gets surfaced and
identified as a thing to do now growing
up in the Texas Hill Country I wasn't
having this kind of conversations and I
think most people don't so that's an
example that that's an artifact that
emerges out of the notion of the blue
church that once you have a vertical
hierarchy and then by definition you
have a finite amount of time you get
clusters of these people who are hanging
together and then by the way a lot of
that human complexity creeps back in
they start having clubs cliques they
start caring about each other and that's
what you're doing a lot of groupthink
that
opinion stress to really solidify and
they become blind to what's not within
that a good opinion there's very good
reasons to believe that the blue church
is done we mean that it's in the
senescence stage and senescence has a
characteristic where when you move into
this in essence stage you tend to go
downhill pretty quickly so I'm expecting
to see the blue church sort of
increasingly obviously failing and
increasingly obviously losing the
habitual or unconscious or unspoken
position of being authoritative and
being just reality more and more people
are going to be going ah that's a thing
that's not the whole thing
it's a thing and it's kind of doing
something and maybe parts of it are
still good but it's not the whole thing
and it seems to be increasingly
up and in the meantime looking around
going okay now what that's the key I run
our in a space we're in that space
between nineteen eighteen and nineteen
forty five or in the space between 1077
BC and 800 BC where there's a gap
between a coherent collective
intelligence is a coherent structure of
being able to respond as a whole to
what's happening and I knew it not an
older Noonan and they're fading so we're
witnessing that transition were in the
middle of it and a lot of the phenomenon
that was experiencing over the past what
fifteen years or so or of that sort
starting around 2000 ish particularly
accelerating you can explain a lot of
the things that happened it seemed very
inexplicable like brexit and Trump using
this model the partly it's about novelty
building up behind the blue church and
then exploding because it had nowhere to
to go well what we're it has to do with
gaps in the blue church so blind spots
and actuation gaps that's one side so it
can't do the things that it thinks it
can do and it doesn't perceive there's
lots of things that can't perceive kind
of willfully actually and then on the
flip side the
rapid evolutionary development of
capacity in what I'm calling the red
religion or the decentralized collective
intelligence just to make it very clear
it's not the red religions just happens
to be an instantiation of a way of
solving the problem so there's a
developmental curve this idea of rate
and state is pretty good here so blue
church state of sense making choice
making actuation high rate down it's
getting less effective over time
decentralized collective intelligence
state low rate high so there's going to
be a crossover point what we see is on
occasion we'll see a breakthrough where
this new thing has reached a point of
criticality where it's capacities are
now good enough to show up is actually
effective in the visceral world visa vie
the fading legacy and I think now it's
actually becoming a rope to the
commonplace we kind of see the the
struggle between blue church normative
good opinion and new structures of sense
making and new structures of meaning
making a new church structures of how
those are beginning to try to cohere
into actually sovereign collective
intelligences that are able to do the
whole the whole thing but we're a bit of
the way is there for sure it'll take
certainly single-digit years and
possibly with double-digit years for the
whole thing to come together to a point
where it's transition formally
we're talking about an ocean where
broadcast is faced with a couple of
different problems and we're talking
about it both from the outside and with
us three domains so from one perspective
broadcast has limitations in its
capacity to perceive and respond to
reality just it's pretty obvious but if
you think about what's happening is
every layer of the hierarchy has to
compress the information you know if you
were out in the field seeing what's
going on with say the rain forest
insects and you're porting it up to
somebody who's at a think-tank who's
reporting it up to a policy maker who's
porting it up to a legislative decision
maker they're having to simplify a lot
to go up the chain right so you're
losing enormous amount of information
which means that you can do so much it's
kind of like if you imagine a was like
in the 80s they had those glass spheres
if you touch some lightning bolt to
touch your fingers so the sphere is the
whole thing and the broadcast modality
is one of those lightning bolts so it
kind of like maneuvers around the sphere
but it can only handle that much and
it's not a lot and that's just the
nature of the structure like just the
structure that has that kind of geometry
to it can only perceive a certain
fraction from the bottom to the top and
then by the way the same thing happens
at the way down the directives that are
given from the top have to be they have
to be relatively simple because as they
go down there's a an expansion of scope
which increases the ads basically noise
because the new person then below has to
add a whole bunch of specificity to it
to be done and it gives it gets handed
down you get more and more noise and so
the this means at the top the directors
that come down have to be really broad
and simple and at the bottom the
divergence between actually happens out
in the world what was intended to the
top is actually quite large and so
you've got a lack of elegance and
precision and you get a compression
going up and so this means that it has
certain capacities it can actually get
us to the moon turns out that's a domain
that's well within the scope of what it
can do
it cannot solve Clement . period and
there's a lot of other things that can't
solve so that's one boundary condition
the other boundary condition is to this
transition between
broadcast in digital which is happening
after the blue church gave us digital we
moved from an analogue world to a
digital world during its period of being
in charge
and when I say digital here I want to
say very specifically what I mean is
Network symmetric decentralized so it's
a the fact that being digital is
important it's actually very very
important but it's not the thing that
I'm focusing on right here I'm comparing
broadcast to this network decentralized
not analog to digital by the way both
are true but we're just gonna focus at
the network to broadcast peace so what
happens is is that a network
intelligence a network system for sense
making and choice making is different
full-stop let's just start there it's
just different and it has different
capacities has different ability to take
information from the edge process and
make choices and disseminate actuation
back out to the edge and it's more
available to solve all the problems that
we're dealing with it's a kind of
collective intelligence topology that is
fundamentally more available to being
able to address complex systems problems
how our brain works for example but to
use a kind of a developmental metaphor
if the blue church is a really really
sophisticated developed and mature aging
boxer the new digital collective
sense-making is a four-year-old all
right so he's got good genes you could
see he's gonna be good when he gets
strong and gets bigger maybe when he's
14 he'll be able to punch this guy out
but in the meantime he's not for it oh
but in the meantime it's not really a
match if you look at it and say hey wait
it in terms of lifting heavy weights the
blue church is gonna win in terms of
being able to answer a lot of questions
at least appear to be able to answer a
lot of questions the blue church looks
like it's quite robust if you take a
look at the emerging decentralized
collective intelligence that's
getting to happen on the Internet it
mostly looks like gaps they mostly looks
like it's doing stuff in the gaps that
are being left behind by the bleachers
just look like they can do anything
holistic and when it's endeavor to do
something holistic likes to the queue
and on phenomenon it looks insane in any
kind of its and if you've ever seen an
absolute newborn baby in its body it's
insane
his limbs are flailing wildly its heads
rolling around so eyes are rolling in
his head because it hasn't figured how
to wire itself up yet that's what's
happening in the network collective
intelligence so there's a gap there's a
transition
we talked about discernment and how
that's a key skill in decentralized
media compared to broadcast media oh
absolutely so so now the the
conversation which i think is really
nice is turning to now what and how so
the answer now what is decentralized
active intelligence great how how do we
do that
so I said first step is know that you
don't know know that most of your habits
are blue church habits in fact most your
habit even gamej habits but let's just
leave it up to church right now and
certainly everything you've been
formerly taught and everything you've
learned from formal institutions and
almost all those are gonna be wrong so
you have to actually step into a pretty
child's mind place and as a rule of
thumb go very slowly and don't try to
come to doing come to action very
quickly step by step you have to learn
whether you have to stand before you
walk you have to walk before you run and
this is very much developmental so
within that context what are some of the
core capacities that are part of our
development of stage for us to actually
be able to move this decentralized
collective intelligence forward and one
of the core capacities discernment and I
will distinguish discernment from say
judgment or good opinion so and oh and
here oh I'd like to actually invoke the
distinction between thinking and
simulated thinking so let me just do
that distinction really quickly and then
come back to discernment so if we
remember that a lot of the way of
thinking about the fundamental structure
of game a and in this case specifically
the structure of the blue church is
computational in nature there's a schema
of information which is simply true and
your job is to simply learn it as a
schema like know the map and to be able
to repeat it back with fidelity and if
they're if-then statement
to be able to execute on identifying
what is the if what's the pattern that
is present and then executed on the then
so if I say read press the red button
your job is to be able to know that I
said red and then to press the red
button
that's a computational function
bureaucratic game a and when I'm in that
mode there's a optimization for being
able to do that which is to be able to
do so quickly and with fidelity I want
to become a really good computer I want
to be able to recognize do pattern
recognition against the patterns that
are available very rapidly and never get
it wrong and then I want to be able to
output the appropriate output very
rapidly and with high fidelity I mean if
you ever played the game where you did
math challenges where a kid would stand
up the kid next him would stand up the
teacher would sure like four times four
and whoever said the answer right got to
move it's called around the world that
is this precisely right your job is to
know your math tables down pat to be
able to see four by four before the
other kid is even figured out what the
board says you're saying eight that is a
simulated intelligence optimization
function and then this other side
thinking from similar to thinking -
thinking thinking is a very different
gig thinking is well it's so different I
have to actually slow down to even begin
to articulate it for example we
absolutely have no idea what's going on
thinking is helpful in fact it's
necessary it's what you do you have to
be able to perceive a lot I perceive
subtly and multimodal II like to be able
to use your eyes and ears and anything
else you happen to have as much as
possible
and you want it to be very available to
novelty which means you don't want to
close where you're perceiving on
something that you think you think it is
you don't want to impose a structure
from your framework what is real so if
you're walking through the woods and you
hear something in the bushes
if you imagine it's a horrible monster
and you panic you're engaging in
simulated thinking if instead you stop
walking and you listen and look and you
don't have any preconceived notion of
what it what it is you know exactly you
know which is that I heard something and
no more and you tune yourself to just
become increasingly capable of
perceiving reality as fully as possible
and then as that reality reveals itself
in clarity making use of that and
nothing more I have just seen a flash of
orange and I haven't seen a tiger I just
jumped to a conclusion that imposed
sense-making on reality I just saw a
flash of orange okay what else oh it's
up there oh I also heard chirping oh
it's a to camp right you slow down and
allow the perception to really settle in
and you allow your mind to even be quite
open and fluid you're in a flow state to
use that language the closer you are to
a flow state and the more you were able
to engage in insight which is to say not
be in the box but actually be perceiving
reality with a lot of fluidity to it
that's real thinking okay and so
discernment is the the the use of
sensing in very a vey subtle way a
nuance and subtlety and a broad net of
sense particularly like your whole
instrument noticing for example that you
actually do have a lot going on you're
not just eyes and ears you're several
billion years of biological evolution
that had to survive in the
wilderness using whatever it had and
didn't throw out the good stuff
[Music]
as you talked about this disciplines
concept of discerning the context of
decentralized collective intelligence so
in in centralized broadcast for example
collective intelligence
it is mostly judgment you know I have to
be able to measure good opinion and say
I'd be able to know hierarchical
relationships I have to be able to
output the appropriate output within the
very narrow boundaries of what I'm
allowed I have a certain amount of
artfulness that I can actually apply to
the equation but it's mostly fitting it
in the box and then popping up to the
right place in decentralize collective
intelligence what ends up happening is
there's a signal-to-noise dynamic as
things move through notes so if you
receive something from a note from from
me for example I'm telling you this is
actually here we are I'm telling you
something I'm telling you something if
you listen to what I'm saying and in
yourself are able to find that part of
what I am saying that feels true feels
right does not kick off emotions of no
greed or fight or flight or lust or a
bit feels there's a quality to it you've
just you've built that quality with your
level of capacity where you're like I
don't understand exactly what is being
said here and most of it seems like it's
kind of weird or noisier cringe-worthy
but there's a thread here that feels
very strong I'm gonna separate that out
and now I'm going to skillfully express
it back out when you actually have now
is a positive feedback loop filtering
system if every node is doing that and
by the way those two recursion if every
node is primarily focused initially on
building us discernment and skillfulness
in doing this process alright then what
ends up happening is the network is
 amazing
and making sense of subtlety alright you
can take the perception these subtle
broad implicit pattern recognizers that
were
so gifted with and grabbed very vague
and weird not quite knowing what's going
on thing put it into the system and
after a couple of turns it's actually
reified to a very crisp clarity that can
be shared so that's what we're doing
because we're trying to accomplish it's
that process and you notice how much of
a burden is placed on the individual now
it's not like the broadcast modality
where most of your agency is limited to
a very narrow band and you're really
relying on the causal structure that
you're embedded in to do almost all the
work in the decentralized collective
intelligence for to actually work almost
all of the agency is actually on the
individuals you have to have really
really effective responsible individuals
and by responsible I mean is they're
they're able to respond to the
environment in the way that I'm talking
about they're not reacting they're not
shifting to a causal domain they're not
saying what they're supposed to say or
rejecting because they're supposed to
reject they're listening and refining
and doing the work of collaboration
think about collaboration how
collaboration works you and I are
collaborating on a song if we're
partners we're really collaborating I'm
gonna be like ah and I just had this
crazy sense and I'd like to play it
terrible sound but you're listening very
closely right and you're good at it
you're good at listening very closely
and you're like you know what is it like
this and you play it back and what you
play back is actually closer to what I'm
feeling like oh yes more like that more
like that and then like okay and then
this but now I'm actually little bit
better I because it's more clearing me
because what you did was you refine it
and expressed it back to me with it I
couldn't perceive myself but once I saw
it pop that's insight you just gave me
an insight collaboratively collaborative
insight so now I take a night out put
something back to you and now you're
like oh yeah I totally get it and then
you drop into it and now we're now a
collective intelligence coherence is now
happening in the flu and collaboration
between us and the things that can be
produced are vastly more than what
either one of us could have done
separately now of course this requires
that you have developed a certain level
of discernment I've developed a certain
level of discernment we're in a
relationship that allows us to actually
use that and we can talk about that
means what the requirements are and
we've also built a certain level of
skillfulness and expression so that I'm
not creating noise and expressing it I'm
actually making it more signal when I
express it more real or true I'm
increasing the truth of the expression
of the quality so it's a pretty like I
think pretty concrete example that many
people might be able to grasp and the
idea is that that's what we're doing
we're here trying to figure out how to
become real collaborators at scale and
well we're getting better at it we're
actually learning it like we're noticing
for example that our most natural
humaneness has a lot of capability to
separate from non
authenticity from artifice and
authenticity can at least feel true I
mean I feel good
artifice can do a really good job of
feeling good but art but authenticity
can feel true even when it's kind of a
clusterfuck or even was not done
exquisitely particularly it's hard if it
feels really true and authentic there's
something in there that your basic like
deep humanist is like all right I can
work with that where do we go from here
and by the way I'm interested and by the
with this openness hey you know we're
just figuring this out I'm trying what
do you got and you send it back to me
symmetrically because we're available
and I listen and I hear you then we've
actually created a relationship that has
that feeling of trust in the
relationship which then creates an open
channel to do more of it now of course
we're late we're a limited
we're limited by our discernment so
we're always going to have to be doing
work on improving the quality of our
discernment in all the modalities that
happen to be happening and we are really
limited by our capacity to express we
have to get better and better being able
to express with clarity with elegance
and width I want to say it's fidelity
meaning we don't want to put stuff in it
that doesn't belong in it I want to say
something that there's also subtly
manipulative I just gotta tell the truth
pure truth two degrees in which I can
I'm gonna it up but at least I'm
not it up with stuff that
doesn't need to be there at all so I'm
just expressing it and what happens
about that is very good news
and it's extremely powerful process and
the process of collaboration that's
available now because we're all
connected to each other is unprecedented
and that has the capacity to solve all
the problems for dealing with that kind
of a decentralized collective
intelligence with high discerning
individuals with it clearly expressing
individuals who are non ego eclis
meaning they are not adding subtly or
intentionally their own into the
signal but are actually simply
endeavoring to share what is
authentically perceived by them to
actually feel true back out with quality
is in comprehensive ly capable of making
sense and by the way making choices and
doing things so much so that it's sort
of absurd that we just don't go there
and you want flying cars and going to
the Stars this will get you there it'll
solve everything the amount of bandwidth
is available inside that domain is
enormous the problem of course is that
it's hard at an individual level and
it's counter-current and we've been
trained for generations to do the exact
opposite we've been training for many
many many many generations to insert
egoic content in between everything that
we do we've been changed for several
generations to be simulating thinking
not thinking and so able to relearn all
that stuff and we have to be doing it
here first each individual has to be
able to take the responsibility and then
learn to trust their own discernment in
relationship you know if I'm in
relationship with you and you are in
fact trying to manipulate me I have to
be in this really weird widely
vulnerable state of actually listening
but then noticing in myself that is a
feeling this little off and then being
able to respond to that as well ideally
to call it out I do this is a way for me
to exquisitely invite you in to a higher
level of integrity in yourself in
relationship but also perhaps sometimes
just to be able to be able to make it
safe for myself and for others that's it
like that's the practice as far as I'm
concerned that is the thing that
moreless everybody should be doing right
now full time and everybody who's good
at it should be doing it
more like it should show up like if you
were if you are good at it other people
should be noticing that you're good at
it and one of the things that they
should be doing is notice sharing that
fact so that the collective intelligence
begins the process of being able to
point its attention away from say
simulation and artifice and towards
truth and towards capacity-building and
growth as opposed to exploitation and
plunder and by definition if you're
attending to people who are helping you
build capacity you're building capacity
so these people are gonna do better so
it's actually a good choice for everyone
it is a better choice for everyone to be
endeavoring to play this new game and
the more people who are playing it
better the more obvious that is because
the more actual visceral capacity is
showing up over here and there's a rate
equation that's exponential by the way
that once it starts to hit is stretched
to achieve criticality escape velocity
and just blows past this old structure
very rapidly no so there we are
I mean that metaphor of a 4 year old
where this is if you want to play
basketball you have an opportunity to
draft LeBron James he's four it'll take
a while before he's able to actually
take you to the NBA championship but the
opportunity exists to have him on your
team right now by the way and Michael
Jordan
they're all there they're just on the
playground therefore they're not that
good right now but in a little while
they're gonna be amazing and maybe even
at 12 like if you imagine five of the
greatest NBA players of all time playing
as 12 year olds might actually be a
pretty freakin good team
just kind of that's it that's the story
[Music]
you