welcome to future thinkers podcast
episode number 57 one of our favorite
guests Daniel rotten burger from neuro
hacker collective is back on the show
today Daniel is talking about a concept
which she calls the generator functions
of existential risks so these are the
deep causes from which the existential
risks we face today come from this
interview is in three parts that should
be listened to in chronological order to
get the full understanding of the
concept in part one Daniel explains what
generator functions of existential risks
are and how they affect the world in
part two and three he elaborates on the
generator functions through a few
different lenses and reflects on what we
need to do to solve these underlying
issues to listen to all three parts and
get all the links in show notes go to
future thinkers org slash fifty seven
one quick announcement before we get
into the show we are hiring a social
media manager for future thinkers and
our other podcast krypter radio if you
or somebody else you know might be
interested in this position go to future
thinkers dot org slash social to find
out all the info this episode is brought
to you by qualia a premium nootropic
supplement that helps support mental
performance and brain health it's
specifically designed to promote focus
support energy mental clarity mood
memory and creativity UV and i have both
used it in the past we really like it
and we actually met the founders and
interviewed them on future thinkers and
you can check out those interviews
they're one of our favorites at future
thinkers org slash Daniel and future
thinkers org slash Jordan they've got a
new formula up called quality of mind
it's got more natural ingredients and
you can get it at future thinkers org
slash brain hack and you can get 10% off
if you use the code future all right
let's get into the show
welcome to future thinkers org a podcast
about the evolution of technology
society and consciousness I'm Mike
Gilliland and I'm UV Ivanova if you new
to the show and you'd like a list of our
top episodes and resources go to future
thinkers that org slash start and if you
like our podcasts leave us a rating and
a review on iTunes and elsewhere
it really helps others find the show and
we really appreciate it in one of our
previous episodes with you we spoke
about how to assess and prevent
existential risks and we got a lot of
positive feedback on that episode people
really loved it and I know you've spent
a lot of time thinking about the subject
since then and you've refined your
position so I wanted to ask you what is
your current thinking on existential
risks and how to deal with them alright
great very happy to be back with both of
you
it's valuable for us to kind of go up a
level when we're thinking about risks
existential or just any kind of
catastrophic risk it's not just a weird
fetish topic and it's not just purely
there is some risk and we want to
survive the deeper topic you know in
future thinkers you guys are looking
here at the future of economy and the
future of sense of making the future of
technology the future of healthcare the
future of ethics the future of lots of
things right and in the presence of
exponential technology that makes
possible changing things that we're
never possible to change before what is
the guiding basis for how we utilize
that technological power well and make
good choices
in the presence of that we've always had
a sense that human nature is a certain
thing fix can genetically or at whatever
level fix and then we're looking at good
behavior you know within that framework
and as soon as we're at the level of
genetic engineering humans as a real at
least thought experiments could be a
real possible technology we could work
to genetically engineer all people to be
sociopathic hyper computers who didn't
feel badly about winning at win-lose
games at all and were optimized for it
we could work to chip our brains into a
eyes that could take us even further in
that direction of being able to win
those games we could engineer aggression
out of ourselves completely and so then
we start to say like wow those are
really different realities what do we
want well we want to win the game why do
we want to win there's an assumed game
that we're playing against whomever
right that some ways some in group is
playing against them out group and
whether it's US versus Russia versus
China or it's you know whatever in-group
out-group dynamic we say well what
happens when you keep playing that
in-group out-group game forever
well those games have always caused harm
they have a narrow set of metrics that
define a win and everything outside of
those metrics is externality so when
we're playing a win-lose game whether
it's personal in person or team on team
and whether the team is a tribe or a
country or a company or a race or
whatever it is right the in-group
competing against an out group for some
definition of a win we're directly
seeking to harm each other right - cause
the lose to each other and we're also
indirectly causing harm to the Commons
which is we're competing for the
extraction of scarce resource we are
externalizing cost pollution whatever it
is to the Commons if we're having if
we're competing militarily there's a
harm that comes from warfare right we're
polluting the information ecology
through disinformation to be able to
maintain the strategic competitive
advantage of some information we have so
all the risk games necessarily cause
harm so if you keep increasing your harm
causing capacity with technology and
technology that makes better technology
it makes better technology so
exponentially exponential harm causing
eventually taps out right eventually it
exceeds the capacity of the playing
field to handle and the level of harm is
no longer viable and it's an important
thing to think about that when we think
about the risks of weaponized drones or
CRISPR bio warfare or any of the like
really dreadful things that are very new
technologies that we could never do
before
they're not really different in
fundamental type than the things that
have always sucked like when we first
came out with catapults versus not
having those or cannons or whatever it
is they're just a lot more powerful of
the things that have always sucked and
but it's important to get that we have
been murdering other people in mass and
this thing called war is a reasonable
way to do
with a difference were to get ahead for
a long time for the whole history of the
thing we call civilization and we have
been Unruh new ibly you know plants out
of the ground in terms of agriculture
cutting trees or whatever in ways that
lead to desertification for thousands of
years all the early civilizations that
don't exist anymore don't exist anymore
because they actually led to their own
self-determination really critical ways
so it's not like war an environmental
destruction and etc is a new topic it
just if a Mayans fell or the Byzantine
or the Mesopotamian or the Roman even
the Roman Empire fell wasn't everything
there was a lot but it wasn't everything
but when you have the in-group out-group
dynamics keep getting larger tribe two
groups of tribes 2 villages fiefdom
Kingdom nation state global economic
trading bloc so as to be able to compete
with a larger team that you know keeps
having the incentives to do those with
larger weaponry extraction tech
externalization text narrative tech
information this information tech you
get to a point where you have like we
have today
it completely globally interconnected
supply chain and globally interconnected
civilization dynamics because of scale
where the collapse ends up being really
collapsed of everything and the level of
warfare possible can actually make a non
habitable biosphere right can actually
not just be catastrophic for a local
people which previous wars always were a
catastrophic for people and so yet that
rival risk games have always caused
behaviors of humans that have sucked but
exponential stock is existential as an
important way of thinking of it and that
means that we have to be different than
we have ever been in the history of the
thing we call civilization to simply not
extinct ourselves because the way we
have always been has been a smaller
scale of the same thing at this scale is
now extinction airing that's a big deal
because it means that the solutions
we're looking for do not look like
previous best practices because those
were practices at how to win win lose
games we're winning at win lose games is
now the Omni lose-lose generator right
it is now the thing that we can't keep
doing so we don't like to think this
deeply about things we like to take
whatever things have been like the good
best practices and figure
how to like iterate a tiny bit and run
with those things except the entire tool
set of best practices we have are
actually why we're at the brink of a
gazillion different X risk scenarios
that are the result of using those tool
sets and so words like capitalism and
science and technology and democracy are
like our favorite words because they
give us a lot of redshift they did they
also created a heap of problems and
problems are now catastrophic in scale
where the solutions need to be new stuff
now people freaked out because if you
say something other than capitalism they
think that you mean communism and you
want to take their stuff and have the
state force everyone to do shitty jobs
and if you say something of the
democracy again it's assumed that it's
gonna be like some kind of fascists
terrible thing and something other than
science means I could rest with religion
no I want to be very clear that I'm not
proposing systems that suck worse than
the current systems we have I'm
proposing deeper level of insights and
deeper level of what we would actually
call innovation and novelty then have
been on the table so far so for instance
democracy you know when Churchill said
democracy is the single worst form of
governance ever created
save for all the other forms he was
saying something very very deep which is
democracy is the best form of government
we've ever created and it's
terrible but all the other ones are even
worse because the idea of government or
governance is this really tricky thing
where we're trying to get lots of
different humans to cooperate or agree
or make choices together and like we
just suck at that and he was admitting
something very important and true and
Jefferson said similar things which is
we were able to get a lot of people to
care about each other to see through
each other's perspective to make
agreements if it's a tiny number of
people and this was tribes the history
of tribes hence why they kept out at a
very small size was above the size at
which you could care about everybody
know about what was going on for
everybody factored their insights share
the same based reality where if you
heard anyone you were directly hurting
someone that you lived with loved and
cared about as soon as you start getting
to a size where you can hurt people
without knowing it anonymously through
some supply chain action or voting on
something whatever it starts to become a
totally different reality right
anonymous people when we're willing to
give up some freedoms for people we
to depend on and care about and have
this close bonding with so but as soon
as we get to larger than tribe dynamics
we have had a real hard time doing that
in any way that doesn't disenfranchise
lots of people we have democracy it says
okay there's no way everybody's gonna
agree on anything but we have to be able
to move forward and decide if we make a
road or not to go to war and not or
whatever it is right
so let's come up with a proposition or
something to do and let's at least see
that more people like it than don't like
it at least at least it seems to
represent the majority of thinking that
seems like a reasonable idea and whether
we have a representative or not or it's
a 67 percent majority or 51 percent or a
voting currency they're all different
versions but basically of the same idea
let me explain something about how bad
the idea actually is the catastrophic
problems that it creates for democracy
will stop being like this really
wonderful word and it doesn't mean we
don't give it it to do for the beautiful
place that is served in history it's
just it is a place that is in the
rearview mirror in terms of if it's
continues in the forefront we actually
can't navigate it's not an adequate tool
for the types of issues we need to
navigate and again remember I'm not
going to propose any other system ever
proposed proposed the things that don't
even sound like governance but that
sound like a different method of
individual and collective sense making
and choice making but Mockridge is a
process where somebody or somebodies
make a proposition of something right
we're gonna build the bridge this way or
go to war whatever it is and they make a
proposition to benefit something that
they're aware of that they care about
but they're not aware of everything and
they don't care about everything that's
connected equally so other people
realize hey the thing that you want to
do is gonna stuff up that I care
about that bridge that you want to build
so that you can get across the river
without driving all the way around is
gonna kill all the owl's in this area
and mess up some fisheries and I care
about that that was in the fisheries and
other people are like you and the
environmental fishery stuff like we need
to get to work and what you have now is
a basis where if the proposition goes
through it will benefit some things than
harm other things and if it doesn't go
through the thing that would have been
benefited now isn't benefited but the
thing that would have been harmed now
isn't harmed and so you will get an in
group of people that care about the one
set more who then banned against the out
group of the people who care about the
other thing
this will always Drive polarization and
eventually the polarization becomes
radicalization and we didn't even try in
the process to figure out what a good
proposition they might do a better job
of meeting everybody's needs was we
didn't even try and do a context map of
what are all the interconnected issues
here what would a good design that
everybody might like look like and can
we even try to find a synergistic
satisfy that's not even part of the
conversation right maybe rather than
make the bridge there we could make the
bridge a slightly different area and
there's no owls there maybe we can move
boughs maybe we can use pontoon boats
maybe we don't even need to make a
bridge because all the transportation go
back and forth is for one company and we
can just move the company's headquarters
maybe but the sense making to inform the
choice making is not a part of the
governance process so if I'm making
choices blind or mostly blind based on a
tiny part of the optics then other
people who have other optics are like
wait that's not a good choice and right
now we both know that if one eye shows
something but my other eye shows
something else I want to pay attention
to both eyes I don't want them in a game
theoretic relationship with each other
right they do parallax and give me depth
perception and my eyes and my ears don't
want to make each other the same they
actually really want to do different
functions but I also want to pay
attention to each other because if I
hear something and I think that it was
over there I'm gonna go away from it but
my eyes tell me it's actually somewhere
else like I want to pay attention to all
of my sense making so my brain is doing
is really interesting process of taking
all of this different sensory
information putting it together and
trying to pay attention all of it to
make a choice that's informed by all
that sends me we have never been able to
think about governance processes like
this where we start with how would a
group of people that are in our
affecting each other that are in or
affecting within a particular context as
sense-making nodes be able to share
their sense making in a way that could
create parallax it could actually
synthesize into a picture that could
create design criteria of what is
actually meaningful good desired etc by
everybody that could work towards
progressively better synergistic
satisfiers that are based less on theory
of trade-offs that will always create
some benefit at some harm which will
lead to some in groups fighting somehow
groups
to increase seating a power on both
sides that will eventually turn into a
catastrophic self terminating scenario
and you know when we look at it we see
that this type of scenario has always
led to left/right polarization davinci
becomes radicalization that ends in war
to stabilize but you can't keep having
war with exponential tech we're
non-state actors have existential level
tech you just can't keep doing that and
so the thing that we've always done we
can't ever do anymore right like this is
a big deal but we also are able to think
about how do brains put the information
from eyes and ears together how do a
bunch of neurons come together a neural
networks to make sense in a way that
none of them individually do can we out
of 50 trillion cells as autonomous
entities operate in your body in a way
that is both good for them as
individuals and good for the whole
simultaneously where they are neither
operating at their own benefit at the
expense of the ones that they depend on
nor are they damaging themselves for the
other like they are really in a kind of
optimized symbiosis because the system
depends on them and they depend on the
system and that means that they depend
on each other and the system in etc can
we start to study these things in a
different way that gives us novel
insights into how to be able to have
higher-level organization collective
intelligence collective adaptive
capacity collective sense making
actuation capacity and the answer is yes
we can and we can see that that's not
the thing that we've called democracy
right the thing that we've called
democracy some process of a proposition
based on some very limited sense making
with some majority that is always going
to lead to polarization that's gonna
lead to the group that doesn't get it
feeling disenfranchised and then having
antipathy against the group as a whole
and then you know the warfare that
occurs between them of whatever kind
with our info warfare or actual warfare
and so the reason I bring this up is
because like democracy was great
compared to just like a terrible fascist
dictator right but it definitely is not
adequate to the complexity of the
problems we have to solve nor can we
continue to handle the kinds of
polarization and problematic dynamics
that inexorably creates the same is true
with capitalism the same is true with
the thing that we call a science and
tack which is a probably the hardest one
I'll get to that one last
so the thing that we call capitalism we
all know the positive story there that
it in cents people being self
responsible and being industrious and
seeking to bring better products and
services to the market at a better value
and those who do will get ahead and they
should get ahead because they're gonna
be good stewards of resource because
they got to resource by bringing
products and services at a value that
people cared about and etc like we know
that that story right there's some truth
to it like there was some twisted
democracy story and it served
evolutionary relevance and it most
certainly can't take us the next set of
steps so you know for instance the thing
that we call money and ownership you can
actually think of it related to
governance as a type of choice making
process if we don't think about deeply
enough the nature of what these types of
structures are if I have a bunch of
money it means I have concentrated
choice making capacity because I can now
want to make a choice that I can extend
through a bunch of employees right I can
have a bunch of them working aligned
with my sense making on my behalf to
increase my actuator capacity or I can
get physical resources to be able to
build something that extends my actuator
capacity and so we recognize Oh a system
that ends up determining who has
resource and then the resource ends up
being a way that some people are
actually directing the choice making of
other people is a choice making system
and then we say well is that your shitty
choice making system because the idea
that those who have the money are better
choice makers for the whole is just
silly right like it's just really silly
even if someone did bring good products
or services to market effectively that
doesn't mean they're kids who inherited
it and it doesn't mean that I can't make
money by extraction rather than
production that is net debasing the
environment and it doesn't mean that I
didn't externalized I figured out how to
externalize more harm and cost to the
Commons than somebody else did which
drove my margins up so I got more of it
and I didn't mean that I didn't do war
profiteering right and so we search
whereas okay well that's just actually a
shitty choice making system so we
stopped even thinking about what is the
future of economics in the future of
governance because the words are so
loaded that we just can't help ourselves
but boot bad concepts when we think
think of those words so we started
thinking about all right
as humans are making choices
individually and in groups based on
information that we have towards some
things that we value and hope to have
happen right so how do we get better on
value frameworks what we really seek to
benefit how do we get better on our
sense making processes and how do we get
better on their choice making processes
and what is the future of individual and
collective value framework sense making
choice making processes and that ends up
being what obsoletes the things we call
economics and governance now now we come
back to capitalism for a minute okay so
not only is it just not a great choice
making system and not only does it end
up actually being a pretty pathological
choice making system because it's easier
to extract than it is to actually
produce and it's easier to rip off with
someone else worked really hard on than
it is to work really hard on making
thing and it's easier to externalize
cost to the Commons than not and you
know etc but we say ok it's not just
that it said we've got 70 trillion
dollars worth of economic activity give
or take every day trade hands back on
what you consider a dollar we're pretty
much all of that externalizes harm at
some point along the supply chain
meaning
the physical goods economy required
mining and turns it into trash on the
other side so the linear materials
economy is disruptive to the environment
causes pollution along the whole thing
etc causes marketing to be able to drive
it that is polluting people's minds with
a bunch of manufactured discontent and
you know etc drives disinformation of
some companies trying to just inform
other ones to maintain strategic
advantage is running on dollars that are
supported by militaries and so you just
think about the whole thing like wow ok
even the things that I think are good
like the just a movement of what those
dollars are is externalizing harm in an
exponential way that is moving towards
catastrophic tipping points all right
well that can't work and then even worse
you say all right let's take a look at
Facebook for a minute because Facebook
since last time we talked between Russia
and Cambridge analytic and Tristan and
etc there's a lot more understanding of
the problem of platforms that have a lot
of personal data but also have their own
agency with respect to you
and we say okay so Facebook wants to
maximize time on site because there they
make money by selling marketing and the
more users are on site more often more
they can charge for the marketing so
they figure out they used very complex
AI analytics split testing etc to see
exactly what will make online stickiest
for you possible so you happen to so
really left out when you see pictures of
your friends doing without you and
that makes you click and look and makes
you feel really bad but they optimize
the out of that and your feed
because it's what you actually stay on
and other people it's the hyper normal
stimuli of the girls that are all
airbrushed and photoshopped that makes
them stay on or the whatever it is but
it'll always be a hyper mo stimuli and
if you think about the way that
McDonald's wanted to make the most
addictive or coca-cola or Phillips
Morris if I am on the supply side of
supply and demand
I want to manufacture artificial demands
that want to maximize lifetime value of
a customer right lifetime revenue and so
if I can make you addicted to my stuff
that's the most profitable thing so when
you look around at a society that has
ubiquitous rampant addiction of almost
all kinds everywhere you realize that's
just good for business that's good for
GDP and so we see that Facebook is just
by its own nature of doing what it's
supposed to do public company fiduciary
responsibility to shareholders maximize
profit blah blah blah is they're gonna
maximize your time on site and
maximizing your time on site is gonna
work better by hyper normal stimuli that
make you addicted and by things that
make you sovereign work because you
actually realize that your life is
better when you get the off
Facebook and go hang out with real
people and so it has to drive addiction
and discontent and whatever else and
it's really good at a bunch of crafty
tricks for how to do that
and so we see then that corresponding
with that is the rise of bulimia and
anorexia and and all kinds of body
dysmorphia we see that corresponding
with it is depression and probability
for suicide rates we see that the hyper
normal stimuli of polarizing news grabs
people more than like non polarizing
news because fights in an evolutionary
environment are really important things
to pay attention to they're kind of
hyper monel stimuli and so the most
polarizing names are gonna show up on
YouTube videos and get the most traction
and you notice whenever there's a debate
that's supposed to be a friendly debate
you look at the name
the YouTube video that gets the most
shares and it's so-and-so of this rate
so-and-so right yeah destroys this
person yeah
and that hyper normal stimuli grabs us
in the basal ganglia and the worst way
possible makes the worst versions of us
but it maximizes time on site so
now you look and you say okay so the net
result of Facebook is increased
radicalization in all directions
increased broken sense-making like
decreased sense-making
increased echo chamber and antipathy at
a level that will increase both the
probability of civil wars and world wars
and everything else and the increased
teen depression and suicide rates and
shopping addictions and you're like wow
this is evil right like this is
a really terrible thing this Facebook
want to do that we could almost make up
a conspiracy theory that it's like
Facebook has optimized how to make the
world wars as fast as possible Facebook
doesn't want to do that
Facebook is just trying to make a dollar
right and justify to itself that it
should continue to exist and it just
happens to be that how it makes a dollar
has the externality of all that stuff in
the same way that when Exxon was making
$1 or when the military-industrial
complex or a secure industry that makes
money when people are sick and not when
they're healthy like okay so look
at that right
so capitalism is inexorably bound to
perverse incentive everywhere and at an
even deeper structural level if we tried
to fix that we'd say okay we're
competing to own stuff and the moment
you own something I no longer have
access to it even if you're not using it
even if you hardly ever use that
whatever it is right drill you don't
even remember where you put it I don't
have an access to it and as a result and
there's a scarce amount of the stuff and
the stuff that is more scarce we make
more valuable and so then you own it I
don't have access to it but because you
want to be able to provide for your
future and whatever and there's
uncertainty you want to own all the
that you can and pull it out of
circulation put it in safes and security
boxes so that takes a lot of resource
from the earth where everything you own
is just bothering me because it's being
removed from my possible access so we
are in a rival wrist relationship with
each other
because the nature of the good itself is
rival risk because of the ownership
dynamic ring and the valuation on scarce
things in particular and everybody can
say well it makes sense why we'd value
scarce things because if there's enough
for everybody it's not doesn't have the
same type of advantages if there's not
enough for everyone so that kind of
makes sense except the problem of course
is if we make decisions based on an
economic calculus which we do right the
CFO who looks at the numbers and says no
this quarter we have to do this and
they're only paying attention to the
numbers they're paying attention to then
if AR isn't worth anything because
there's enough of it for everybody and I
can't increase my strategic competitive
advantage over you by hoarding more air
then air is worth nothing even though we
all die without it
literally is valueless to us and our
economic calculus so we will pollute the
 out of it and burn the out of
it Phillip Felicio to pull the o2 out of
it in the oxidizing of hydrocarbons
because we don't factor it because it's
not scarce and doesn't provide
competitive advantage where's the gold
on the other hand the gold we will fight
wars over will destroy environments and
cut down trees to mine it out that we're
actually putting the oxygen in the air
that we don't give a about so that
we can put the gold in a safety deposit
box that we don't ever look at and
doesn't get to do anything other than be
noted on my balance sheet as it's um
increased kind of competitive advantage
I have over you because if there's not
enough for everybody to have it then I
get some competitive advantage by having
a new table and the value is
proportional to that not the real
physical asset of what that metal could
do which is why the metal is not
actually being used in electronics it's
being in gold bars and for gone
somewhere else right this is all insane
and of course we see that the moment
that we make abundant things worthless
even if they're the foundation of life
and we make scarce things worth a lot
even if they're meaningless then it
creates a basis to artificially
manufacture scarcity and avoid abundance
everywhere if I have something i supply
and I make it abundance and all of a
sudden is worth nothing which is why if
I make some software that I could give
to the whole world for free once I've
made it I just have to make enough money
there may be no no I'm gonna patent
protect
and comes through you if you figure out
how to pirate it so that I can keep
charging you even though I have no unit
costs right I've actually solved the
scarcity problem and I'm gonna
artificially manufacture scarcity to
keep driving my a balance sheet of
course the Kimberly diamond mines burn
and crushed their diamonds because we
thought diamonds were scarce for me at
the price I then we realized they
weren't scarce if people had the price I
didn't want that to be known and you
know etc accelerating so if we want a
world of abundance for everybody we can
actually make it technologically
engineer the scarcity out create
abundance everywhere is a feasible thing
to do we can talk more about that later
but you can't in have an incentive on
scarcity and engineer it out at the same
time right so now they're scarce stuff
we're competing for it you own it which
means you possess it and you remove my
capacity for access and so I want to own
it faster than you own it and so then I
know and now we get into a tragedy of
the Commons and a multipolar trap thing
to say I go cut down a tree in the
forest I don't need that many trees
right now but you're in this other tribe
and you're gonna go cut down some of the
trees I would like there to be a forest
rather than a total clear-cut
environments for store beautiful and
they grew up with the forests and I like
the animals that are there but I know
that if I don't cut down the trees and I
leave the trees they're still won't be a
forest because you're gonna cut down the
trees and since you're gonna cut down
the trees and the other guy the other
tribe knows that and they know that I'm
going to and so we say it I gotta
cut down all the trees as fast as I can
because if they're gonna be no trees
anyways I might as well get them rather
than them get them because if they have
increased economic power over me they're
gonna use those pieces of wood against
me and more in an economic competition
and for now we all increase the rate of
the destruction of the forest as fast as
we can even though we'd all like
a forest because we're caught in a
multipolar prisoner's dilemma with no
good way out so the tragedy of the
Commons is a multipolar or trap the arms
race where we say you know what we
should just not make weaponized AI we
should just not do that that's it
everyone in the world thinks that the
idea of facial-recognition weaponized
AI drones is a world that would be
better not to live in right like nobody
wants live in that world because it
doesn't matter how rich or powerful you
are you're not safe to a bunch
of beds in here is normal but we're all
making them like everybody's advancing
 tack why are we doing that why
don't we just make a treaty not to do it
because we make a treaty we secretly
know that the other guy's gonna defect
on it secretly because if he gets the
tech first he'll rule the world and
he'll beat us and he knows that we're
gonna defect on it so either we make the
treaty and we all defect on it secretly
while agreeing to it publicly well
trying to spy on the other guys while
trying to dis inform their spies about
what we're actually doing or we just
don't even agreed with right so
we move forward towards a world that
increases the probability of extinct in
all of us every day in this scenario the
tragedy of the Commons these multipolar
traps and we'll come back to this I was
on capitalism but I'm gonna connect as
multipolar trap so please remind me to
do it one of the things we have to solve
at a generator function level is
multipolar traps as a category meaning
all instances of them categorically
because a multipolar trap basically
means where the local optimum for an
individual agent if they pursue it leads
to the global minimum for the whole
right but if I don't make the noobs or
the AI or take the tree down I'll get
 right now if I do it I don't get
 right now but as we all do it we
all get worse later right so you
made a scenario where the incentive of
the agent short-term locally is directly
against the long-term global well-being
that is the world writ large right now
and capitalism is inexorably connected
to that right because it drives these
rival risk dynamics and rival worse than
em extra the basis of multipolar traps
and so I could just sound depressing
except there are actually solutions to
all of these things there is a basis for
how we deal with physical stuff it is
not you owning some scarce thing and
removing my access we all know examples
of it we know that when you go to the
shop to the grocery store and you use a
shopping cart you don't bring your own
shopping cart that you own which would
be a major pain in the ass and I don't
do that you have access to a cart where
there's enough car
during peak hours the busiest hours
there's enough cards for everybody and
enough left over for repairs and so your
access to the cart does not decrease my
access to cart so I'm not upset that you
got a cart we're not in any competition
over carts and because I only need
enough for there to be enough during
peak time which is maybe 200 people only
need 200 cart learn plenty cart train
even though that store might service
10,000 people months so think about 200
carts vs. 10,000 carts how much less
resource it is from the environment how
much more efficient it is so now you
start saying all right well let's look
at other places where this thing could
happen say well we've owned cars as a
good and when you own a car I no longer
have access to it but then you're mostly
just gonna leave it sitting and hardly
ever use it you'll use it now and again
distance been 95 percent of it's like
just sitting places and as a result of
that there's a lot of cars to
not provide that much transportation and
that's a lot of metals taken out of the
earth and a lot of plastics and a lot of
you know actual environmental costs to
be able to make those to have most of
them never in use now you start to say
okay well we look at car sharing like
uber and lyft and whatever and we start
moving there from a possession of a good
to an access of a service that's pretty
cool I'm still gonna pay for it it's
still kind of shitty because there's not
enough of it to have give me good access
everywhere but it's pretty easy to
imagine did that thing takes over right
and then you use something like
blockchain to disintermediate the
central company that's pulling the
profits out of it and so now it's
cheaper access for everybody and puts
more resource back into the quality it's
a transportation and then it becomes
self-driving cars so it doesn't actually
even have that cost it's just a self
maintaining dynamic an you say okay now
it takes a tiny fraction of the metals
coming out of the earth to provide
higher quality transportation units for
everyone where you having access to
transportation as a Commonwealth service
does not decrease my access to
transportation as a Commonwealth Service
but when you use transportation to go to
school and learn stuff or to go to a
maker studio and make stuff or go to a
music studio and make stuff you're gonna
make theft that also becomes part of a
Commonwealth enriches the Commons that I
have access to so we've moved
a rival risk ownership of scarce goods
to an anti rival with access to shared
Commonwealth resources now we went from
rival risks not just to non-rival risk
meaning uncoupled ray and and rival
risks were anti couples your well being
is directly against mine but now to anti
rival risks which is a coupled good
where as you have access to more
resources that make you more generative
what you generate enriches the Commons
that I have access to so I am engendered
I am incentive to want to give you the
maximum to support you having the
maximum access to generative resources
now I'm not explaining all of what the
feature of the economic system looks
like right now but to just start giving
a sense that when we think about the
problems of capitalism there there have
been problems associated with it forever
and but the scale of the problems is
just more catastrophic now but I'm also
sharing examples of ways that we can
start shifting some of the things that
we couldn't shift previously some of the
things that neither Marx nor Smith had
available to them and this is very
interesting we have to shift all these
systems and we can at the same time and
this is to me a very interesting
developmental insight when I look at
biology in particular is that if we look
at the 40 weeks of a baby in utero it
can't actually we talked about this
before but I bring it up again in this
context it couldn't be born much earlier
it would be preemie and without and ICU
for it or whatever it would die but it
also couldn't stay much longer
you could get too big and never be able
to be born and kill the mom and kill
itself it comes out in a pretty narrow
window where both for the first time can
it actually now has the capacities and
hostage can't stay any longer and it's
interesting that this it's got 40 weeks
on one growth path right it's growing
the whole time there's a growth curve
it's not gonna stay on that growth curve
forever if we tried to forecast its
future and just continue the progression
of 40 weeks around 50 weeks it kills
itself in the mom right so that's not
the thing it goes through this discrete
nonlinear phase shift that if I had
never seen it before I'd have no idea
how to predict and out of the birth
canal umbilical cord cuts respiration
through the lung stuff coming in through
the mouth rather than the belly button
everything's different and it does it in
a way that's unprecedented to the whole
40 weeks of its existence previously so
if I tried to
the curve of what has been it is not bad
and it does it both when it has to end
can and if we look at any type of
developmental phase chicken developing
inside of an egg if it tried to come out
earlier is still goo if it tried to stay
in later it starts if we look at a
caterpillar to butterfly through
chrysalis same thing if it tried to just
keep eating it would eat itself to
extinction if it tried to go into the
chrysalis earlier doesn't have enough
resources to make a butterfly it would
die in the chrysalis this partial good
this is really interesting that when we
look at discrete nonlinear phase shifts
where there's one phase right the
caterpillar is getting bigger and bigger
and bigger eating everything in its
environment and if I just forecasted it
keeps being there I forecast it eats all
the environment and it does except
that's not what happens it does this
really different thing that is not an
extension of the previous curve and so
when we try to take our capitalism curve
our nationalism curve our science and
tech curve and keep extending him it's
just silly and it's why we come
up with silly stuff like it asymptotes
into infinity with the singularity it's
just you know on one side if we take all
the things that seem like they're good
then if we ask them Toth into a
singularity if we take the things that
look bad then it just goes into self
extinction it's neither of those curves
right cuz is getting exponentially
more powerful which means better and
worse at the same time but that means
it's neither of those curves that means
that this phase is just coming to an end
it's destabilizing the things that are
getting exponentially worse will in the
phase before the things that are getting
exponentially better will change the
nature of those things but that means
that what we're actually going to get
something altogether other if it is
other than extinction and it's very
interesting that we're at the place
where these types of dynamics both have
to change right now because that we have
catastrophic level tech that we never
had to have the same things that always
suck to be unsurvivable and can change
because we actually have the level of
insights that make possible things that
are different at a deep enough axiomatic
level if it's kind of like when you know
you've got a bunch of cells competing
against each other and then there's this
metamorphosis for now they're inside of
a slime mold and they're act and there
are part of the multicellular organism
where they're participating together as
part of a shared identity that's like a
really deep level of reorganization and
people going from that shift
as separate rival risk competitive
agents modeling themselves as apex
predators trying to compete with each
other to be the most apex predator and
predate the environment so we modelled
ourselves as apex predators right there
was an easy thing to do we look around
at nature and we were like we're kind of
more like lions than gazelles we look a
lot like chimpanzees they're kind of
badass hunter apex predator they
coordinate etcetera so we're like that
cruel to the apex predator thing so we
both want to see where we can get in the
dominance hierarchies and we get add the
prestige hierarchy but how we do within
our tribe but in our tribe as a whole
our species as a whole relative to the
other species is ins kind of apex
position there's a reason why we cannot
think that way anymore and again we felt
this way forever
and we cannot take this way anymore when
I say we thought this way forever I
don't mean every indigenous tribe talk
this way because they didn't write they
had a web of life and were merely a
strand and it types of thoughts but the
ones that thought this way became more
apex predators and killed those other
people and so it was effective to try
and do this apex predator thing up till
now but now it also destroys everything
so again the thing that has been
adaptive is now anti adaptive which is
why the thoughts that have made us win
or the thoughts that make us extinct now
and so if I take any pix predator how
its ability to be a predator its ability
to kill other things and compete with
the other predators for who's most
badass is pretty fixed and it's pretty
symmetrically bound with its environment
so lions can't get better at killing
faster than gazelles get better at
running and so they Co evolved where the
lion slowly get a little bit better at
some things and the gazelles also get
better at other things because if the
Lions just rapidly got way better they'd
kill all the gazelles and then debase
their own capacity to keep living and
then they'd be extinct if great white
could make mile-long drift nets and just
take all the fish out of the
ocean and reproduce at an exponential
rate like they would have already self
induced extinction but they can't all
the years the great rice never got a
driftnet but we have drift nets and we
have nuclear weapons and we have D nines
and we have the ability to
technologically extend our predatory
capacity and to do so in a way that
exponential and that makes us completely
asymmetric with the environment that we
depend on so again I come back to the
lion and they say all right the most
badass lion the most badass gorilla is
not like 10x more badass than the next
most badass grow up
it's like marginally better right like
marginally can win in a fight and only
for a pretty short period of time before
the next guy takes it but then you look
at like a Putin or a Trump and you say
how much military capacity does that one
person have to bear if they wanted to or
economic capacity compared to say a
homeless guy you look at the spread and
you're like oh this is a very different
distribution of power than any other
species has other species did not have a
million x power dynamics within the same
species or a billion X that like it was
freaking tremendous or that much more
power relative to their environment so
if the Lions could get technologically
more advanced in their predation faster
than gazelles could it would debase the
stability of the entire ecosystem the
thing to realize is like if a cancer
cell starts replicating in a way that's
good for it it's actually getting more
sugar and replicating faster inside the
body if it keeps doing that it kills its
host and kills itself it is ultimately
suicidal its own short-term success is
suicidal viruses that kill people too
quickly don't propagate for very long
because they kill their hosts they don't
get a chance to propagate the viruses
that are less lethal end up being the
ones that gets selected for over a
longer period of time to get a chance to
propagate so if there was a species that
was so good at hunting that it killed
everything in its environment then it
would go extinct so it's not the most
competitive advantage that makes it
through its self stabilizing ecosystems
that make it through just such a way
more complete understanding of evolution
which is individuals within a species
don't make it through because they
wouldn't have survived without the whole
species and species don't even make it
through because they wouldn't survive
without other species whole evolutionary
self-stabilizing niches make it through
that's important Thrace
yeah this whole idea of survival of the
fittest is kind of challenged with this
concept because at no point are we is
survival of the fittest taking the whole
system into account going forward and
infinitely
like it has to go through that phase
shift yeah survival of the fittest was
something that had a local truth but was
not the only global phenomena that was
operating because there was also a
tremendous amount of cooperation it was
happening in cooperation within members
of a species with each other and between
species and interdependence on each
other and so but again it was like
almost the idea of competition it's a
hyper normal stimuli it was like an
early hyper normal stimuli hijack like
sugar and porn and airbrushed pictures
and likes on Facebook because in an
evolutionary environment sites stand out
even though they're not mostly what's
happening right like mostly if I'm in a
forest there's a gazillion interactions
happening every second of aerobic and
anaerobic soil bacteria having a
relationship with each other and gas
exchange between me and the plants it's
just boring but it's like almost
everything but then I see a couple lions
fighting in like oh that's really
interesting rights to rebel with fittest
so there is this hyper normal stimuli
that made us actually miss emphasized
what was happening as a part of the
phenomena that was not all of the
phenomena miss emphasizes now there's
also this thing
there's we're moving forward right now
the way we have been applying that
thinking which is that some individual
agents or some in groups countries
companies races whatever some in groups
can be more fit to survive than others
through better militaries or better
economic extraction tech or bettered
info and disinfo and narrative tech that
has always been true I'm not criticising
that that was always true and even
necessary because if one tribe killed
another tribe and their life got better
because now the other tribe wasn't
competing for pigs with them and now
they got all the pigs and they got like
all the stone tools that our tribe it
may whatever they're like oh I
realized that that's like killing other
tribes thing is actually a pretty good
evolutionary strategy now all the other
tribes have to build militaries or die
by default right the win-lose game
becomes obligate so one the win-lose
game worked it actually worked if you
were good at it and two it was obligate
which is if you didn't do it you got
killed by Genghis Khan or Alexander the
Great or whoever the it was right
when we look at culture
that did not focus on militaries but
focused on the arts and humanities and
education and healthcare and etc that
out competed the other cultures in terms
of quality of life but that wasn't where
that the thing actually got decided they
all got murdered and the really
effective murdering cultures combined
and combined and made it through and
that's us today and yet the tools of
murdering and their tools of
environmental extraction are going up
and up until we're at a level where the
playing field just cannot handle that
game anymore
you can't keep extracting more stuff
from the environment when you've already
got peak resource when you've got the
biodiversity issues and species
extinction issues and etc you can't keep
polluting an environment when you've got
dead zones in the ocean from nitrogen
runoff and co2 levels in the air and etc
getting to the point of Cataclysm and
you can't keep doing increasing military
tech at following exponential tech
curves we're then non-state actors can
have fully catastrophic level tech and
you can't even monitor it you just can't
keep playing that game and so this is
the gist is that the thing that has
always defined the game is that it's
always been a rival risk game theoretic
environment and the rival risk game
theoretic environment if it can produce
tech that keeps increasing will always
self-terminate at a point and we just
happen to be in the eminence of that
point so this is the first generator
function of X risk now we tie this over
back to the beginning of the
conversation and I obviously got
long-winded the beginning conversation
we said why are we focusing on risk well
if we're focused on how do we design a
civilization that is actually good
enough it's beautiful it's desirable
those are hard terms and we'll get to
that in a minute that starts to get to
some of the inadequacy of the thing we
call science right now and it's in
commensurability with ethics get to that
but what does a beautiful civilization
look like well the first thing we can
say kind of easily is that it doesn't
self terminate if itself terminates we
can mostly all agree that's actually not
a desirable thing so if it is inexorably
self terminating it is structurally self
terminating not just kind of like one
little accident that we can
but over determined through mini vectors
because of underlying generator
functions
that's not a good civilization design so
the first design criteria of an
effective civilization is that it's not
self determining so then we say well
what are the things that cost
self-termination
and what we find is that even though
there are a gazillion different ways
that it can express ways that it can
actually happen it's from some very deep
underlying dynamics that if we
understand those and we solve them at
the dynamics level we fix all of them so
the first one is this topic we've been
talking about and we talked about
previously which is the rival risk games
multiplied by exponential technology
self-determining because rival risk
games cause harm with power and more
power ends up being more harm until it's
more than more than is handleable a
playing field we got that so exponential
tech whether we're looking at a scenario
of everything getting up by AI or
by bio warfare or by nanotech stuff or
by read so many different types of
scenarios those are all the same types
of choices humans have been making just
with those exponential powers at it
given that we cannot put those
technologies away we cannot get the
world to stop making them much as I
often this we could we either figure out
how to move from arrival risk to an anti
rival RIF environment that is developing
and deploying those technologies or we
self-terminate so this is the first
design criteria is that we have to
create rigorously anti rival risk
environments it doesn't end up being all
of it I'll do two generator functions
that's one and that is what we see in
terms of all of the either exponential
tech risks or war risks or economic
collapse leading to failed State
scenario risks they all come from things
like that now all of the like
environmental biosphere collapse stuff
is also related to tech getting bigger
right as we're fishing out more fish as
we're getting more co2 it also relates
that but it's a slightly different thing
that we look at here which is whether
we're talking about co2 in the air or
mercury
in the air or the water or microplastics
in the water or a continent of plastic
in the ocean or nitrogen affluent in the
river deltas or those are all toxicity
dynamics those are all basically stuff
that has accumulated somewhere that it
shouldn't have right we call that
pollution so we don't need to solve the
dead zones issue or the co2 issue or
that we have to solve all of those
categorically that we're not creating
accumulation dynamics and on the other
side of that same coin is depletion
dynamics so cutting down all the
old-growth forests fishing out all of
the fish species extinction biodiversity
loss peak nitrogen peak oil etc those
are all where we are using something in
a way that depletes it then it gets
turned into trash or pollution on the
other side were to accumulate somewhere
so we can define toxicity formally as
depletion or accumulation because of an
open loop in a network diagram and if
the loop was closed the things wouldn't
accumulate they would go back to the
source of where we would get something
from so it wouldn't have to deplete and
we noticed that when we see any kind of
natural system we go to an ecosystem
whether it's of coral reef or a forest
or whatever won't go to forest there is
no trash the body of something dies it's
compost there's feces it's compost
something gets cut and bleeds it
processes don't matter what it is
anything you can think about that is
part of that environment from an
evolutionary sense the environment
designed to be evolved to be able to
process and there's also no unknowable
use of anything right anything that is
utilized is utilized in a closed-loop
fashion so one of the things we see in
complex systems and natural systems is
comprehensive loop closure one of the
things we noticed about the human design
systems is open loops everywhere the
materials economy itself linear
materials economy that takes version
stuff and turns it into trash after
using it for a very short period of time
is a macro open loop but there's micro
open loops everywhere we have to
categorically solve that right we have
to basically close all of those loops
and another way of saying what this
generator function of issues is is that
nature the stuff that nature makes is
what we call
complex right it's self-organizing
self-creating self-organizing
self-repairing and the stuff we make
design tools is complicated it Brad
right like the computer we're talking on
is rad but if it got broken it would not
self repair and it didn't self organize
it was made it was soldered whatever
made them design from the outside we can
think about complex stuff comes about
through evolution complicated stuff
comes about through design two different
types of creative processes with
fundamentally different characteristics
and complex stuff has comprehensive loop
closure everywhere because it couldn't
external eyes something and still be
selected for adaptivity
right the adaptiveness factors
everything whereas if I'm building
something I might make it for one reason
or two or three reasons but it actually
affects a lot of other stuff but the
other stuff wasn't what I was trying to
optimize for so it ends up being where
externalities occur so even this
computer I'm talking to you on right now
was not optimized it was optimized for a
bunch of things so it's really cool but
the fact that it's got a backlit screen
that is 2d that's at a fixed focal
length from my eyes where I'm getting
macular degeneration from spending too
many hours on it was one of the things
that my eye health was not one of the
things that was built to try and focus
on or the fact that it's up my
posture ergonomically by me looking down
at the screen it wasn't one of the
things that tried to focus on or the you
know a gazillion other things right what
happened to the environment and the
supply chain process of getting the
metals to make hitter the making of this
computer affected a gazillion things
that were not part of its design
criteria which means the making of it
required externalizing a bunch of harm
ie a bunch of open loops where it
affected stuff it was not internalized
to the process we can see that if a
forest burns it repairs itself if a
house burns it does not repair itself
and if my computer gets broken it
doesn't fix itself but if I cut myself
it fixes so there's this fascinating
difference reason we're bringing this up
is to say if for something to be anti
fragile it has to be complex complexity
is the defining origin of antifragility
and complicated things are all
ultimately fragile more or less fragile
if we have a situation where complicated
subsume their complex substrate then
this means continue to grow right so
basically we're converting the
complexity of the natural world into the
complicated built world and it's
continuing to grow it will eventually
collapse because the complicated world
and if you know it's just like my
computer the water infrastructure is
complicated not complex the pipes don't
self repair they can break easily
they're subject to being broken on
purpose or accident rate the same is
true with the everything right the roads
the energy grids everything now when I
look at globalization I say I've got an
increasingly interconnected complicated
world that is increasingly more
complicated where the failures anywhere
can prevail yours in more places because
nowhere can actually make its own stuff
anymore it's just as complicated enough
has to be made across this whole thing
right like this computer we're speaking
on took six continents to make and so if
China died everywhere is if the
u.s. died if there's so many play that
if if mining wasn't accessible in Africa
everywhere sucked and we see an
increasingly interconnected Li
complicated which also means
increasingly fragile built world that
we're trying to run exponentially more
energy through in terms of human
activity dollars etc etc and that's
happening while decreasing the
complexity of the biosphere far enough
that if known antifragility is going
away we're getting to a place where
rather than climate being self
stabilizing it can go into Auto
destabilizing positive feedback cycles
where the biodiversity is getting low
enough that you can get catastrophic
shifts in the nature of the homeostasis
this made it possible to have a
biosphere like the one that we've lived
in if you have a world where complicated
systems are subsuming their complex
substrate and continuing to grow they
will eventually collapse so these are
two different generator functions where
we can say if I'm trying to solve ocean
dead zones or plastic or species
extinction as one offs I will certainly
fail because at most I move the curve
collapse a year but there's so many
other scenarios for fail that are over
determined if I don't solve the
generator function of all of them I
haven't actually got it the having a
right relationship between complex and
complicated and having loop closure
within the complicated and creating anti
rival risk basis it is a safe basis for
exponential technology is the first
level of assessment of necessary design
criteria for a viable civilization
[Music]
alright that's it for this episode to
continue listening to the second and
third parts of this fascinating
interview go to future thinkers org
slash 57 and to check out our sponsor
qualia go to future thinkers org slash
brain hack if you're new to the show and
you'd like a list of our top episodes
and resources go to future thinkers org
slash start if you want to sponsor our
show go to future thinkers that org
slash sponsor if you like our podcasts
leave us a rating and a review on iTunes
and elsewhere it helps others find the
show and we really appreciate it thanks
for listening and we'll see you in the
next episode
[Music]