welcome to the stola the stoah is a
digital campfire where equal hear and
dialogue about what matters most at the
night's edge what's happening now
all right check-ins little look
physically exhausted I just had an
intense workout with Nick over zoom this
morning other than that I always feel
giggly when I talk with Bonita so I'm in
a very giggly state
welcome to the stoah i am peter limber
the stuart of the store the store has a
place for us to go here in dialog what
matters most at the knife's edge today
we have Bonita Roy I don't think she
needs any introduction in this space she
is the queen of sense-making my number
one crush and we have a very very
interesting title today I'm gonna read
it like when beneath that says she wants
to do something I'm like okay just do
what everyone penita and she said she
wanted to do a talk on sacred cows
elephants in the room and other noble
beasts and we both had like a an editing
error and we just but it was noble
beasts for the longest time so maybe
there's some kind of unconscious
Freudian slip there maybe we'll explore
that being said I'm gonna hand over to
Bonita she's gonna share her thoughts
and then we're gonna have like a Q&A
portion so if you have any questions
just put them in the chat box I'll call
on you to unmute yourself or if you want
me to read on your behalf let me know
and I'll read on your behalf this will
be going on youtube so if you don't want
to be on YouTube you can ask me to read
it for you so that being said we need
two floors yours
your mute there you go alright hey
everyone thanks for coming but nice to
see some new faces and familiar faces
some blasts from the past so yeah
getting a lot of energy just from seeing
the room populated yeah so the title
actually and Kaspari is here with us
today and it's actually a title that we
derived together years ago and one of
our first workshops and that is the
sense of what are the elephants in the
room what are the monstrous stories that
people are telling offline that did
never make it online or into your groups
what are the sacred cows you know
something that I've been watching really
closely on my Facebook page as I curate
a lot of information around coalbed and
also in the different venues I've been
in is there's there's there's implicit
rules of where you can go in the
information ecology there's a lot of
social sanctioning going on all the time
and so I'm not sure if people are are
sensitive to that but even on these
channels like the stoah and rebel wisdom
and you can you you see that there's
invisible boundaries of where were where
we're not allowed to think right so this
is the notion of sacred cows or
elephants in the room and I think that
when if you if you've been in this kind
of work long enough you see there's kind
of a rhythm where new intelligence will
breakthrough new ideas will breakthrough
and then they get kind of fashionable
become attractors then they start to get
popular on the media and then they
become somewhat of a performance kind of
attractor and the boundaries of what is
talked about is is contained and
constrained and like integral theory and
then then there's a private language and
then there are penalties for going
outside that private language in in any
and I think that as we experiment with
new technologies and a lot of us are
spending time having more transparent
conversation I think it's really
important that we also to knock our
sensitivity toward when we are looking
for cohesion let's say not coherence so
Peter will say the Stowe is a place
where we Co here around dialog and
coherence means that all the diverse
opinions and all the perspectives make
it into the information ecology not
cohesion where we all kind of implicitly
agree to these boundaries of beyond
which we're not allowed to talk about my
current I example or exemplar of someone
who is very good at continually surfing
those edges as Charles Eisenstein I mean
Charles Eisenstein if you watched him
through his whole career he started kind
of like you thought he was kind of New
Age environmentalist and they keep
asking questions keep asking questions
keep vigilant that he's not sucked into
some kind of popular fiction popular
fiction is really when when we live in
turbulent times it's very you know like
our bodies are starving for popular
fiction for new mythology for a new way
to pretend and I think that you know
series on elephants of the room and
sacred cows is probably could be
important into this ecology so just
start it off you know I have some
bullets I want to do but I also would
like to invite you all to throw out what
you think is you know is sanctioned out
from the conversation and and we can
address them as we go but one of the
things that I want to say
is that anything that is understood
broadly is poorly seen so anything that
can be captured by a broad
generalization means that the people are
not seeing the actual reality you're not
actually seeing what actually happens so
for example the broad understanding of
Kovac 19 sanctions the anecdotal
evidence is what a lot of people are
actually seeing so we one of the ways in
which to address this conversation is
how can we coordinate broad
understanding and preserve and perfect
what is actually seen and these this is
a real tightrope to walk and it happens
in very ordinary daily experience also
so I like to say it took me 30 years to
know what a horse is to actually see a
horse because so much of the time when I
was young I participated with Disney our
idea of the horse and then when I was
competitive rider I had this notion of
the horses excellence carrier of sports
and then I got when I got very sensitive
about animal cruelty and learned about
how they work with horses you know
constantly moving from one broad
understanding to the other and realizing
that literally even though I had worked
with them for 30 years and trained
stallions and once I started training
stallions that really started like
understanding that all those years I
actually was not aware of what was right
in front of my face and so this notion
of anything that is understood broadly
is seen poorly is something that I think
we need to bring into the sense make
space because you get these people
coming on and you know this phrase war
on sense-making and then all of a sudden
people we have a war on sense-making
it's very popular right so it's very
broadly understood but there's not a lot
of actual participation in what is
actually happening
there's not a lot of perceptual
information coming in there you have a
lot of theories you have a lot of
psychological theories and you know
conspiracy theories and you have all
these things but like what does that
actually mean and I did this I did this
interesting poll on the meta modern list
when the war on sense-making got really
big so I asked people to rate their
sense-making and their meaning-making
from a scale of one to ten ten being
high since making we defined as being
able to make a sense with other people
in the public sphere and meaning-making
is you know your own personal meaning
and it was like Lake Wobegon everybody
rate rated their sense-making and meet
in meeting maker making higher than
average right so you guys are the
prophets of the war on sense-making and
you rate your own experience six - seven
- eight some people were like nine and
ten so it was like oh look we have a
crisis in sense making
this is the prophets of sense-making but
the same people when we reflect them
their own experience we're not rating
them very low with the exception of one
or two but in general this was not the
case so there's like a lot of stuff
going on all the time and I think that
we're very vulnerable to you know we're
at a crossroads because the modern world
where there were sacred cows there were
generalized information that we all kind
of assembled around that world is kind
of over and so we're very vulnerable to
whatever can capture our imagination
and then go with that that whole hog so
that's kind of what we want to talk
about today and see if we can get down
into some particulars yeah this if
people are having the same kind of
experience and how are they themselves
trying to negotiate that
so I'll warm up when you deal with a few
questions but if you have any questions
just throw it in the chat box so my
first question is how are you
negotiating that in a cup there's a
couple of different ways one is and some
of you took a couple of practice
workouts one is this notion of what I
call still hunting and we talked about
still hunting social media like you know
you can let a lot of information in
without trying to organize it into like
some final answer right you just it's as
if you're watching Birds and you know
there's more Cardinals over here there's
more this over there there's all this
stuff going on it's not there for you to
collect and adjudicate and create some
kind of conclusion to it that's not how
collective intelligence works collective
intelligence works like your brain does
your brain has many many sub-threshold
microstates going on at the same time
you know some of them say there's all
kinds of things going on there's maybe a
2% chance that the this house is gonna
burn down and that's that's that little
thing is in there and then there's a 40%
chance that my dogs will start box start
barking right now so as I'm looking
around I can mine all these little kind
of sub thresholds expectations and ideas
that are in my awareness
myself well they're not in my awareness
is sub-threshold
and the end product is a threshold event
that comes out of all of those and our
tendency on social media is to that's
anecdotal like we have this notion that
anecdotal information doesn't doesn't
play in the arena of scientific
information we have this notion that the
data crossed with a computer simulation
is more real than anecdotal information
we have this notion that I mean it is
true that BOTS create a lot of
conspiracy theories of the algorithms do
what they do that's also something
that's very hard to honest us out but
it's just it's you taking the
information and you notice like you
notice for example that the New England
of journalists of science and the New
England Journal of Medicine I think
write an article that says asymptomatic
transmission the the the the notion of a
sudden thematic transition was a false
study right and then you notice - two
months later there's another article
that says that's a false study but
instead of shifting to like oh my god I
believe this oh my god I believe this
you realize that both of those are part
of the information ecology they're both
partially truths they're both they're
not maybe weighted the same way but you
need to let them in you need to
understand now not understand you need
to be in relationship with all the
sub-threshold information and then that
changes your behavior you may not be
able to come up with some kind of like
systemic download that adjudicates all
that but if that all that lives in your
system then you're primed positionally
to move with how the information moves
right and that you don't try to go
for quick closure so that's one way to
work with the information ecology is to
understand that you want to be in
relation with many many sub-threshold
like micro states collective
intelligence works across people like in
your in your brain you want all this
information to be part of your awareness
and not struggle to create some kind of
like final synthesis because you're
working with collective intelligence
it's not the same as collecting
intelligence so what is your tolerance
for example there is a term called your
dispositional state what is your
tolerance for saying oh that's
interesting it doesn't prove this person
wrong it proves ah there's that's
interesting also so how many how many
information points can I be in
relationship with without like this
notion of trying to capture the truth
right trying to capture the truth and
what does that mean then in terms of
like well then how do you know what you
know well maybe you don't know what you
know but it will change your behavior it
will modulate for example your fear it
will modulate for example your extreme
behavior on one side of the polarization
or the other and and that's kind of one
skill if you happen to be someone who
who is interested in this in the
collective intelligence and you do a lot
of spend some time looking at that on
social media you know the other is to
just really discipline yourself from
social media itself and learn how to pay
attention in your own local environment
that's that's you can learn a lot about
how
things work if you pay attention to your
own internal environment and your
participation for example in the natural
environment there's a huge amount of
depth to perceive there so I got a
question and it might be a request for
advice as well so with the the stoah
which I'm viewing as a digital campfire
there's a wisdom gym that is really
organically emerging it's sort of like
which one Reiki calls it has ecology of
practices and we have about neither on
10 right now of reoccurring events and
there's many more I can picture there
can be could be one hundredths and in
the wisdom gym in the future and it's
really just it's like it's finding the
store either than the stores finding it
so to speak and I'm just sort of
listening to what I call the damon and
myself and others I'm just getting the
 out of the way and just allowing
people to give their gift so to speak
and the move there is that once this
stuff forms I'm also an adjunct
researcher at Jon's consciousness and
wisdom studies lab so the ideas allowed
this collective intelligence to emerge
and I called you practice and do studies
on it to see if it works and I imagine
there's a lot of like things in the
middle there all right so just any
advice on that project how to proceed
and maybe what to look out for or what
type of practice is in order to get the
skill set unlock yeah I think you know a
little bit when we first talked and that
is this notion of trying to stay away
from programming you know like
controlling a lot of these initiatives
start with a lot of variation but then
the word also this uses audience
captured you start to let the popularity
create a narrative arc you know and then
all of a sudden you ago that's what he's
doing there's like under self-reflective
now and he thinks this though is this
and you can feel this design happening
and that's okay I mean if if that's what
you're doing you know that's more like
more traditional broadcast journalism
for example you know to go too far
for one thing and to go to this for that
thing and it's also going to naturally
happen you know you are going at some
point be a strange attractor that
wobbles around a certain a certain
themes or something's or whatever so
moving off out of that is is kind of
challenging so that's one thing but also
understanding that I mean I'm just going
to be very provocative here right so you
see that social section but also
understanding that when we are in this
business we are just part of also that
collective intelligence and if we look
at what's happening you know in terms of
the environmental crisis the political
crisis financial crisis there's a good
chance that we are not we meaning the
people that you will attract or not the
people who are going to fix it there's a
good chance that the Western world isn't
it's not our time so this is an
interesting conversation to have what do
you what does it feel like to be in this
game where you're like yeah this is not
our time this is not ours to fix this is
not the capacity we don't have the
capacity the competency we're not
especially situated to fix it this time
so you start to realize that all that
itself is kind of malware right that's
in us that's like oh yeah you know we're
gonna fix this we got this we got this
world if you look at it clearly chances
are we're not especially suited for it
this time so then the question becomes
again in terms of trusting trusting the
whole if we're not suited for that then
how do we allow ourselves if you know if
you go down this rabbit hole and you
start to really feel into that and you
said we're not really suited for that
we're gonna trust that
marginalized cultures marginalized
people Africa perhaps you know there's
thirteen-year-old girls in Africa that
have created engines that run on pee if
you watch Sugata Mitra is
hole-in-the-wall school there are
children who can't speak English who've
never been to school and he puts a
computer in their village and they learn
about recombinant DNA because their
social structure is intact so they have
all these ways of really harnessing
collective intelligence it's not clear
that this is our our competency right
now so if you entertain that as part of
your understanding of what you're doing
I think that releases something it opens
a lot more opportunity you know it's and
I'm not saying you're gonna go and take
a camera and go into the hood in LA
that's not yours to do either it's it's
like this is maybe not ours to do so
then what do we do
maybe there's a leapfrog what if we
started to do things that in that war
ideas on the other side on the other
side of the transition maybe we could
bring something then so these are the
kinds of opportunities for understanding
the time that are much broader than you
hear in your everyday podcast or on
these channels and so so and I'm just
throwing out a couple of them in case
these these communities can can practice
people that I spend a lot of time with
you know there's a lot there's a lot
more of that kind of questioning going
on and I see a lot of people you know
I'm not saying it's true but I see a lot
of people going yeah the notion that
maybe Western people are not suited that
sits in your intuition as a very real
possibility right there's something
about it I'm not downing us I'm not but
but the collective intelligence is like
the whole kit and caboodle here and so
again
we're on social media talking about the
politics is that should live in this
much larger appreciation for the human
species it could be the humans are not
even you know it's not even humans time
what we won't go into that you know
could be like that but in terms of
collective human intelligence you know
all of these if you if you really allow
your mind to create a wider perspective
like what is really going on here
then you start to see there's a lot of
space in this sense making space there's
actually always a lot of space a lot of
space to to perceive and and sense
making is about sensing sensing and
feeling and getting to know this person
who where is this conspiracy coming from
you know what is what is what is the
lived experience of that person and so
oh god you know don't put that up on
Facebook that's a conspiracy like like
the more were triggered and vulnerable
to jumping down the throat of all these
information the more we sanction things
that actually has valuable information
why does our information ecology have
conspiracy theories you know Charles
Eisenstein rather I think you did a
podcast or no wrote a long thing about
it so yeah they don't just get sucked
into the content is sensing to the the
rhythms and the dynamics of the broader
collective intelligence ya know I love
that resonates a lot that's where sort
of the fuller and I had tension with my
performative agnostic piece cuz I really
I like exercising the muscle of
understanding someone's reality tunnel
and the propositional sense so you can
pass their ideological turning test but
actually sink into the felt sense when
they believe what they believe to be
true and feel it and that way you can
kind of really communicate with them and
instead of just shaming them or judging
them away and I have problems with on
the internet with Bernie support
right because I've been called your
pseudo neutral whatever non
Alliance thing and it's not that I'm not
alive it's not that at the end of the
day I'm not gonna I'm gonna not support
one person or the other or make a choice
it's just that I don't live inside this
totalizing narrative it's not healthy
for anyone that I would vote for it's
just not healthy right
so yeah it's like it's like people are
like only read books would have read
book covers don't read the blue book
covers it's kind of like that silly
really yeah so so even as we try to open
up these spaces there's a sense in which
there's a sense in which we
simultaneously close our audience's mind
and we need to understand the
precariousness of that you know that's
ethics for people who are doing
broadcasting so yeah so there's a kind
of a phrase in the spiritual community
that if you it's kind of a paradox for a
teacher because if you make an object
for the discursive mind out of the out
of the teaching then the lesson becomes
the poisoned hmm so how can we turn more
and this is why I love your wisdom Jim
it's more just pointing out instructions
you know it's not these hold out if I
can give you a capacity to ask a
question then I don't really want to
supply the answer right so something
like that so this feeling of yeah
something like that yeah so I'll pivot
in the question questions I don't know
if you I just before I do I don't know
if you saw that I won't name his name
but he's a Bernie supporter
sort of you know our space and he called
you and I integral reactionaries so
that's our that's our title penita no I
mean you can see how if people don't get
it they would think you're just trying
to surf like
not non-attachment or some kind of
whatever I get it I yeah I mean I think
it's it in that sense it's it's an
understandable assessment yeah it's just
interesting how like you know rubs not
reactionaries but just that title like
that weaponization of that title yeah it
sticks on you yeah all right it's
unsinkable the early human so rain you
have a question they do my question is
where does dogmatism fit in are you
describing dogmatism and if not what's
the difference yeah so I think it's I
think it is about
dogmatism ideology but what I'm talking
about are people that can spot dogmatism
and ideology there's always a more
subtle level this is the trick when it's
it's you get snookered by yeah it's like
a performative contradiction sub
dogmatism i don't want to call it meta
because it's actually like deeper right
but it's a it's about first of all
noticing that language and discourse and
inter and relating conversationally will
create this right great stick it creates
it and then always trying to sense where
that creation is and be interested in it
and you know dogmatism is okay there's
people that I have strong and have
strong opinions but I don't someone
attacks them I think it's kind of funny
I might play with them or I don't I
doubt I understand myself as well
whatever
I'm very parochial I see the parochial
miss of my own strong opinions and yeah
so and I also experience my inability to
encounter or inhabit the strong opinions
of other people I have to use them you
know I've to use my my decoder ring and
then I lose some signal there so yeah so
these these are all these are all
pertain to conversational engagements
more than embodied engagement so tends
to be more well you wouldn't you could
have a dogmatic body like someone who's
teaching some kind of martial arts of
movement arts and teaches more from a
dogmatic dogmatic kind of mind but in
general I'm talking when I'm talking
this is more like conversational you
know like what we do on these podcasts
and stuff yeah strong opinions loosely
held which is better than a loose
opinion here's the postmodern a loose
opinion strongly held right so and the
ability to hold that strong opinion
because in a sense you want it shattered
like like it's fun to see it's like
building sandcastles you build them
really really well because when the when
the tide comes in and sucks them away
you can't go more you know like or
creating those sandman dollars all the
effort
make it as perfect as possible because
then when it's destroyed you really
really have a lot to let go of John
Davis you had a question about magical
thinking hi Bonnie
Hey good to see you yeah it's been a
long time since Magellan courses we've
come a long way I really I've been
following on this series and have been
really fascinated by it I have a
question about magical thinking which a
lot of people I've noticed in this
community and other communities have
expressed enormous contempt for so I
think that's something that I would like
to address because I identify with being
a storyteller
I come from the gay movement and in the
other big pandemic which was the AIDS
epidemic in the gay community in the 80s
um we had to think magically to survive
we had to create stories that were
compelling we had to create stories that
could change stories that we're being
told so I identify as a storyteller and
when I am storytelling at my best I'm a
whistle blower and blowing a whistle
gets attention fast it starts and
finishes a game it creates good
boundaries and I also want to blow the
whistle mindfully so that I don't create
false alarms so we don't have a often
the circumstances that life creates for
us the conditions do not we have to use
our imaginations in healthy ways either
than destructive ways and I think this
is something that you bring attention to
with your emphasis upon going underneath
the story to the energetics
but I also think it's important that we
go beneath the story to the energetics
and go back to another story
that is compelling that creates momentum
that grabs attention that can move us
towards something different and better
than there's no guarantee by the way
this is extremely messy but I think we
need to be more friendly to the
narrative and the meta-narrative
capacities that we all share and
recognizing absolutely the path
sometimes pathological stories that we
tell so we want to tell stories that
don't reach Ramat Isis I think this is
this is I think one of the things that
is I share with you so so people do
getting trapped into stores that are
pathological and crazy making it just an
impoverished thank you for this
opportunity to rehearse no it's good
okay so my answer is gonna seem kind of
odd to some people don't know me but I
feel called because you asked me to go
there so in my course I teach something
that toward the end of the two years
called magic little reality
magic reality it's a trans rational form
of magical thinking all right so that's
why and it has a que and talk about it
it's French so I mean you obviously if
you can name magical thinking in this
context you're more doing magical
reality a brief very brief description
of it is that if you think of a matrix
up here you have what is specifiable
down here what you have what is not
specifiable and what here you have what
is true and over here you have what is
real so these are kind of they're not
polar opposites it's just a landscape
let's say
so what's specifiable and true are
things like theories the
they're true not real right what is
specifiable and real are certain types
of stories but they're not true and then
down here you have what is not specified
and true and over here we have those are
that's more like perception and over
here you have what's real and not
specifiable and that gets into things
like Aletha cubes and stuff like that so
this is a way to really understand or
it's a label it's just a matrix so we
can have placeholders for talking about
this
I think territory that you're surfing
called and we call it magic reality and
you get comfortable being able to
understand those are all parts of your
experience and what's interesting is
they're parts of its does it's not a
developmental lens because children
early on have all those four areas also
something more we hold it more like
ontological II you know if you want to
smell of it so that's the deep the deep
response in terms of stories I think
this is my opinion I've read some of
your fantastic posts and I think you
would agree that there are stories that
we would say have narrative arcs and
then there are stories that say our
experiences and because there we are to
the particular the more universal is the
message and I know some of your journal
writings on your experience I think not
in nursing homes but with hospice or
something close to that always come with
this kind of universal but you're you're
just saying what's what your experience
is so you could call those
you know you could call that a story but
this is certain kind of story
it doesn't have a narrative arc you're
very good at for example you get there's
so much beauty usually around two-thirds
what when you used to write 2/3 down
into your story there's so much beauty
and as a reader you would think you're
you're thinking it's gonna have this
conclusion and they all went out into
the sunset and you never deliver that
because that would be inauthentic to
experience so I'll always remember that
that tension that's more real right then
true it doesn't tell a story that way so
just happy to look like that back to you
nice to see you again
cool Phil you had a question oh man can
you okay so yeah I like this probably
opinions loosely held and I think I
wanted to one step above that in terms
like a perception level like I I'm
afraid right now that like I am reading
a whole bunch of stuff and I'm
discounting a whole bunch of other stuff
are the personal level I didn't like for
example everyone here on this the stoah
is all like really listening to a
certain amount of thinkers and we're
kind of getting really really deep into
a few people and I'm trying to think
about like how important is like
diversity have to be sure that we have a
diverse like sense-making I guess so
that we can actually create these types
of understanding that includes a lot
more diversity and specifically also
like how do you make sure that you're
not just listening to the people with
the loudest voice in terms of your sense
making yeah I think because you've
noticed that about yourself your prop
you know you're probably in good shape I
mean taking a deep dive is good you
start to see now there's something
actually encouraging about the podcast
phase because the other than Joe Rogan I
have to give it to him a lot of these
podcast spaces seem to have a half-life
that turns quite quickly like the ivw
got really boring really fast you know
so Rueben report you know so one of the
things that's good is that there's
there's we tend to binge and then then
this something's lost so so I've noticed
that you probably have noticed it too
and so that's a good thing
you know there's so many people like
really exotic characters like contra
points are self
but I just went like wow all of this but
there's something that there's some need
and then there's something that it gets
exhausted it's you know you move on so
so so that's really it's encouraging
right I think there's something working
there in terms of reading one of the
best ways to and it's hateful I just you
know John is a really good writer but
one of the hardest things for me is when
I street a lot then I got so you know
I'm a really really fast reader it's
ridiculous how many books I have but
then I got to where I started writing
for integral view and then my masters
and these are the academic journals this
will send you where you need to read
next if you try to write because when
you're trying to write you're like
really when this comes to a point where
you're trying to get from this spot to
that thought and you realize there's
this gap because when we hear people
talk really fast and they're very good
articulating like you know like the
things small and dark I can say I mean
the stuff he's covering and it just
seems like wow it's really solid if you
start sat down and tried to write just
between this sentence and the next that
seems so logically one follows the other
you'll realize is a huge gap there and
that you really don't know anything
right so now I think smiling burger
knows you know if you had a conversation
with him he could parse all those things
that's it what I'm saying but you
yourself were realized that you had a
conversation the whole thing seems
really tidy but if you tried to write
and then you start to look like the fact
that I right now makes me luck most me
to like the things that I need to read
next and they come from different places
because they show what I haven't they're
holes they're holes in my my thinking
and
all areas that I haven't one thing I
think you'd like we need to sort of like
I'm seeing with the stoa so raven and i
and a few other people we're getting a
lot of people in the store from all
across the political spectrum and
they're coming in sort like doing these
QAS a sense maker nodes but i imagine
like the bacon switch is gonna happen
eventually especially if the wisdom jim
gets more robust in the questioning and
the coherence and what not is that it
might seem like a sermon at first but it
might be a reverse sermon eventually
especially at the koalas are really
tight also is to give people permission
to bite you know like yeah give your
dogs permission to bite you know the
talks call you take your dogs to the dog
park and then the fight breaks out over
there they don't like they don't want to
get into the fight you know and so we
have this notion of transparent
communication we yes but we need also
permission to bite like that
someone just put noble beasts in the
chat box yes noble beasts bite no now
the normal beasts don't bite no too
noble tyson i'm gonna take you and i
think you have a statement or a question
thanks Peter yeah as I'm filled with
your question and Benina your response
it just was bringing out from yeah
sometimes these conversations when I
feel I'm having insights and it feels
really generative and I'm excited I find
myself like feeling sympathetic to those
that identify as lightworkers or like
shaman's of indigenous tribes or people
that claim the channel aliens or like
experiences I've had with young children
that I've like freestyled and made music
way from there saying these ideas that
it is beyond explanation when they would
have got them and their parents like and
so there's like this I guess there's
part of me that's sympathetic and has
this appreciation and identifies with
the magician and magical thinking and at
times I find myself with this curiosity
of how to and I think it's about
bridging the worlds within me of like my
kind they had the magical imaginary side
and then the very critical intellectual
side and I find myself
yeah just like wanting and to sort of
bridge these tribes more effectively and
I just for the even just for the joy of
seeing more of these conversations
happen and seeing them go back and forth
so that's for something that's coming up
for me yeah so it reminds me up and John
you're gonna get when I first started
teaching the Masters course in
consciousness studies you know I had an
allergy well the course has changed a
lot I could give a lot more people like
who that's on this on this thing and at
the time the school had attracted a lot
of women who had who's you know recently
divorced women whose children are grown
up we're taking a lot of yoga and kind
of New Age like New Age thinking I do
you know what I do my work it can be
very academic it took me a long time to
get a degree because I don't like
academics themselves but and so I had an
allergy to a lot of New Age thinking you
know and but then something happened and
the quality of person was changing like
and I noticed that another is on the
other side that I was actually not
letting in some you know people come to
the course they don't have a lot of
language you know mostly I help them get
language for making these distinctions
so and we still get some people need to
be disabused of their faulty thinking or
loose you know sloppy thinking but
something started to switch and it
started to switch because again the kind
of irritation I had was different my
I was overreacting and was like really
bothering me
and I and and so I pay attention cuz
like I don't know all of a sudden I
really bothered it was because I had to
really examine that it's like
something's changed and what was changed
was actually an opportunity to notice
that what was what was they're trying to
communicate wasn't what I was thinking
that's worth actually the magically I
would say came in it came in my
imagination during this two years where
I'm like what is like what is going on
and then when I put it up people
completely could surf the notion that a
theory was true but not real and I
thought oh my god this these people have
metacognition and cognitive skills that
developmental stage theory says they
don't they're just not articulate you
know so it's all about noticing noticing
what's in the child noticing and
noticing a different way and and then
being the you know and bridging that
into a wisdom skill because the child
can't then you know notice themselves
and then you start to see oh my god and
I started to realize that the role of
the teacher in this kind of space is
only to listen and notice when something
brilliant is trying and then reflect
that back that's all so that's all I'm
actually and then the rest is just blah
blah oh I have to do content and we have
funds oh and people will say there's a
there's a couple of students students of
mine here and they can confirm this
sometimes people will be trying to work
something out and they'll say something
and they'll just keep going I'm like no
no what did you just say just like you
said with the kids
that's a brilliant insight and we just
stop and say what you just said just
slow down like that is a huge insight
let's suspend some time with that so you
start to it's very I call it Tai Chi
with words you start to see all these
these gifts start percolating months ago
or it gets tight then it's really
amazing but yeah I think that's what
you're saying
like like read and all this stuff but
then notice what to notice when you
start to notice whoa right that's that's
a big part that never makes it into the
information ecology it's the opposite
it's it's not broadly understood but
it's precisely seen right so that's
beautiful thank you great so this would
probably be our last question maybe gray
you had a question
um yeah one of the things that I think
creates a lot of like murkiness in the
information ecology is our broad
understanding of emotionality as like
these things that were kind of passively
surrendering to that are triggered by
circumstances and we have to defend that
they are reasonably and justifiably
triggered by those circumstances and I
think that that kind of broad
understanding and all of that more
precise stuff that glosses over creates
a lot of the identitarian issues that we
run into with like reading their mimetic
status so I just wondered if you could
talk to like what kind of group norms we
could set to like bring that mirror
energy into a spaces so that we can
start to understand our emotions better
and like see them as like opportunities
to communicate with ourselves instead of
things where helplessly like
circumstantially is suffering yeah it's
a very good question the playground
again it's about making distinctions
based on emotion is a bodily sensation
plus a story so what you want to do is
lose the story and process the live
lived experience of the body it's really
hard cuz then you start to realize like
you actually want the drama and the
story so then you have to come to terms
with that right
now there's a fun way to get around that
because you know sometimes here in like
a bar you're in a social situation and
your allies you're actually playing with
the drama and the sky it's things we
like to do but if it's a crucial moment
and you're suffering you'll still see
that you're actually attached to the
story that makes you suffer to think and
then you start to say what is it about
the story or maybe you're addicted to
the way your body feels or something and
you start to realize the microstates of
how the story's attached and becomes an
emotion and so the more you can work
with it just like what your body's doing
and effects which are you know what your
body's doing
they're like everything else they come
and go and they take the time they take
and so well they're here they need to be
honored but you know and when they're
gone you know they need to be released
and yeah so just try to be and we talked
about it you might check out the video
because we talked about how there's like
Care is an expanded form of relationship
and the contracted form is panic when
you're afraid to lose what you care for
and you start to see your energy
signature a little toggle between Karen
panic play and anger and seeking
curiosity and fear and you start to see
really that other than lost which we
want to get to next time there that's
all you're really working with and
everything else is because we like the
story you know we like to play the story
it's a good thing it's a bad thing it is
what it is that's a good question thank
you very cool so that brings us almost
of the hour banette did you have any
closing thoughts you'd like to leave us
with no I mean these were all really
good questions it's a it's you know
there's a lot more that obviously I'm
sure people holding on a lot more that
we could dive into but I really like the
question and I think that yeah
are these kind of conversations really
really great and so what's happening
with the playground on Friday or is it
uncle never gonna end it or people want
to talk about lost so it's the seventh
effort we might start there then there's
there's other other things we could look
at I don't know I make it up
well probably like yeah talk about lost
what's the role of lust I'll have to get
my old journals out yes I think there's
a juicy topic
it's a week-by-week lust beneath the
playground
that's Fridays at 10 a.m. Eastern Time
I think yes so be thanks so much
maybe I'm happy to have this sort of us
in my regular series too if you want to
come and share your thoughts at the edge
of your thinking from the group I think
maybe like once a month or something
yeah yeah that'd be really really great
so for next events we have a bunch one
nation and all win leadership from the
kind of one nation party Christopher
life that's coming tomorrow at 1:00 p.m.
Eastern Time and then the same day
Benjamin Boyce is talking about gender
transition and discourse and that's at
4:00 p.m. Eastern Time
so our SUV to those and check out our
wisdom Jim that being said just go to
the website sign up for the mailing list
you can check out the gift economy and
yeah just keep being awesome and
beautiful