all right it is Wednesday morning and I
tried to do a video a five minute video
and after about the tenth take I decided
that that is not actually what I want to
be doing right now um about a week ago
I'm committed to doing three videos a
week Monday Wednesday and Friday as well
as a evening a 40-minute live broadcast
every evening at 6 o'clock I did two of
them which is why today's it's called
day three even though it's about four
days later as I couldn't six o'clock at
my brain at the best of times isn't
isn't on at that moment
nobody probably needs to clear my throat
and honestly I've fallen apart since I
got back from Alberta I all I wanted to
do when I was in Alberta was come back
home to BC so I can feel like I was
doing something during this time Demick
feeling like I was in a little better
emotional state than other people
because I kind of already knew our world
was falling apart and at least the world
knows now a lot of my stress anxiety was
for like everyone else going about their
business and not realizing that our
system this is fragile and as it is and
I was in a really good state before the
pandemic hit like I was just allowing
the process to unfold that just because
I feel like I know how to save the world
doesn't mean I have to save it doesn't
mean I have to go out and do something
any different than what I'm doing then
then just living my life and following
my next step is enough and then the
pandemic hit and it was like but wait as
like one stuck at home can we just
create a tech cooperative how do we do
it I'm gonna go live I'm gonna bring all
these people on and then 6 p.m. day 3
hit and I just couldn't I couldn't go on
my brain wasn't working I'd smoke pot I
was just like not capable Jam that's
what I've been doing for the last week
is basically smoking pot throughout the
day maybe making it tonight a.m. without
smoking it and that would be a good day
and it's because of I went back into my
old pattern which is when I'm under
stress from the outside when there's
something I can't I can't affect well
like a virus I react with learning with
trying to understand as much as possible
and so I have I've been watching the
Canadian news the American news and more
recently like what's going on in India
and what's going on in Australia and
refreshing the kovat 19 sistex like
that's gonna do anything like that's
actually gonna and it's like there's a
part of this that is is I know it's the
opportunity to create something amazing
so we don't have to go back to life as
it was before we can create something
that works for every single
I know we can do it together I even kind
of know how we can do it together
but I've known it for two years so why I
think we'll the words world's under
panic all of a sudden now I'm gonna be
able to communicate it now it's gonna
just like everything's gonna go viral
and I'll have tens of thousands of
people who want to put money and/or
their time into creating this world that
works for everyone when I can't
communicate it effectively no of course
that wasn't gonna happen
and now I'm back to okay
I'm how do we smoke pot and binge watch
Tiger King and I binge watch one of the
other ones on Netflix I didn't thought
it was and I didn't even do a video on
that normally that is something that
well I'll watch a documentary or
something to be like oh I can do a video
on this which I could I could do in a
whole video in Turkey but what I'm now
committing to is not doing a video at
all Monday to Friday doing one when I
feel the urge when there's something
that can be explained in a five-minute
video like how our governments aren't
the answer yet they're all we got right
now we got to kind of listen while we
create the infrastructure underneath so
they can't become fascist dictators as
they so want to and without giving them
the option Oh No is it and that was also
what happens that 60 how about the other
one she might be in the other room let
me just turn off my camera into the walk
to the living room although that haha
why is there no time of day that works
either people are sleeping or people are
awake okay can hear me well awesome
oh that are we going to move the Wi-Fi
closer all right yeah we can see we can
see if moving closer to the Wi-Fi
actually helps with the streaming
quality but quite frankly everybody's at
home streaming these days and so we're
all sharing the internet and it is not
designed for this I was home by myself
for six years
I should be ought to say grandfathered
in I should have seniority
give me more bad faith internet and try
to save the world let's see let's see if
that
that works alright hopefully this works
a little better cuz that was also I
couldn't come out here at 6 p.m. which
is one of the reasons I didn't come out
here for the Thursday at 6 p.m. it just
doesn't work this order for my brain
doesn't work for our household those
aren't for for any of it so I'm hoping
this tree means a little better now that
were out in the living room closer to
the Wi-Fi but if not there isn't much I
can do about it besides only go live to
one location someone periscope that
YouTube at the moment which I don't I
honestly don't know I could just be on
periscope which is also like the part of
doing these lives was the idea that
periscope has lens and people on it and
so random people will find your scope
and that's awesome that doesn't
generally happen on YouTube and I only
have like 140 subscribers on YouTube but
what I want is people who want to help
create a better world together on the
YouTube channel so that we can have
conversations in the comments and come
up with ways that aren't on YouTube that
are in zoom and another occasions
because although right now what I've
tried to do a video on for five minutes
and dude like 10 cakes on it and now I'm
talking about it's just me falling apart
over the last week that although I
thought it was in a better emotional
state about koban 19 and a lot of other
people and that's actually still true I
let my old pattern kick in which was
taking on the weight of the world which
was like ok single-handedly I'm gonna
save the entire planet from something I
have no control over and can't actually
do anything about by the way has the
string gotten better is it it's it ok
now that I'm closer with my Wi-Fi I hope
so I assume if I'm not seeing people
complain about it then it's probably
someone ok but I fell apart and now I'm
back to like okay this is actually need
it needs to just happen in its own time
the same way it was before that just
because we're in a pandemic and everyone
stuck at home doesn't actually speed up
my timeline of being able to create this
thing even though it does speed up the
the audience that's potential who is
watching it out
and the right person seen this at the
right time is always what it's been
about it's not been about going viral
and having thousands and thousands of
people watching this video it's about
finding the handful of people who want
to create the the solution racing
together because that has been very
powerful I have a conversation with
Jordan tomorrow talking about solution
raising which I feel weird about just
because I'm like wait what are we
talking about how are you gonna help me
with this I don't know he's just a very
common and amazing and intelligent he
would leave and so I haven't talked to
him I talked to him about two weeks
after I joined game B he was
instrumental in creating gave me and it
was one of the best conversations I've
had when the only ones I had with one of
the higher-ups if there are higher ups
he did such a but this morning the video
I rewatched on periscope that I did
eight months ago and I'm literally in
the exact same space I was and right
Kevin as a camp except that I was on day
8 I'm not smoking pot and right now I'm
on our 10 not smoking pot and I plied on
some peanut later it's not gonna go away
but I have to figure out how to figure
out anything that's the point I don't
have to I don't have to figure it out
it's just I have to allow it to happen
and not take all of the stress on just
share my journey which is that's what
I'm doing sharing that like right I'm
gonna smoking pot for last week because
that's what I was capable of doing I
attended some meetings having a solution
raising tomorrow as well which no one's
RSVP'd to so maybe we're not happy no
solutions you know the solution raising
it tomorrow but one of the things that
came up yesterday during the antigua
cafe was a solution raising on mental
health and emotions that right now that
is that is the catastrophe we're about
to experience on this planet on the
scale
is it's not actually easy to sit at home
by yourself and be with your thoughts
and be with your extended feed with your
immediate family for extended periods of
time it's hard and we don't have the
mental health and interpersonal skills
our society's not about creating them
it's about creating capitalism it's
about creating a society that's
profitable
and go go-go-go-go and don't have time
to think about anything especially I
don't think about how our worlds not
working because we're all go go go go
and now people have nothing but time to
sit with themselves and sit with oh is
this the world we created mmm
interest in and half of us wanted to
never go back to how it was and go back
to something amazing and other people
are like can it just go back right out
of my business and I have my job and
neither of those things is going to
happen we don't know what's coming down
the line and that's where we have to
create the tools an infrastructure
that's designed for that that's designed
for look our governments don't know what
the they're doing maybe we should
be doing something different yet it's
the best we have read like our
governments are in no way adequate to
handle such a issue where they don't
like they don't we actually don't
understand Cove in 19 yet we're getting
to understand more and more but we don't
we don't understand economics that's
quite apparent even people who that's
all I know
like our politicians if they knew
anything know politics and marketing and
how and the economics and how to spin
things but you can't spin actual
economics I mean people can't go out and
can't do the means of production and
can't like our economy falls apart and
then what do you do they don't have
solutions for that because they don't
even have solutions for the stuff we do
know how to do I like the climate change
of like let's produce less carbon well
we couldn't possibly oh wait now we are
because everyone's the second time but
what I'm I'm committing to do lissa
pretend I didn't but I did this is what
I do I commit I do it for a little bit
and then it falls apart and then I
learned something from it falling apart
and that's perfect and this is he gonna
be anything besides what it is like I
can't I can't be a different person than
I was before the pandemic so it's like
ok owning that this is not all my
shoulders all I have to do is take the
next step and that has to be well good
enough for me
because I don't care if it's come up in
the world it's only ever about is it
good like I'm the one who's like you
have to save the world you know how to
do it so do it well I do I know what how
we can do it together
I can't do it myself this isn't
something that can be done by me yeah
not Elon Musk I don't have money I don't
have privilege I don't have why is
something privileged but I don't I can't
just snap my fingers and they can exist
when I play the lottery and I think I'm
winning 550 million I could I could save
their entire planet with no problem but
I don't miss a single about their own
disability and that's just the world
that I actually live in and so all I can
do is this like I can come on I can't
pay people to edit my videos I can go
live which is easier when it's actually
live than when I'm doing a five minute
trying to get my thoughts into a
five-minute span that's good enough that
it doesn't need to be edited because
they all need to be edited but I don't
get it I'm going on but that's it that's
what I'm so I'm going instead of doing
6:00 p.m. live broadcasts which we're
never gonna work I don't know why I
thought they would I can do maybe two a
week indefinitely on every night I'm
gonna do this time period so creating
possibility in a pandemic together I
still don't know what this hour is gonna
look like um going forward I would love
it if there were other people joining me
like my brother did the first night for
the day one on on both periscope and
YouTube you can watch it and then I did
one on my own and then I fell apart it
was like 6 p.m. I can't possibly not
smoke pot and be on point till 6 p.m.
and then on my brain in anyway show up
anyway even without pot but I can do
this I can come on me today clearly
because today I'm owning my Who I am
like my anxiety that I've fallen apart
and so I'm not in the state of like and
let's get it all done but this that I'm
gonna show up in different states at the
30 in the morning my household will be
in different states at 8:30 in the
morning and that's part of what this is
and that's where like this pandemic is
kind of what like it's the perfect it's
perfect for what our planet needs to go
through it's like our baby apocalypse I
know it feels like it's more than a baby
apocalypse but quite frankly it's not it
has a very short time span where you can
see that your actions are having in
Act two weeks we'll be able to see the
numbers coming down and or at least the
percentage it's going up going coming
down
trust the mouth people whereas with
climate change its onward like a
decade's time scale and everything that
people are doing right now for coab in
nineteen that there's people acting to
create innovation to help in the medical
fields right there they're doing how i
doing together into the country well i
mean the world's good i went grocery
shopping yesterday it only took three
hours that's the one day I won't be
doing this is whenever I go grocery
shopping like I only ever link rotary
dropping every two or three weeks
stocked up because I hate grocery
shopping but now the world does that
Nike shop for my dad two of my carts not
big enough so I'm like okay I can only
actually shop for two weeks at a time
so whatever day that is not this week or
next week but the week after I will not
be coming on in 8:30 in the morning my
time because I'm across your shopping
he'll already be in the grocery store
for half an hour oh but I think I'm
gonna try to cut show up however I am at
8:30 in the morning that is what I'm
gonna do I don't have to save the world
sure in that hour we don't have to save
the world's or in that hour we will but
it's it's me working through the process
of solution raising and finding other
people oh because in order to get in
right at 8:00 you have to show up at
7:45 and and then it takes about an hour
to walk through the store to pick up the
stuff and then it takes about a half an
hour to get through the checkout line
and then come back it's just everything
takes a little longer like you can't
even put yourself on the conveyor belt
until the person in front of you is
fully gone I'm like I need that time to
organize I don't even wash off the
conveyor belt look these things don't
make sense it's like they have policies
in place that my microbiologist self is
what okay cool yeah awesome
let's it makes you feel better meanwhile
I don't
I can't control other people I can't
control other people or other people or
social distancing the county can control
for social distancing around me but I
will I will use my voice to be like you
are too close to me but he's doing that
in anger it's not going to help doing it
in a calm voice well maybe but I'm
mainly inside and dealing with the
boredom that everyone else is and so
coming on here for an hour and just oh
it helps me I know that much
it helps me like that's what happened
during the hour that I watched the scope
that I watched this morning which was
exactly the one I was supposed to watch
like I have tons and tons of scopes out
in the world but this one someone
worried watched so I was like I'm just
gonna see what I said in that one it was
good it's what I needed to hear my
message for me eight months ago and then
it was eight months ago and I'm still
going through the same thing both that
I've evolved so much in those eight
months and like I hadn't heard of game B
before not broadcast I was still wearing
my necklace it fell off on my friend's
birthday which was my profound moment
it's last year
yeah something since then me done this
self coping 19 thing up it you've heard
about it I don't know maybe like all the
late night hosts that I loved watching
are doing it from their house and so
they thought no no people to help like
they have their crew but their crews all
at their own houses so they have to
email they have to figure everything out
I'm like yeah welcome to my world I
don't have money I just have to do a
show without having sound people without
you know without having a billion dollar
apartment without happy any of this
stuff at least but it's like you can see
the the downgrade of quality when you
don't have a team surrounding you that
it's there to make it look like they're
not there right it's there like even
democracy now Amy is is in the studio
and everyone else is is Skyped in
including Juan Gonzalez and I don't
remember the other the other woman who's
off my clothes
on there and you just see but it's okay
because we've already given them our
eyeballs with their you have the normal
audience and so you're probably not
go away just lets Trevor no it isn't
helpful with that you know special
special effects and stuff and John
Oliver is actually my favorite in this
time period
he's like I'm British I'm used to
telling jokes and having them land with
like flat him at him and Colbert had an
interview on the call on The Late Show
and the one Colbert does I can't with
what's called it was just awesome
because you can tell they're just
friends having a chat on your just felt
very human and very like she gives me in
my cab we don't have an audience how's
that going for you great me too
what's going on in the world and I think
those are the kind of conversations we
all need to be happy and I'm blessed
enough to be having those conversations
regularly
I haven't stepped into being part of
what my community is creating like the
singing that they're doing every night
and facilitated more my kid having
connection online through video chats
with family and friends because I
haven't been in the space myself but
I've still been following my routine
which is the idea cafe on Tuesday and my
good group today and our live board
meetings with together tech on Fridays
and Saturdays having it's starting to
become a team of meta project group
which I hope I hope this Saturday works
and there's actually other people there
because that would be great definitely
great to not just be bentley Adriel and
i talking about our individual projects
and what we could create you can't
create three people who can't create
four through people's projects because
then it's not going to extrapolate to
the rest of the population whereas if
you can create four twelve people's
projects it more readily can not go bad
because not here my dad's gonna be
making about but like I have to do this
at some time it works for my brain and
830 works for my brain in the morning
and then my job is not to be I was like
I can't boss was stop smoking pot this
is not because I was watching this the
scope and I was undated I'm not smoking
pot I'm like I'm God you should not
happening right now I can't go through
that heightened anxiety and not sleep
and everything that's required to coffee
pot what I need is to only be doing it
even
which we'll see we'll see about capable
either but the other my two addictions
that are very tied together or media and
and pod and so my media consumption has
gone out both the the numbing ones the
ones that are just like binge watching
shows to ignore everything that's going
on and also my consumption of what's
going on have both gone up and either of
which are really helpful they both
believe me feel like my helps gets to
becomes a mess so what I've decided is I
can do one or the other
I can watch shows completely sober or I
can smoke pot and not watch shows but I
can't do them both okay that seems like
something that's doable and we'll see
we'll revisit again in a few days and
see how that works but oh that reminds
me it's a school day it's just three to
beat school work with my kid Oh
in ten minutes so sorry 9:30 she
literally has to do one page from her
school look a day that's the level of
schooling that you throw bosses capable
of and honestly this everyone else he
feels like their kid needs to go to
school and learn so they can get me into
University do you know what the world is
gonna look like in in ten years
welcome spirals who are you raising your
kid to be it was ten years from now it's
not gonna look anything like now ten
months from that wasn't gonna look
anything like now so alright raising my
kid to be happy and well-adjusted is
wrong I'm also realizing my kid is the
opposite of obedient and I need her to
be obedient right now like when we're
out and about in the world number I
don't touch your face and she's like I
don't touch my face cuz you tell me not
to look for the love of God which is
just me it's like the government tells
you to do something but the medical
system tells me to do something and my
personality wants to do the exact
opposite cuz you told me to touch my
face all hello
and so it's personified in my kid back
at me like you and it is it's like we
need to listen to our governments right
now are they perfect
no we need a much better system to deal
with as it's coming at us because
they're not
there is no way how to quit for what
needs to be done right now and they're
the best view
so until we come up with something
better and I know we can come up with
something better I've come up with
something better my own house you can't
imagine but there's more of us you all
wants to be part of it it's much better
what we can't do is become the new
government we can't become a new force
that gets to dictate what everybody else
does but we can create the tools that
honor we don't have that power so the
government's first of all ignored that
there needed to be locked down for weeks
if not months and there wouldn't
immediate necessarily needed to be one
if they've done what they needed to do
back then which was like screenings at
the airport we now know people are you
symptomatic so that might not have
helped as much but may be symptomatic
people aren't gonna spread it as much as
coughing hacking people that's just
biology so it would have been better if
we had those things in place if we had
had basically anything in place we may
not have had to all sequester in houses
and shut down for two weeks or we could
have a nitwit engine fit in just two
weeks and not what it's gonna need to be
which is months and months where they
keep or just they're gonna keep
increasing will be open by Easter I mean
our politicians are not great they're
not but they were the best of you and so
people who are like well then I'm not
gonna listen and I'm gonna go out of my
house or like right there like my kid
touching her face it's like this is not
the times Rebelle you can run bail from
your living room you can repel from
online believe me I'm all about
rebellion and starting a revolution from
our living rooms on the Internet because
it's much more powerful than pouring out
into the streets pouring onto the
streets worked when the media covered
you and you weren't just pissing
everybody off and I get why they're
doing it nice important also like our
pipelines are getting made right not
when people are stuck inside which is
yes because just be is ridiculous
but of course that's what they're doing
every government is gonna try and take
as much leeway as they possibly can
right now they're putting up everything
that would they're doing all the
construction that would normally have
people protesting it of course they're
going to take this time to do that
they're gonna take this time to take as
much or so
liberties as they can take this time to
possibly off people that they don't want
he's like look at all these people who
died of coke in nineteen strangely it
was all the radicals I I don't think
that's gonna happen in my country where
I wouldn't be on here talking liquid if
I die from coke in 1901 create a
technology cooperative the dismantled
capital has only crates the world that
works for everyone please please because
I don't plan on no and I don't plan on
time but that like this is something
that could take anyone and so being and
that it's also a lot of I'm currently
falling apart that I again can't do
anything about it but just being aware
that one how much of ableism it's just
the week why do we care and I'm like
what you don't actually get is it's not
the week
it's the physically week the physically
week are the opposite of week they're
the ones who went through chronic
illness and disability from the time
they were born and they've learned
patience and ingenuity beyond what you
can even possibly come up with when
you're evil pocket when the world works
for you you can't create as ingenious
solutions is when the world doesn't work
for you but we don't listen to people
who the world doesn't work for so the
very people who will be instrumental in
creating a better world are people who
are seen of as weak by society like my
nervous system shuts the down when
I'm under stress which means I've had to
be more aware of how stressful our
society is he D stress my own life in a
way that I am better prepared for this
crisis than most other people because I
have the coping mechanisms I know yes I
was down the smoking pot for a week but
I knew that well it was happening I was
like this is an interest you know that's
that's funny this is what's happening
right now
and I don't think it's necessarily done
but I do feel the spark to like clean my
house and the smart you like
together at the same time I'm like can I
do both of those things and that and
although it might not be the energy that
other people need me to have I need to
stay in curiosity with this thing and
stay in play with it like yes we're all
stuck inside and this is a
very scary time but if I can't make
jokes about it and I can't look at the
ridiculousness of the world that's going
on that I can't function and so I need
to be able to function so I can create
what I'm here to do and for the right
people that will resonate with them and
for the other people it won't and that
is the learning that happens in every
level of this thing that I've been
looking for for three years is I just
have to show up as me and every time I
try to be anything different it falls
apart of nothing else parts tip I'm
learning that I just have to keep
learning because I just watched me again
from eight months ago like okay forget
it I can't put the whole world on my
shoulders this is like the fact if
you're watching this on youtube it's
called simply say so we're all been be
entering through life it's that it's not
cheaply same to the world by being the
new Elon Musk and the newly we're a
leader it's like I'm saving the world by
meandering through life by following my
guidance and my next step and as soon as
I try to take it all on and try to
figure out a big map I know the big map
but did you communicate the thing about
somewhere and so that is what I'm gonna
be doing for an hour today is coming on
and communicating the vision clearly not
today who needs it today but
communicating the vision on what the
possibility could look like in the
pandemic what we can create together and
why we need to create it together
because we can see what's happening in
the world and this is like everything
I've been talking about for the last few
years although I had no way envisioned a
pandemic happening that was not what I
was I was guarding us against this is
our baby apocalypse that we can if we
can figure this one out we can figure
out all the other ones we just need to
extract Lee what we're doing here in a
very short time span of two weeks cycles
of information instantaneous information
instead of decades-long information so
the scientists and the engineers that
are working together and crowdsourcing
tools and it's the taking over of
factories where it's like this is what
we actually need right now this is a
dire need that's what our governments
are somewhat capable of doing is looking
at the next big thing I'm getting what
I'm doing right like it's like following
you the next thing but I government SAR
not there to follow their their path
doesn't lead to saving the world their
path leads to exactly
we have because like you imagine if I
was in charge of the world it's just
like oh today I'm gonna go live every
day at 6 p.m. and then two days later
was like that does not work from Unicorn
live at 6 p.m. I'm going live at 8:30 in
the morning instead it's very
wishy-washy and in no way does anyone
want that as a leader but doing that is
going to lead to a better world
because I can see what's happening
whereas for a governess did that we
understand they do do that Trump does
and it's really disconcerting it's like
this is not a big big deal we have 15
numbers we'll be down to zero in a
little while
I knew this was a pandemic from day one
I was caught at pandemic long before
anyone else
why didn't he eventually there's
hospitals only about two beds they are
so nice to get out me stench later stat
like it's very disconcerning mine comes
from the opposite side where I can see
everything I can see why I can see how
Trump comes to his conclusions and I can
see how he comes to a conclusion the
next day like like seeing the diversity
that exists so if we take step a it's
gonna have any number of these 15
possibilities happen but we're not going
to know which one until we take step a
and all of that paralyzes anyone because
ticket nutty stuff comes with all of
these ramifications but people who are
currently in power the very people that
we thought could gave us the projection
they could do that but nobody can
actually do that no like it's like I'm
on I'm in charge and I'm gonna take
action and we're gonna like what is the
word like boldly go there and that
doesn't actually work because what we
need is someone who's like we're gonna
try this because it's the best option we
have and we're gonna see where it's
falling apart and correct that and
correct that right now we're seeing that
everyone the world worked for a very
specific group of people
she can't have been talking about for
three years it's like the type-a
personalities who can fake it till they
make it who have pretend charisma or you
know it's of them have real charisma but
most of it a lot of it is like if you
read books it's like how to fake having
Christmas had a fake have being a
professional not how to be yourself and
succeed in the world which is what I'm
here to do because it's where energy
actually comes from it's where ingenuity
actually comes from in my experience
it's like being yourself finding your
own people
doing what everyone else is done all
along but society doesn't work for those
people there's a reason I'm not rich
there's a reason I'm not powerful at the
moment and if I ever in like we allow
rich powerful people to be quirky and
different we don't allow quirky
different people become rich and
powerful so it's like out of the few who
happens they like Prince
Elton John and certain people who are
lady thought awkwardly weird and quirky
but and they got their being weird and
quirky but they're few and far between
we don't look for the weird and quirky
people on you to be like you're gonna be
a star
I was like they have to have more of a
voice to get there they have to have
more talent to be able together and I
guarantee you that talent came from them
being very quirky
and because they weren't spending their
time pretending to be one way they were
able to put it into their music into
their art and that's what we need is
everyone being really their own version
of weird quirky and then putting their
genius out into the world and then we
organize that in anyway we create a
world that works for everyone right now
we're happy all of the stuff that we're
doing is facilitated by technology
that's owned by other people if Google
if we trusted Google Google could help
immensely to this kind of it but what
that would look like is them quote being
in cahoots with our governments we trust
me neither of them and no one's gonna
make of all the sudden people's left
track here where you've been
you have koban 19 we'll just we'll just
email all of your contacts well does he
know all the people you put me in
contact with because we know where your
phone's been and whose phone's been
right there but they're not even sisters
they can't really even own they have
that information even though we all know
they have that information let alone do
anything with that information because
of privacy axes that are should be there
but if we owned Google that is something
that we can say hey if I'm the person
with kovat 19 I want you to tell my
contacts if I'm the person who's been in
contact with somebody cuz it I want to
know yes you have my data but that's
only gonna happen in a way that's it's
you that's trustworthy and usable and if
Google did it it wouldn't be usable they
wouldn't let us have that information so
everyday people wouldn't be able to
happen
government officials who can happen I'm
gonna track you down and let you know
which just is different energy like it's
like right now there's a ton of people
going to oppositional defiance but it's
like you want me to stay inside I'm
gonna do anything but stay inside and
it's a natural human tendency for some
of us to have that if we if we create it
together it's a different scenario like
if we got together ones like we we have
to socially distance we have to stay
inside why aren't you how can we make it
work it's very different than a top-down
you just do like we're seeing in India
right now they basically were like shut
down everything everyone stay inside for
three so any kind of forethought without
people being able to stock up on
groceries which you can't when you're
living on your daily wage and then
spending it on food you don't have the
ability to do that and so hey bobert did
you know this was all coming bummer
the time-traveling cat because you
should have warned us this was big
that's lipstick like and that's what
right now if we had known that this was
coming in a year from now what would we
have had in place not just individually
but collectively what kind of social
medium would we want to be able to deal
with right now what kind of information
system would we want to have access to
because people's lack of trust in the
governments in the meat people's lack of
understanding of basic science is gonna
kill more people and so it's not like I
just watched this I read this own
article every that second bobert read
this article this morning on the
Downtown Eastside which is where they
have a big opioid crisis we have like
the safe injection site which i think is
still open but a lot of the people like
there was just so much so much people
don't don't put themselves in other
people's shoes they don't understand
it's not a thing they do it's all I do
but this woman who took a in
somebody's garden and she's filming her
shaming her running after her like how
dare and you get a poop bag clean it up
and
everyone in the Bhangra was like that's
gross I think I'm like are you kidding
me like first all this woman doesn't
look homeless because people don't look
homeless do you know where homeless
people were before on the
street but also in libraries and in
cafes and in everywhere that's closed
right now they're like just go find
nature I'm like I'm sorry he wants me to
go walk with those nature basically
everywhere I've to tell you your bushes
nature my kids play around here like I
get in this is why we don't want people
 outside at the same time what
do you do when nature calls like people
have needs if they can't find a toilet
if toilets aren't available to them this
is what they're doing and they don't
have the ability to wash their hands
anyway there was someone who had a guest
written a blog post about the Downtown
Eastside and he was saying how he took
his dog out last night and all he heard
so much coughing and the Downtown
Eastside all these people who aren't
housed and who have mental health issues
and addiction issues and are more
concentrated together now we're starting
to see now that they have the clubs
they're starting to like the in smaller
groups but they weren't and it's already
spreading people already have it and I
got the next level of information which
was like yep these are gonna be some of
the first wave of people who are going
to be on the ventilators who are gonna
be because we didn't take care of them
in the good times we didn't make sure
they were hoes we didn't make sure their
mental health was taken care of we
didn't make sure their addictions they
have tools for their addictions and so
they're gonna be the some of the hardest
hit in the beginning and they're gonna
be on the ventilator so welcome to
Canada you don't kick off people who are
poor to give it to people who are rich
which means these people not being taken
care of it's gonna affect every level of
society and it's happening in the states
too where people don't have access to
health care so now we're seeing what
that looks like what does it look like
when people that have access to health
care and it's we're connected and so
when one person hurts it truly hurts the
rest of us not in my empathetic I care
about the humanity way but in real the
people who you thought of were the
weakest in society and we often think
about that of addiction people who are
poor again it's those very people who
generally are more compassionate and
more empathetic and they feel
the world more strongly and if we world
worked for everybody we would get their
genius and their purpose instead of what
currently happens anyway it's gonna it's
showing it's showing that we're all
interconnected the beginning of the end
of the Trump era save this point of
history awesome you glad to know to
become through this we do we give the
world the cats I mean yeah this journey
this is our greatest honor its kind of
perfect
like it's from a virus point of view if
you could design the perfect virus to
become a pandemic it would be one with a
long leg of it would be long leg it
would actually be more deadly but then
if it was more deadly we'd be more
emphatic and more hopeful I don't think
would be able to stay at houses there
wouldn't be people at the grocery stores
that would leave grocery stores and so
this is kind of like if I was mother
nature looking after my children and
global warming wasn't like all the
species destruction of humanity being in
poverty and not all of humanity but it
was a large chunk of humanity being in
poverty didn't wake them up this would
be the ground you know would give them
like it's like okay this is gonna kill
one percent of you this is going you're
all gonna have to stay at home and think
about what you've done and this is going
to show you how you could come together
you can come together and create
which is definitely happening or you can
come together and create beauty which is
also happening and if you don't create
the beauty because other people are
creating you're part of the crazy
 alright if you in this and you
don't have to in this pandemic it
doesn't have her to you to make cookies
for your neighbor or go and help
somebody walk their dog or whatever
that's okay it's doesn't add to your
life to give to other people when you're
not working and you're not and yes it
does
so people are choosing to give
themselves to others because it feels
good the warm we can concentrate that
the more we can actually organize that
and help that happen on a more massive
scale the better and so that is part of
what we would hopefully have done if we
had known this was coming here down the
road the thing is this although this
will go away it's gonna have a drastic
impact on our economics that we they do
not understand even the people who are
economists do not understand because the
ecosystem is the economy is like this
we're an ecosystem that we both designed
rules for and want it to play by those
rules when it doesn't and it's a it's a
somewhat natural force that we then
still try to mold into our own or how we
want it to be and the more money and
privilege you have the more you can mold
it but it's not actually it's also an
ecosystem that follows its own set of
rules and so nobody understands all of
it because you can't know what
individuals are gonna do like I don't
think most people thought that toilet
paper would be the thing people would
somehow come by because really toilet
paper like it's the one thing you could
actually solve so much as yes I use
toilet paper daily if we run oh I have a
washing machine
I have fabric we should like figure it
out there's water as long as water is
coming through our tap we're good but
like I can't recreate food instantly
food is a much bigger problem than
toilet paper but all of it is a problem
we need to know that our supply chain
that is needed not all the little
that you can buy from the dollar store
that like you really don't need like
food and tools and things that we do
absolutely need and the things that help
create that fertilizer the tractors then
need to exist and they need and I don't
know what the world's gonna look like in
six months to a year because places like
India and China when it was happening in
China and they're gonna get a second
wave but the people who create our food
on mass for cheap aren't necessarily
creating our food right now in six
months to a year in Canada they are our
farmers haven't stopped working but they
can't necessarily get it out of the
field
our global system is showing its
fragility and one of the things
I do want to talk about maybe this what
we'll talk about tomorrow cuz I didn't
know plan for today besides my well I
mean it's like go live because you can't
do this five-minute video so do an hour
video you don't have to put it that's
the solution um but I think it was
Bonita Roy who had men who had said
something in one of the comments for
we've sacrificed basically everything
for efficiency and so we don't have
redundancy built in and so everything's
made in one place like if the Amazon
goes out under right now what are we
doing
um how do I get things delivered well
they don't actually make anything they
only do the deliver that century they've
started making things they see as
profitable whatever they're mainly in
the delivery service and a marketplace
which is something we could recreate
together in a much more ethical
efficient way not if and this is where
yes there is a trade-off between
efficiency and a done redundancy but our
current capitalist system doesn't allow
for redundancy and only efficiency but
in a really inefficient way that all
these people are competing for our
dollars and they have to market to us to
get that and they all have to have an HR
department they all have to have a legal
department they all have to like his non
efficient and they pass all that costs
on to us whereas if we can have
redundancy because redundancy is
important it's important to not have one
pasta sauce because people have
different tastes and also what if that
pasta sauce goes under then no one has
pasta sauce remains who knows how to
make that lots of people but having
redundancy both gives you the diversity
of options and the helpful in this it's
easy for them you can see but in the
current way it's done that we got the
worst of both everything that's done for
profits not for profit the shareholders
and it's not actually done to give us
redundancy it's not actually done it's
it's survival of the fittest of the
companies and so whoever can be the
charismatic fake it till you make it
person who hides all of the all of the
 they do under the rug
you're gonna have a position of power
over somebody who can who is honest Oh
like yeah we put a lot of salts into our
pasta sauce because you like salt
turns out human like salt so we do it's
cheap there's a lot of salt it's like no
this is less salt than our umber salt 1
so find the one that's waiting back your
lesson so if you look at it they're
actually the same sure sure anyway um
trading system where we own the company
and so instead of it trying to make
pasta sauce and selling you this is the
best pasta sauce it's like hey let's
make the cheapest best pasta sauce and
share in the profit not sharing because
there is no profit share in how do we
make it the cheapest like how do we have
less actual resources going in to make
it and that's where efficiency is good
but redundancy is not if we have only
one place that makes all the pasta sauce
for the world they have to ship it out
everywhere there's there's a trade-off
between being local and you can get
right we don't want a pasta factory a
yogurt factory yet no nope nothing a la
factory everywhere on every block so and
we don't want just one in the world that
we all have to shift everywhere in the
world it needs to be redundant and
deficient and those are are actually
natural trade-offs but in our current
system we have an allowed redundancy
everyone who's a business person has to
be so it's a high risk personality and
so because they're a high risk
personality if I owned a business I
might be able to weather this storm
because I would have had three months in
the reserve I would have been like well
what happens when he puts the climate
change hits I wouldn't keep leveraging
my business and go on to the next thing
and take the next risk in the next risk
and make sure every dollars working to
its highest level because I would
understand the risk needs to be
mitigated but then I wouldn't have
succeeded in the old marketplace because
I would have had to lower risk tolerance
to all the people I was competing
against who have a high risk tolerance
who are willing to spend like their last
penny and have it leverage that they're
in more debt and more debt more
somebody's working for them because they
don't even think Oh what happens if I
stop making income and I stop to pay my
debt I absolutely think that because I
understand finance and I understand life
and that life happens since sometimes
you're not able to pay your debt and so
we're about to see how the world that
worked for a very select few individuals
when it flips and it no longer works for
them it costs us everything or most
everything because we're about to see
all of the businesses tanked
even the ones we just bailed out and you
know the states just bailed out four
trillion Petroleum sellers that are too
big to fail aren't too big to fail and
they're going to fail because if you
needed if you needed that much cash
injection on like day three of this
crisis what do you think you're going to
be out like three months six months down
the line we don't need to be putting
money into the top that really does very
little you need banking services we
don't need the Wall Street we don't need
the big bankers we don't need that right
now
we do need people be able to get access
to their individual cash but our entire
system is based on debt and people are
gonna aren't very paying debt like today
today April 1st the day when the rents
due the shit's gonna hit the fan and
maybe not this month because this is
like two weeks in someone was able to
work too much in two weeks they might
have have rent money May 1st
even less so and when you have to choose
between rent and food you pick food
especially when you can't be kicked out
but then what happens when this crisis
is over and like everyone gets kicked
out at the same time or all the
landlords can't afford their mortgage
they have it they all foreclose on like
we can see this one coming
in a way the bank so they should have
been able to see the mortgage crisis of
2008 happen they did it from like what
we give for people mortgages that they
can't afford and then give them huge
penalties when they can't afford it no
brainer Oh what wait we we made those
into type a assets and sold them to each
other like they were like they were
government bonds hmm I see why that's a
problem but now it's like this isn't
about the the
subprime mortgages the people should
have seen is a bubble this is all the
bubbles this is all the people like our
bank Cooper real estate is all of it all
of it at the same time like we have a
lot of places that aren't there that
they're vacant and so because people use
it for money laundering from from China
and Hong Kong and whatever else in the
world where they make money and they
need to show that it came from a
legitimate legitimate source they just
want something to hold that money and
maintain its value and hopefully
increase it value but they don't have
tenants it's not worth the headache for
them to have tenants so it's just a
vacant property in fact people will buy
like skyscrapers worth of vacant
property they never gonna step foot in
no one's ever gonna step foot in it and
it's just kind of a placeholder and
place hold money to resell it later but
they some of those people own work
they're like what a great ideas people
mortgages on it
those people generally have to rent to
no accept at least be able to pay the
interest when that's not happening when
anything that happens for Vancouver like
thank you for is gonna have to figure
out that burn all have overinflated rent
and no one can afford it without jobs
and so the markets gonna come down but
that's gonna hurt everyone who based
their their business plan on on that it
means what's up yeah I'm gonna be off of
here actually I can get off here now
okay bye hi I'll see you guys tomorrow
you