[Applause]
[Music]
hey folks welcome back to the Dark Horse
podcast 13th livestream Q&A session with
dr. Heather huiying and me brett
weinstein dr. brett weinstein neither of
us are medical doctors as we keep
reminding you yes but we have relevant
expertise over in biology space I must
say during COBIT 19 never been a glad or
not to be a medical doctor it would be
it's challenging work for sure yes and
we admire you who are doing it thank you
for taking care of us so in our last Q&A
we received a question from echo about
an article that I am going to just read
the abstract of first time we're gonna
talk about it briefly it's called
artificial selection on male genitalia
length alters female brain size you're
gonna read this without giggling without
giggling I can do that I know you can
it's from 2016 male harassment is a
classic example of how sexual conflict
of remaining leads to sex specific
behavioral adaptations females often
suffer significant cost for males
attempting forced calculations and the
sexes can be an arms race ever male
coercion yet despite recent recognition
that divergent sex specific interests
and reproduction can affect brain
evolution sexual conflict has not been
addressed in this context here we
investigate with artificial selection on
a correlative male successive coercion
genital length affects brain anatomy in
males and females we analyze the brains
of eastern mosquitofish
cambogia Halbrook i which had been
artificially selected for long or short
ghana podium got a podium being the
instrument organs the equivalent of
penises thereby mimicking selection
arising from differing levels of male
harassment by analogy to how prey
species often have relatively larger
brains and their predators we found that
we found that female but not male brain
size was greater following selection for
a longer gown a podium brain sub-region
volumes remain unchanged these results
suggest that there is a positive genetic
correlation between male gana podium
length and female brain size which is
possibly linked to increased female
cognitive ability to avoid male coercion
we propose that sexual conflict is an
important factor in the evolution
brain anatomy and cognitive ability
which is fascinating it is fascinating a
little hard to interpret well I mean if
they're if their results are true they
find an arms race effectively between
male gender lengths and female brain
size the idea being that of all the
various mechanisms for sexual selection
that have been proposed in the world
male-male competition and female choice
being often described as at odds
although you and I both think they
should not be described as iPods in this
case in a species such as the mosquito
fish no fish in which male male
competition is imagined to be a driving
force of sexual selection and in species
of mammal competition being a driving
source of sexual selection it is often
the possibility of male coercion rather
than females choosing mates it is males
coercing females to mate with them that
is what results in successful
reproductive events that you would have
in such species and these guys seem to
have found that as the ability to coerce
through male genital size increases so
does the cognitive ability of females
increase in order to upset the would be
coercive strategies alright well let's
start here though first we should point
out that in humans things work a little
differently and totally lacking in gone
a podium well but being hung like a
horse is more likely to make you better
able to persuade but not coerce I can't
see how it would help you coerce yeah
okay but here the thing that I find
curious about this and I haven't read
the paper I'm just going off the
abstract here is that I might expect the
longer gana pod√≠a to select for larger
brain size in females but why if you
select for the larger gana podium do you
get larger brain size so the paper says
kinetic correlation but is this because
this trait varies in a wild population
and that therefore a female who is born
into this population with that parameter
having been turned up for male genital
size knows that she is in a population
in which coercion is likely to be more
effective and therefore this is
automatically favored that sounds a
little far-fetched to me yeah I I grant
that it's it it's just correlation
without providing an obvious mechanism
for how they might be causally linked
how they might have become how they
might have become causally linked
because doesn't it appear to be that the
argument is that female brain size is
enhanced in order to avoid coercive
males and it is imagined that the
coerciveness of males has an accurate
proxy in general sighs yep all right
is it more to say here I don't think
there's lots of room for more Jo oh sure
there's lots more to say but I will say
though if we can go meta on it okay
right so we are very difficult to
embarrass with questions and generations
of students have tried but I don't think
they have succeeded and we have been
through some some tough some tough
questioning by students designed to
cause us to blush and anyway if you want
to try game on go for it I will say that
I don't I don't have any reason to think
that this question from echo with whom
we've now been in a little bit of
communication behind the scenes was sent
to embarrass I think this person is
legitimately seeking information in in
pursuit of actually some work that
they're doing
I actually think sometimes the ones who
want to see you blush they do so they
attempt to trigger it with some
affection oh sure yeah all right so as
in past Kunis we're going to restrict
this to an hour and we're gonna get
through as many of these that came in in
the first live stream as possible in
something like a half an hour so let's
see right now it's 207 and then we will
switch to the the questions from the
from this live stream and get through as
many of those in the order in which they
came in so for the first live stream we
are ranking them just by
Terry mount because that is the rubric
that is easiest to do so the first
question what is your and this we
considered give me a whole episode on
this question so we're not going to
spend a whole episode but the first
question is what is your opinion of the
planned MX series any truth worth
researching and let me just say first
that you know probably people watching
have ran into this we alluded obliquely
to it in the first half here in the
first live stream but there appear to be
at least two maybe more videos
circulating there's a two-hour ish video
that's actually called planned emic I
believe that has all sorts of conspiracy
hypotheses that it would appear to be
unrelated to copa90 know yet somehow
they link them yes and then there's and
then there's a 28 or so minute video
that is mostly although not entirely the
filmmaker interviewing the doctor
megabits I think do you think of it yeah
as to what she believes understands the
situation to be so neither of us have
watched the 2-hour thing you dipped into
it a little bit and decided it wasn't
worth our time dipped right out dipped
right out the 28 minute video is is more
complicated yeah let's say a few things
got it one thing is that it appears that
Judy Mike Ovitz is a voice that has
credentialing that makes this worth
paying attention to
and I must say many of the things that
she says while hard for us to evaluate
whether they are accurate do have a kind
of plausible ring to them with respect
to how academic politics for example
functions on the other hand there's a
bunch of things in that half-hour
documentary that are incorrect and so
what I'm left with is this has caught
the public imagination if I take my
a professional toolkit to it what I get
are things I can't evaluate things that
are true and concerning and other things
I know to be false which leaves me with
the sense that this is not a it is
certainly not to be taken at face value
there's enough wrong with the analysis
that is presented that I don't I
wouldn't advise people to circulate it
as if it's right which says can we just
pause there the the mixture of that I
actually understand from other sources
to be true even if even though and
perhaps of course it doesn't satisfy the
shared common narrative being pushed by
most new sources that other thing I know
not to be true
and there's a whole lot here that I
cannot assess independently that mixture
is exactly what makes this very very
difficult to assess and you know unlike
say the current County video which
didn't really have generic claims that
couldn't didn't have sweeping claims
that couldn't be assessed either by the
numbers they themselves gave or from
other sources and so it was possible to
go through and say actually there's a
whole lot here that just isn't true with
with this video with Mike Ovitz megabits
I don't know how to pronounce your name
I don't remember it's really hard to
know about the veracity of claims about
what happened that ended up with her
being absent prison I gather given that
those it's it's exactly in locked
documents you know we have no we have no
way of perceiving it but do you want to
say anything about what what you what
you saw that you think is not yeah we
should if we're gonna do that we should
probably come back to it systematically
later there were a number of these
places or
an alarm bell went off and it was like
that claim doesn't isn't right I'm the
obvious one had to do with her point
about the sand in the beaches containing
microbes that are necessary for immunity
relative to Carabas running iris the
fact is this isn't how the immune system
works there is truth to the idea that
the immune system becomes informed of
hazards based on encountering things in
the wild and so the old George Carlin
routine about training the immune system
by swimming in the Hudson because it
needs practice isn't without merit but
the idea that the net benefit of
encountering this coronavirus and the
wild would point in the direction of the
beach being curative no no what's
curative about the beach is that it's
outdoors where it's very hard to
transmit this thing and you're in the
Sun so you're making vitamin D and those
two things together suggest actually the
beach is probably a good place to go so
vision wise it feels like confirmation
bias right like ah let's pick one of the
very many bad policies that's been
handed down don't go to the beach yeah
and choose that as evidence that it's a
government plot to keep people sick
right I see I see no reason to imagine
that that go don't go to the beach
orders visited you never imagined
conspiracy when simple incompetence will
do the job and this you know this looks
like not saying that there's not
conspiracy yeah but with regard to the
beach orders invoking conspiracy to
explain the beach orders also seemed
uncared best yeah so there's another
heart that I actually there were two
questions about the plan demmick let me
just see if we can address the other one
while we're addressing this one it would
be good to hear from someone
knowledgeable regarding the claims made
by Mike Ovitz parentheses chronic
fatigue and xmrv mouse brains used in
polio vaccine and retrovirus infections
in the plan demmick doc boy
don't remember no I do remember a claim
another one of the things that set off a
red flag for me was she said if you've
ever gotten you say if you've ever
gotten a flu vaccine then you have been
injected with corona virus because these
things are grown in animal media because
these things are grown in animal media
and all the animals that are sourced for
the animal media which they're grown
have corona viruses circulating in them
that was the logical yeah I would want
to sleep it's a lot of leaps and it
strikes me as very unlikely but anyway
if you know better if you've got those
links so that we can follow that set of
links in the chain we'd be willing to to
reinvestigate this but yeah this left me
wanting the references wanting the right
jacket you know if the story if the
personal story of Mike Ovitz is is true
and I'm agnostic on that at this point I
think some of it is certainly true and
you know all of it may be true then it's
understandable that we couldn't have
some of the pieces of that story because
it would exactly be under some kind of
you know legal lockdown but I want but
the but the scientific piece is the
logic of what is or is not true or real
or organic about the current thing that
we're living through should be
decipherable by people who have
sufficient background to decipher
information when it's put in front of
them and we found no way to find the
information with which to interpret many
of the claims yeah and if I can just as
long as we're doing this there's another
conspiracy theory involving there your
hypothesis very good nice catch there is
a conspiracy hypothesis that has been
offered by one of the Nobel laureates
responsible for the discovery of the HIV
particle and his allegation is that
there is a HIV sequence in the Czar's
co2 virus now as far as I'm concerned
were that the case where a sufficiently
long sequence that it had to have come
from HIV to be found in this virus it
would be all but game over for
the argument that this was not a
laboratory manipulated entity however
when one investigates this claim it
turns out that it is weak on the basis
that similar sequences are found in a
wide variety of things including
bacteria which aren't closely related to
viruses at all in any standard sense and
that basically the point is that
something has caused these sequences to
be widespread because they are useful
means that the discovery that something
that is short and analogous to something
found in HIV doesn't necessarily mean
anything at all so that's the thread to
check there is is it a sufficiently
improbable sequence that its presence
there is actually indicative of it
having been transported there which
would be extraordinary well but or
another hypothesis is is it to use the
technical term pleasee amorphic to both
HIV and the corona virus which is to say
please the amorphic means is it an
ancestral state that was shared by the
most recent common ancestor of the two
viruses which you know clearly it's
implied by I don't remember his name
this this Nobel laureates argument that
this is a derived state in HIV or in or
in viruses like that and a derive state
here and it's showing up both places
when it's such a long and therefore
complex thing is extremely unlikely to
have happened by chance but arguing that
oh my god sturgeon have bones and we
have bones and isn't that really
unlikely to have happened by chance when
you can go back and say actually bone
evolved before the most recent common
ancestor of sturgeons and humans evolved
and therefore there's nothing to be
explained because it is pleasee amorphic
it is ancestral to the state of the most
recent common ancestors so ancestor of
humans and sturgeons whereas if you said
oh my god sturgeon have a language and
humans have language that's really
unlikely to have happened by chance
there must be something else going on
there and you go back and you say wow
not only does the most recent common
ancestor of human in sturgeons don't
have language but the basal mammal
doesn't have language the basal reptile
doesn't have language so then there's
something to be explained but in this
case you may be maybe this sequence is
actually ancestral to pleasee amorphic
to the
most recent common ancestors of the two
viruses which would be fabulous if there
was reason to think that the two viruses
were actually linked ancestrally through
something that we would call a virus
right right they're both RNA viruses one
of them is a retrovirus one of them is
not but we don't even know that so what
we're discovering is that the tools that
you and I are so familiar with the
evolutionary phylogenetic tools and the
reasoning that goes with them works
really well for example within you know
the SARS Cove - starting in Wuhan that
is to say within a evolution which has
an origin a single origin and a
branching from within a lineage and so
it also probably works if you go back to
all coronaviruses that's an
honest-to-goodness clade but if you go
back before coronaviruses to let's say
other viruses and then all of the Tree
of Life we don't know how to map these
things we don't know what the
relationship is in part because the very
nature of viruses is to have gotten rid
of everything they're not using and to
borrow it from their hosts and so in
some sense they leave us scratching
their heads because they've abandoned
all the stuff that would normally allow
us to map them on to the Tree of Life
yeah I think phylogenetic biologists
have a decent sense at a clade bigger
than Corona Corona verde I think it is
but it's not to all viruses or at least
the the expected confidence in the
phylogenetic tree for all viruses is
very low compared to the confidence at
the level of smaller clades and and how
viruses link on to the rest of life on
Earth I think actually what we can infer
from what we've seen is there is no tree
of all viruses there may be a tree of
all retroviruses for example but that
the viruses have multiple origins so
that's the distinction right there and
the problem is my what I would say is
the leading hypothesis from what I
understand is that viruses have actually
freed themselves from what they were
before they were viruses in other words
they
were genes within creatures of some kind
and at the point that they leave those
creatures and strike out on their own
and abandon all the machinery that they
would need borrowing it from those new
hosts when they enter them they become
hard to map but it may be you know if
coronaviruses evolved from some tetrapod
then the point is where would you map
them onto the tree well they would be
mapped to the tetrapod most closely
associated with the one they emerged
from so it would be a very weird tree
because you'd have a virus related to a
creature you know so anyway it does push
our tools to a level that they were not
built to to explain that's right okay
that's two questions and half our time
so let's let's move a little here
argument for reopening is that I prefer
3% of people dying probably much lower
than that than my children starving I
can't rely on government to make
competent decisions by now there is no
evidence they are capable of such so not
so much a question but a comment and you
know we can both understand the concern
for sure well and I would also say a
this virus if nothing else raises all
kinds of questions that we need to
address like why is it that your ability
to feed your children is anything but
our collective concern in this case
presumably neither you nor your children
have done anything to invite this and
therefore this is obviously a case in
which we are better off taking the risk
that we all face which is going to be at
many different levels and neutralizing
it through a path that is social in
other words just the same way we take
the risk of your house burning down and
we say actually you know what we're
gonna do we're gonna put a little
Building in every neighborhood in which
there are people who have equipment to
put your house out of it catches fire
you call the number and we show up right
we neutralize that risk as best as we
can and nobody complains about it cuz
it's such a great idea well why is this
any different so there's that as for
government not functioning you're right
it's not functioning
it is pathological and what I wish is
that when we did not have this pandemic
people had been more interested in
having the discussion of how dangerous
it is to have a pathological governance
apparatus and what might be done to
rescue it from the things that have
corrupted it next question
somewhat tongue-in-cheek I think what is
the attack vector from back to human
bite bad breath no it says bad breath
doesn't it Oh bite bats breath batch
breath it does yes yeah this this
assumes that there was bat to human
vector and we've talked we've talked to
her earlier livestreams about what it
might have been I think originally the
wet market hypothesis is that eating
recently dead bats would have allowed it
to be transmitted or hand maybe it's
handling corpse at recent bat corpses
and then touching your mouth could be
but the think about it from the virus's
perspective the virus is experimenting
with different mechanisms for getting
into the future one way to get into the
future is to leave the species that you
are currently infecting and find a new
species that increases the chances
you'll make it in the future because
you've got two chances rather than one
two different species are carrying you
so finding your way into secretions that
are liable to be encountered increases
the chances of that so I know that there
is a rare but established ability I
think I've got this right for rabies to
be transmitted by bat urine encountered
in a cave you know the bats are on the
ceiling of the cave you walk through the
cave there's a mist in the air some of
it is bat urine and it gets in your eye
you're not working on behalf of the bat
PR department at the moment or no
unfortunately not sorry bats but but
anyway it could be anything but imagine
that viruses that have made it if this
is the future for all of the viruses in
the past how did they get here they
found their way into secretions that
were liable to be encountered by other
creatures and they had a generalist
enough plan to be able to invade the
cells of those creatures some fraction
of the time when they found them and
they had a genomic plan that was
sufficiently experimental to find its
way from one part of history to the next
yep so anyway that's what they do it is
unlikely to have been bite in this case
because of the clade of bats that this
current a virus is or related conent
corona viruses are known from well I'm
not sure why you say that if somebody
was handling these bats they would have
probably bit hmm so handling either for
food or for research
yeah or you know bat falls out of the
sky cuz it's sick and you pick it up and
it bites you cuz it's afraid that's not
so unlikely but again I would say the
chances of this having come directly
from a bat to a human without lab
involvement seems pretty remote explore
and Laura yep
dear hmb thank you so much for your
invaluable contributions to the world
sanity on May 6th I emailed you about
the newest kovat 19 research in Slovenia
would love to hear what you think about
it we saw this I have not looked into it
yet
but I and it's as I remember some large
very large scale testing that is that
potentially establishes at least for
this particular locality geographic
locality some some good baseline
statistics yep I agree it was a good
large-scale study but I haven't been
through it in detail yet what is a good
way to talk down those people who think
that being socially distant will kill
our immune systems because we aren't
exposed to anything I know this is false
but how can i frame it in a way to them
that makes sense I would say this is
question this is a simple case of it's
two things one exposure does create
immunity often it creates it through
mechanisms that are unacceptable so for
example let's take chicken pox chicken
pox is a serious disease that if you get
it late in life can be a deadly disease
in order to prevent people from getting
it late in life people of our generation
were often exposed to chicken pox in
youth which then creates a horrible risk
of shingles late in life I'm not sure if
that was known when we were kids and
people decided so but in any case we now
know that connection so how costly was
it for us to have been give
chicken pox as kids in order to protect
us later it had a big cost in this case
you're dealing with a virus with unknown
hazard to you there are so many ways
some of them unlikely but there's so
many ways that this could turn into a
much more serious phenomenon than we yet
know it could be that it lives on in
some tissue and emerges periodically for
people who had it so that you're never
rid of it it could be that the damage
you get is dramatically shortening of
life and so in this case to say that the
exposure is what's necessary for the
immunity is to invite the infection
that's going to do all of this happen
but I think I'm read the question
differently it's it's not about exposure
to SARS cope to its having exposure to
everything so this is this is an
argument put forth by this chrome county
doctors and I've seen it elsewhere as
well right in fact it's in the shorter
of the planned a mikvah dioz as well the
idea that if you totally sterilize your
environment your immune system will
basically be on overdrive and we might
actually know this is this is two
different things so we know actually
that very sterile environments in youth
can produce immune systems that are
hyper triggered and in the Pacific it
creates allergies that we specifically
system that we specifically have more
allergies and that this may well be the
main explanatory factor in the high
level of allergies that God what's it
going to be younger Millennials and Gen
Z kids have right or you know maybe all
the Millennials actually I think it's
our generation to all that lifestyle
that was sprayed around Lysol became
antibacterial soap etc so that that is
true but that does not translate into
get know you know expose yourself to the
circulating corona viruses and other
viruses that are around and your immune
system will forget how to respond like
that's that appears to be the the
argument that's being made and I
actually I don't have a pithy succinct
answer to this except to say that's not
how it works
well yeah I do think I want to be super
careful here I do think there is a
possibility and maybe even a strong
possibility that our system is built to
collect let's say fragments of hazards
and translate it into a kind of early
warning yeah whether that's ever fully
protective is hard to say but you are
dealing with a critical immunological
crisis to the extent that we pick up
immunities through natural encounters
and that's suddenly being told to wear a
mask on for a matter of months is being
interpreted by people as a hazard
they're missing that a the informing of
the immune system is primarily an early
feature of life maybe this is why kids
eat dirt and things like that but that
in this circumstance you've got a
trade-off even if it were true that we
were constantly collecting fragments of
what was in the environment in order to
get some sort of a jump on pathogens we
don't know we're out there but we will
encounter you are dealing with a
critical encounter with a novel pathogen
that is highly dangerous if not to you
then to people downstream of you if you
pick it up and then pass it on that
hazard is so acute that there's nothing
in this other category that competes
with it on the scale of weeks or months
or even a few years right long term we
might have a different question on our
hands but short term I think that this
is an argument that sounds good to
people and it's advancing because people
it sounds intuitively right but it's
actually quite incorrect applied at the
scale okay okay we're gonna get through
a couple more of these but not the
majority I'm afraid
does smoking tobacco have any upsides
I've read somewhere that smokers are
less likely contracted TB I'm speaking
more cigar and pipe tobacco use that are
not generally inhaled we talked about
smoking a fair bit in one of the earlier
live streams it's not clear if there is
an upside but it seems increasingly
suggestive
the data that there was not the downside
that one might predict for a pathogen
that attacks the respiratory system yeah
I've seen some data that suggests it's
protective some data that suggests it's
mysteriously non non significant there I
believe there is data that says in the
case of some Parkinson's patients it's
positive and what we have said before is
that it is essentially certain that
ancestral forms of tobacco used by the
populations that have a long history of
such would be net harmful that doesn't
mean that the corporate tobacco that all
you smokers are smoking is any good for
you at all in fact I would guess it's
not but it is almost certain that
ancestral tobacco is used in an
ancestral way at least in the
populations that have a history with
them were net positive the next one is
written in a way that I'm not totally
tracking bloggers suggest local work
testing contract racing travel
restriction by town I told him it would
not be politically possible opinion
question mark so presumably the question
is not politically possible in the u.s.
the idea of widespread testing contact
tracing and travel restriction by town
as was done apparently to great success
in South Korea test and trace would be
absolutely the way to understand what is
going on and to start limiting the
ability of the virus to do what it wants
to do which is to give itself as many
copies in the future as possible
I am deeply torn over over this because
while as I said in the end of the last
live stream pandemic global public
health problems do allow for certain
things to be possible by the government
that the Constitution would not normally
allow do I trust the government to give
up all of the ability to surveil at the
end of this that we would have to hand
it in order to do successful tracing I
do not is it perhaps necessary in order
to get this thing under control it may
be how do we reconcile those two things
I don't know well I would say first of
all I think you would be wise to throw
out the entire concept of the possible
for at least the foreseeable future
because the present is not possible
therefore the concept is invalid second
thing I would say is we have handed the
surveillance of our population to
private unaccountable corporations
already those corporations have two
closer relationship with elements of the
government that are known to behave
badly or have been known to behave badly
through history so in some sense the
ship has already sailed maybe we should
get the benefit at the moment and then
when this is over or if it becomes
chronic at the point that we are capable
of focusing on other things we need to
have a very frank conversation about how
it is that we have all ended up
surveilled in nearly 24 hours a day for
you know every day of the year and that
information is accumulating and being
used for who knows what it's time we
have the conversation about the
constitutional protections that we don't
have because the founding fathers had
never seen anything as sophisticated as
a train much less an Internet and and
therefore could could it was not failure
of imagination on their part so they
could not possibly have gotten it mean
we're close to imagining this world that
we live in they needed to sit down with
black mirror and to see a few episodes
but it wasn't possible at the time yep
since it's technically possible why
hasn't and isn't Robert Dorfman's method
for group testing parenthesis combining
swabs or test samples from many people
into one lab test used to increase
testing capability I'm not familiar with
Robert Dorfman but that sounds like a
totally reasonable approach any group
test comes back positive and then you
parts it out and you do individual tests
on all the people who contributed to the
one why isn't it don't no no no yeah
seems reasonable yep
what is what is the evolutionary reason
for males having nipples so let me just
say that this is a question that you
when you were tending that part of your
patreon actively you would ask that as a
question that people want to hear the
answer to that in the next the next
month and it never got voted up it never
got voted to the level such that you
answered that question rather than some
other question I was trying to remember
if it had your recollection is it did
not get answered I think it did not all
right so a few things to say one you
could have your nipples removed and see
how well you do in finding a mate and I
suspect you would find that many people
would refuse to to go out with you once
they figured out that you were lacking
them that's a terrible answer and you
know it alright fair enough I mean it's
it's not it's a very proximate answer if
you lost your nipples now it would
strike people as pretty weird it's
approximate at every possible level all
right
so let's just say this I believe this
question has a very good end to me I
think fully satisfying answer
unfortunately for you that answer is
closely tied with the question of what
is the evolutionary meaning of
homosexuality which is a lecture I
desperately want to deliver and I don't
want to explore it piecemeal in these
broadcasts so anyway I had thought about
renting a hall I'd still like to do it I
don't know if renting a hall is still
going to be a thing in the future but if
it is maybe we should explore doing it
that way but just remember these two
questions are related and not directly
but logically let's put it that way
let's see we're gonna do we're gonna try
to get through four more quickly and
apologies for all the good questions
that we won't get through before we go
to the super check questions from the
next from the current live chat
previously you mentioned that
antibacterial products leads to building
up of bacterial resistance over time
while washing hands with soap does not
what about UV light cleaning devices
great podcast
even though light should should not have
the same problem as antibacterial soap
antibacterial
clears yeah I think the real question is
this if you've got something that
creates an extreme enough environment
that it just kills the things it
encounters outright then it's not
selecting for resistance to them the
problem with the antibacterials is that
they basically provide an evolutionary
gradient where things that are better
positioned to endure the onslaught
persist and you've killed off all the
things that are susceptible so just like
not taking your full course of
antibiotics if you take the full course
and you kill off everything that you've
been infected with then you haven't
selected for superbugs if you kill off a
fraction and then you stop taking it
then you create the next group of
superbugs so so I mean it's it's
possible that especially a weak or an
inappropriately applied UV light could
select for those viruses that are better
able to withstand slightly elevated UV
rather than they die at the first
exposure to any UV well on the other
hand though they're being exposed to UV
light all the time and dying so you're
not adding a selective force that's
going to be giving them some new
discovery a UV inside right as opposed
to you know Purell is an evolutionarily
novel thing well it is except the thing
about Purell that works is alcohol which
is not novel and so in my opinion and
you know I'd love to see if this is
incorrect but my best guess is that very
simple approach is to create an extreme
environment for bacteria and viruses
render them unlikely to evolve into some
kind of objectionable resistance because
for one thing as soon as you removed
that phenomenon they will evolve back
down into normalcy as a result of trade
offs so that is to say if they're
evolved and there's nothing in principle
that makes it impossible for a creature
to evolve resistance
to a high alcohol environment but if it
does it's then poorly adapted to a low
alcohol environment and so it's not very
effective under normal circumstances so
there's a game to be played about not
selecting four characteristics you don't
want to see and the simple physical
interrupters I think are the best bet
yeah it was so when we have homes that
are simultaneously far cleaner than our
ancestral environments and potentially
far dirtier so even people who clean
their homes to a level that looks
immaculate and sparkling probably have
corners that don't get much wind don't
get much light don't get many sprays of
a bottle of alcohol or whatever it is
that you're using to clean it and it's
exactly in those corners where things
will start to you know first grow and
then potentially evolve and yes children
growing up in those homes may end up
with more allergies because they have
precious little exposure to like the
soil microorganisms that most kids
historically have had access to but they
may actually also be exposed like
everyone who lives primarily inside
rather than spending a fair amount of
time outside to some suits and bugs
broadly you know bacteria and and
viruses and fungus that do better
indoors in dark damp places whereas
historically there's always been some
some ability to open it up and let the
wind and light sweep through 40 minutes
okay very very quickly then where are we
Oh what are your thoughts on directed
evolution vo genetic engineering CRISPR
are we stagnating in terms of human
evolution and if so are these mechanisms
to artificially evolved for survival
inevitable let's just take one part of
that what do we think about directed
evolution via genetic engineering such
as CRISPR well I think the thing is
CRISPR has been overhyped it's a very
powerful technology but we are when I
have said elsewhere is that we have the
typewriter that now allows us to write
any genetic sequence but we don't have
is the Rosetta
that allows us to speak gene and we will
eventually get there but for the moment
the ability of this technology to allow
somebody to just bring something into
the world that is devastating or
severely altering of what we are is
limited by the fact that we don't yet
know how to do it what we do know how to
do is take the Lego that exists in the
world of genes whether they be RNA or
DNA and recombine them and this is
exactly the concern about what may have
happened with SARS Cove - is that
something that in and of itself wouldn't
have been all that capable of infecting
humans and would have had to do a lot of
experimenting in order to get to that
point may have been created in a form
that was lethal and highly transmissible
between people before it escaped or was
released okay one more and then we'll
switch over to the next live chat is it
true that no RNA vaccine has ever been
produced the woman from the first Plenty
McVitie Oh teaser said that I don't
think it's totally true but I believe
that what may have been referenced was
for people in other words I believe
there is a vaccine for a corona virus in
horses I'm taking other people's word
for this but but I believe that it does
exist now a horse physiologically isn't
all that distinct you know it's a mammal
so it may be a fine model in some sense
but that doesn't mean you know why if
they exist for horses do they not exist
for people it may be the need for them
has been low because we've arrested the
couple of escapees that have circulated
in humans or it may be that there's
something about creating the vaccine
that there's a trade-off you wouldn't
want to accept you know horses don't
live as long as people maybe it's a
longevity concern but I would say I
don't what I have seen does not suggest
that a vaccine is just something we can
create because we need one there is a
lot that stands between us and a vaccine
that is safe enough to use if in fact we
can create one at all yeah yeah please
thanks Zach
first drink is on me yeah it's a little
early for us here yeah it's not five
o'clock anywhere speen so we're not
we're not drinking on camera today
have we seen spaceship earth or thoughts
on biodome - project have not seen a
spaceship Earth's I don't really know
much about the second biodome no project
I would say it was kind of - too naive
to bias fear - yeah yeah yeah maybe
that's not the same thing that I was
thinking a biosphere yeah yeah let's put
it this way it is very difficult I think
one of the lessons of these things it is
very difficult to create an ecosystem
that is closed right and that ought to
tell us something about what we're in
and this is something I think you know
biologists especially field biologists
encounter I remember there's a one of
the most marvelous creatures in
Madagascar is a thing called an injury
injury is a very large it's not
technically a lemur it's a linear it but
anyway it's a beautiful creature
tree-dwelling sounds like humpback
whales rid you're not it's not you
that's andreadd but it's average all
right sorry for your purposes in the
lemur but in any case injuries are a
marvelous creature and so marvelous that
every zoo would love to have them no Zoo
has one why because if you take them
into captivity they die even if you as I
understand it even if you put fences
around some large piece of habitat that
they're already living in they die
they're so sensitive to the conditions
of captivity that we haven't figured out
how to include enough stuff in anything
other than a reserve to allow them to
survive yeah it was imagined that it was
about the vast number of species of
leaves there full of ours that they need
to eat but as far as I know
and I haven't looked into it for a few
years but yes you can't you can't cage
them even a really really large cages
which means if your own been to
Madagascar you haven't seen injuries you
may well have seen video of them but you
can only see them in the world which is
both magical that you still have to go
there to actually see them and also
should remind us in our hubris that we
cannot actually totally recreate almost
anything even for those systems where it
appears that we can recreate what is
necessary right and so these biosphere
projects the good ones are gonna run
into this which is you know how big
would it have to be to be a closed
system and as I think you were hinting
at we also need to be thinking about
this with respect to these ideas of
colonizing Mars and yes I'm looking at
you Elon Mars not only is not going to
be any fun but it's going to be much
more difficult to colonize than anybody
down here on earth is yet capable of
recognizing yeah okay next question asks
about me we haven't seen at least I
haven't so I'll read it then we'll look
into it
what do you guys make out of the DoD
document that leaked this week the
recruit diagnosed with Koba 19 by a
laboratory test or clinician examination
will be permanently disqualified
reported by military times calm that I
will look into it I have an immediate
reaction which is what why would they
disqualify someone who had already had
it yes and I'm trying to remember what
military times.com is I think it may be
it may not be what it appears yeah okay
are you familiar with the conversation
of the molecular biologists over at nerd
has power that we plea calm if not may
want to check it out I feel like this
may be the link that you just sent me
yeah I'm aware of it it's definitely
within the confines of my thinking about
what the most likely path of this
pathogen was so anyway yes it's an
interesting and an interesting paper yep
the concepts of rights and justice seem
to be human concoctions are they only
metaphorically true can literally fin
them be counterproductive
rights injustice first of all I think
there's no justice outside of people
there's some rudimentary ideas of
fairness that we can demonstrate in some
other creature there's a fair bit of
fairness but in terms of a system that
defines something as just and then
attempts to create that space I think
the way to think of it is it is an
elevated state above that which we would
live at under normal circumstances is it
natural well we're humans and we
generate artificial states so they are
in some sense natural but it is a very
fragile state so I would argue rights
and justice are essential concepts they
are highly desirable and we should be
much more careful about protecting them
rather than allow markets and other
things to endanger them and without
being able to pull it up let me just say
that the one of the papers that I can
think of that looks at whether or not
other organisms have a concept of
fairness is I think it's chimps but it
might be some other species of monkeys
and yes I'm saying chimps or monkeys
just like we're monkeys in which they
are given they're given I think this is
that given cucumbers you got two chimps
or some other species of primate in
cages next to each other so they can see
each other they can see what they're
being being given by the researcher they
given cucumbers which they like just
fine but they prefer grapes and at some
point one of them is given a grape and
the other one is given a cucumber and
the guy who's still getting cucumber
sees that his conspecific is pure at
whether or not it's a friend has gotten
a grape which he prefers and not only
does he throw a fit but he actually
throws the cucumber back at the
researcher so he actually gives up the
thing that he was perfectly happy to
receive as a treat for doing something
at the point that he perceives and you
know imprecisely we can talk about this
he perceives that he has experienced an
injustice
is there really a distinction between
justice and fairness in this regard I
guess justice is sort of longer term
it's more there's more architecture
around it yeah I would say justice is
the architected
attempt to create a landscape of
fairness yeah and I would say as good as
cucumbers are they're not as good as
grapes right exactly house every monkey
knows believe me oh okay are you
familiar with the analysis oh wait we
already read that one
oh it's both Zac someone thinks I might
write over here yeah yeah so I think
you're attractive but that's not me no
that's that's not you know I left a
question mark off my previous superjet
well thank you for contributing wait a
second hey Zac your mom is super hot yo
first of all why are you going through
Zac's
second of all hot is not the right term
beautiful yes but hot because it's just
not right so we could we could do that
another time um whoever filed that okay
either knows or should go look it up
okay do Coronis ours hybrids exist in
bats naturally that is a good question
and you know there's a there's a site
that I showed on earlier livestream that
that keeps track of all of the known
corona viruses as well as all the other
viruses and has a sort of an ad hoc
phylogeny there's a whole lot of corona
viruses that are identified as being
found in bats that are called
recombinant and it's totally unclear
whether or not that means that they have
recombined in bats naturally or if these
are recombinant viruses that have been
created in labs and but but are still on
the database of all the viruses out
there I actually I got I got stuck here
and it felt kind of alarming not to be
able to figure out whether or not this
this database of viruses is effectively
a recognition that bat coronavirus is
often recombine between species or if
the only time that happens is through
hee
intervention yeah I must say the
question is phrased a little oddly do
coronavirus hybrids exist in bats
oh and SARS hybrid so sorry
I guess SARS is redundant here because
SARS is just a syndrome yeah well its
idioms right it's a syndrome descriptive
of some classes of classes I don't think
we know the answer to this question and
by we I'd be interested if anybody knows
but it would certainly be a useful
mechanism to the viruses if they could
recombine which doesn't make it possible
and the key question is given the way
these things function you have an RNA
template that makes it into cells that
RNA template is read by ribosomes and
turned into proteins and is transcribed
into another RNA strand that becomes the
basis of new viruses so it's not obvious
to me that that includes a mechanism
whereby recombination could happen but
there could be some subsidiary set of
proteins that allows splicing especially
in light of the fact these corona
viruses appear to have error correction
mm-hmm hybridization could actually be
accomplished through mechanisms that are
involved in error correction so I think
it's plausible but I'm not sure that we
know that it happens opening natural
areas exposes rural folk to increased
infection recreative intramural grocery
stores gas stations etc this implies
that rural and farm lives are less
important than city folk or economics
please comment it's it's a concern I
would say that you needn't you know in
order if you're traveling someplace
rural you do not inherently need to go
inside anywhere in general it's been
encouraged because it helps the local
economy but in order to get gas you
shouldn't need to go inside and you can
take your food with you and I'm not
saying that that's what it's happening
but I certainly don't think it never
occurred to me actually that go outside
open natural areas imply
that these are a inherently rural I mean
we've got we've got a giant park very
near us that's been closed for a couple
of months and it's within Portland City
Limits and your Portland itself has
three of these giant parks and many
hundreds in one case thousands of acres
within city limits so it's not
inherently about rural versus urban
environments and certainly you know on
in coastal towns those aren't inherently
rural areas either so I guess I'm not I
don't quite buy the dichotomy that's
framed here that you know further pits
urban versus rural of coastal versus but
all the country and yet there's a truth
in concern if you think about you know
Manhattanites if we say you should go to
a Nature area we're definitely telling
them to travel sure and so that would
expose people outside so I think this
has to be navigated carefully the fact
is and you know that well and sorry but
apparently many sir the number but many
many many people showed up in Georgia
after they were the first state to open
so exactly the game theoretic problem
that you had been predicting and this
wasn't about natural areas opening it
was about stages of opening that are out
of sync with with their neighbors yeah
and so you know that will certainly
cause problems there will there will
certainly be people who moved the virus
from outside of Georgia into Georgia
because Georgia opened and made itself
look more more inviting to a whole bunch
of people some of whom presumably are
sick yeah so this problem exists at
every every single layer and I would
object to the framing of open natural
areas as an attack on the world yeah I
think that's not though there is
something to be navigated yep - portugal
impersonating sam harris in your
approach to consciousness why must
subjective experience arise can't we be
zombies packaging information for
exchange with the lights off much love I
don't think so and in fact this was one
of the places in the talk we gave for
the James Madison program at Princeton
that I wish we had had more room to
explore but
what I would say is this is the best
analogy I've got so far if you look at
what we are told functions underneath
Google translates newly upgraded ability
to go between any two languages what
Google Translate has is a layer in which
it translates into some sort of common
language that is not a human language
right it has an intermediate and what I
would argue is the efficient way for me
to take your perspective and put it
side-by-side with my perspective to
figure out what I think in light of the
sum is to create a space in my mind
where you and I are both real right
mm-hm and to unpack these things there
and that you would have a parallel space
and that the more similar your space and
my space were the more likely we were to
have a fruitful interaction between our
different perspectives and so basically
the point is there is no actual space
between us where this happens but each
of us have a mirror better or worse of
the degree to which the perspective is
shared and the degree to which the
perspectives differ that'll aoz us each
to to compare the objects side-by-side
and so the question really is if you did
this as you say with the lights off
where would it happen and in what form
if you do it with a you know I have a
model of me and I have a model of you
and I exist in this subject space where
things are perceived I at least know how
it works right so the question is did
evolution create subjective experience
because it was the simplest mechanism
available to it for allowing an
individual to compare two perspectives
from Candice we get thank you for
answering my immune system question I'm
a patron of you both thank you for that
we do we do have patreon which we are
beginning to tend to more virtual hugs
thank you is there a serious argument
for alcohol or mind-altering substances
being essential in quotes the
Machiavellian view could be
it keeps people content oh sure sure
depends which substance you're talking
about but you know essential I think we
just misunderstand what we are we are
obsessed with ourselves as individuals
because historically those are the
limits of our power to affect our own
evolutionary well-being but from the
point of view of getting deeply into the
future which we are also involved in
seeing what you are not yet capable of
understanding and figuring out how to
process it basically how to bootstrap a
new way of conceptualizing something
there are moments when other substances
help you do that and there are moments
when they're not helpful and you know is
that essential you know individual
instance is it likely to be essential
but is the ability to access that other
place essential it may be given that we
made we tried to make an argument for
having access to the materials with
which to do projects around your home or
essential I think it's an easier
argument to make that some mind-altering
substances would be essential for some
people yeah so if I read you correctly
you're saying scent mushrooms yeah yeah
vaccines exist for coronaviruses in
veterinary medicine for cattle horses
and dogs okay doesn't mean a virus for
us is right around the corner though
thank you for that Greg a vaccine for us
is ironic oh it says virus I was just
reading it yep doesn't mean a vaccine
for us it's right around the corner
though that's right so okay that's in
response to an earlier question about
whether or not there are any vaccines
for coronaviruses yes and other species
i we don't know of any in humans and of
course it could be a long time on to
never possibly before we have one for
this particular one oh please please
please do that systemic breakdown of
planned emic that you mentioned you're
the only honest and measured voices we
can count on thank you um yeah we might
we might do that the reason that we are
hesitant I just I I went down this
rabbit hole between this the last
livestream and this one and I was I was
pretty deeply plagued by it and you know
nearly pulling my hair out coming to you
going I don't know I don't know what to
make of so many of the claims here and I
know some are wrong I know some at least
fit with my priors yeah and at some to
some degree I think what we ended up
deciding was it's such a mess it's it's
almost like it was perfectly created to
make it impossible to assess which means
that any investigation of it is high
risk because if if it is inherently
difficult to assess any number of things
you know any number of signs could be
flipped on any number of the logical
pieces in the puzzle that you're trying
to do so that's that's part of why we
did not spend today doing it yeah I
would just say the danger in doing that
is that you're basically holding
yourself responsible for finding the
borders between what is accurate and
inaccurate rather than stepping back and
saying there's a lot here that's
inaccurate that's enough to tell me that
this is not a straightforward
revelation of the truth so if you hold
yourself responsible for parsing those
divisions and you get something wrong
then you add fuel to the fire so I must
say it might be worth doing and maybe
we'll do it but it's not simple that it
is the right move the recognition that
there's a lot wrong with it
already tells us if you can't get a half
an hour basically right without a major
error then there might be a reason for
that yeah okay last question from
Eleanor Rigby no less on the last
podcast you said that sex is a common
breakfast conversation in your home is
that regarding humans or lizards I do
like to talk about lizard sex yes yeah
it's actually quite artful it's
beautiful actually it is actually we
both have some nice pictures yes that's
true yeah
but I don't know I mean you know it's
not like we sit down to breakfast and
sex is that thing which we must talk
about over our cereal is that mostly
because we don't actually sit down at
breakfast it's part of it yeah it would
be more likely to be at the dinner table
yeah the dinner table well it's
breakfast table conversation even if it
happens at the dinner table is my
feeling that's probably true yeah but no
you know we talked about what's
interesting and sex is interesting so
you know it doesn't come up in a fair
number of conversations all right with
that I think it is time for us to end
this Q&A livestream and say that we are
very much interested in having you like
subscribe you definitely want to hit the
notify Bell we are hearing from people
that even if they're subscribe to the
channel they are not being notified hit
the notify Bell see if that helps we do
we do plan to be here at 3:30 p.m.
Pacific on Tuesdays and noon 30 12:30
p.m. Pacific on Saturdays as lockdowns
begin to lift and as we have more
complicated schedules again those those
plans may change so if we don't make it
here at some point like we didn't last
week due to technical troubles it's the
notifications that you receive that will
help you know when something's happening
all right everybody may all your ironies
be followed with emojis see you next
time