[Music]
yeah so since this is a follow-up piece
I'm not gonna try and repeat any of the
ideas that air people can check it out
if they haven't already and the the gist
of it was explaining some principles of
how propaganda works and how kind of
narrative warfare works and whether
we're talking about through political
process which we normally think of as
propaganda or campaigning or through
commercial process which we think of as
marketing or the intersection of those
things or you know social movements
which are basically movements that have
some agenda that are trying to gain some
kind of differential power that end up
using narratives that coalesce people to
support them and use information that
coalesce as people to support them but
where there ends up being distortions in
the narrative and the information to
support some agenda right and we kind of
discussed how Vick witness that is and
how it happens and how social media
makes it the social media and broadcasts
and all those technologies increase the
capacity to do that
and there's a lot on that and I think
before people can do good sense-making
may be one of the prerequisites is that
before people can really focus on what
our true beliefs and how do they know
what a true belief is they have to make
sure that they aren't being compelled to
believe not true or very partial things
as being less partial or more
representative than they are and so the
goal of that piece was to kind of
inoculate people against propaganda so
that when it was happening they would at
least recognize it and so because if
someone holds false beliefs or holds
true beliefs but that are very partial
were held as more complete again in that
being very distorted if someone holds
distorted worldviews and then they try
and do logic factoring those things as
true everything else will be affected by
distortion so not holding false or
misrepresented beliefs or ideas is
really fundamental to being able to do
sense making and I think what we're
wanting to talk about here is the next
step in giving people to
fools to notice we're distortion is
occurring to again further inoculate
their sense making against distortion
and also recognize when they are a
source of distortion in the information
ecology when they are actually engaging
in some form of narrative warfare maybe
without having done it the reason this
came up is you and I talked about was
you know we're we're watching the
comments and watching the shares and
then watching in various groups where
people are discussing some of the ideas
and of course the fact that some people
resonated was great that some people
agreed or disagreed or whatever all
that's fine but I was witnessing places
where people were taking ideas about how
the information ecology is broken and
using them in ways that further broke
the information ecology they were you
know like it's very easy to recognize
that some news is to some degree fake
and then assume or make the story that
it's the other side that has all fake
news right which is now basically a fake
news strategy or a narrative warfare
strategy itself against the other guy
because as soon as you see that the
other guy the other side whatever it is
is using information as a weapon then
you can use the fact that they're using
information as a weapon as a weapon
itself to engage in that process and we
started seeing this happen and started
seeing like even in the comment thread
where people's responses were not really
seeking to understand and engage in a
process of deeper understanding they
were seeking something else which was
how to launch counter responses that
would either get likes or seem smart or
position them securely at the center of
their in-group or you know whatever it
is and so and it wasn't just that video
it was like you know I actually feel
kind of an ethical culpability and any
public sharing of tools right
metaphysical tools knowledge tools so
whether it is a psychological principle
or an insight or a cognitive or an
epistemic tool or like a sense making or
frameworks kind of process or
or or a virtue or a narrative that those
tools can be weaponized and especially
in the context where almost everything
is being weaponized because everybody
feels like they're at war of some kind
then what I don't want to be doing and
what I know you don't want to be doing
as you know with rebel wisdom is
actually in the name of addressing
culture wars to try and heal them and
bringing thoughtful smart insightful
people on something like rebel wisdom to
share insights that those insights get
taken in some distorted way and used to
further culture war and so they're
wanting to really address basically how
all ideas can be weaponized all true
ideas can be used for distorted purposes
and to show how acquiesce that is and to
show how almost every idea can be
weaponized in multiple directions there
can be a pro and con case against almost
any idea any virtue whatever and the
reason I want to share this is so that
people notice it when it's happening in
other people and in themselves and so
like this video is useful only if people
are actually interested in trying to
make better sense of the world like
actually hold more clear beliefs about
the nature of ground reality and to
engage in earnest and in good faith with
others to share sense making towards
being able to make better choices to
make a better world if someone is simply
wanting to make sure their agenda wins
whatever that agenda happens to be that
they're already sure enough that they're
right about then all of this will not be
that helpful it except insofar as it can
be weaponized so it's kind of the
paradox that we spoke a lot in the last
film about a more ethical and more
grounded and more truthful sense making
but even that language itself can be
used for it can be weaponized and used
for what pathological ends basically
yeah when I you know pathological is a
strong word and so I kind of want to
speak to that self-serving is that
better what self-serving is good and
that ends up being pathological for the
whole we're self-serving leads to
different types of conflicts between
cells and between selves and Commons
then that ends up being pathological to
a larger scale right and oftentimes
people don't don't think they are
engaging in a self-serving way they
think they are engaging in a way that is
good for the world as they understand
and as their in-group holds and
understands and it's hard for them to
think about engaging in good faith with
people that they think are bad and
basically hurting what they care about
so if people on the Left think that
climate change is about to make the
entire planet uninhabitable and caused
massive and irreversible existential
risk and that as a result anyone on the
right that doesn't think that that's a
climate denier is basically killing
everything running the risk of killing
everything their kids their grandkids
them like the the true the good and the
beautiful the right is actively seeking
to her they're not trying to understand
them or engage in good faith they're
just trying to win because those guys
are clearly wrong and bad right and
similarly if you're on the right and you
see that the left is trying to destroy
the traditions that you hold as what has
actually made it through the trials of
history that actually works and is good
and is trying to basically destroy the
what you're trying to conserve which is
what was true and good and beautiful you
believe that their science is distorted
and etc then simile you're not trying to
engage in good faith so for the most
part I don't think that people think
they're engaging in bad faith or they
think they're self-serving they're just
over certain about perspectives that are
under complete the line that separates
tools and weapons is not a clear line
it's very fuzzy so let's think about
physical tools and physical weapons for
a moment a weapon is a tool to
accomplish a goal in a adversarial
context a tool is basically some kind of
tech name kind of invention to
accomplish some kind of goal maybe or
maybe not in an adversarial context we
can see that most any tool that was
developed for a knot weapon purpose
could be weaponized if it needed to be
so the kitchen cutting knife is a tool
that is obviously to prepare food in the
kitchen but it could be weaponized if
one needed it too and so could a hammer
and so could a screwdriver and so could
a chainsaw and so could a car right so
could my laptop if I needed it to be and
so we can see that pretty much any tool
can be made into a weapon actually I'm
not positive but I think the term
weaponized which is now like one of the
most common terms and I think it's
important to understand why it's so
common but very rarely does anyone say
we're weaponizing stuff they typically
say why someone of another group is
weaponizing things and what we'll see is
like the exact same thing the same topic
two different groups will say the other
group is weaponizing a version of it
right but you know weaponizing safe
space and vulnerability and whatever on
the left side versus weaponizing free
speech to just do hate speech on the
right side right that kind of debate I
think that the term weaponized was
actually coined or at least popularized
in recent time after World War two by
Wernher von Braun the Nazi rocket
scientists that we brought to the US to
lead a lot of our rocket and also ICBM
work and the Apollo project
he was talking about taking the rocketry
capabilities and things like Apollo and
being able to weaponize them by adding
nukes to him and so that was basically
take a tool there's not a weapon and
learn how to weaponize it and in the
physical domain we can see that anything
can be used as a weapon the same is true
with metaphysical tools so psychological
tools tools that can actually help shift
people's psychology or cognitive tools
tools for sense making or communication
tools right tools to be able to create
rapport or to be able to influence of
other people's thought all of these and
even tools or principles or insights of
good behavior
ie virtues or morals all of these can be
used to advance some agenda in a way
that has some distortion and that
creates some harm that's how I'm going
to define weaponize and you know maybe
that some of the way we can start to
think about the demarcation between tool
and weapon is that a weapon is going to
be causing harm if it is deployed and
that if it's not deployed and it's
basically being used to avoid violence
by saying we can commit violence right
it is still its capacity to cause harm
that is its basis of effectiveness well
interestingly when we think about so
many of the tools that we don't think of
as weapons but we think of as just
things that supported human life we
could think of many of them as weapons
against nature right whether we're
cutting down all the trees or harpooning
whales or whatever like they were
clearly weapons against somebody and a
lot of the environmental harm that's
happened that is now making a much less
hospitable planet for us to live on was
actually those tools being weapons in
some context so this is actually a very
deep thing to think about is man our
ability to make tools makes us super
powerful because of course the other
animals just have their corporeal tools
for the most part the tools that are
built in and they don't get to up
regulate the capacity of those quickly
they operate very slowly with natural
selection but we get up regulate ours
very quickly across lots of different
areas and that's why we have
the capacity to destroy whole ecosystems
and to make new types of environment
cities and whatever into like actually
engineer new species an extinct species
so given that our ability to influence
the environment and others in the world
the capacity of our choice is
evolutionarily unprecedented because of
our tool making capacity and especially
as our tools keep getting more and more
powerful and our in the vertical izing
part of an exponential technology curve
given that our choice making capacities
evolutionarily unprecedented our choice
making basis has to also be
evolutionarily unprecedented which means
that we can't just engage in self
advantaging behavior including rivalry
where it occurs with the level of
technological capacity we have and that
is kind of the whole conversation here
obviously being able to do deep abstract
reasoning and conversations with other
people mediated by symbolic language is
also it in evolutionarily unprecedented
capacity just we're not using it very
well right where we are using
evolutionarily lower capacities more in
terms of our basis for choice making
while using evolutionarily higher
capacities in terms of the technology
create meant to empower our choices and
that is the self terminating dynamic if
our choice are going to be that powerful
they also have to be that considerate of
all of the second and third order
effects of the application of that power
so there's a level of consideration and
clarity of thinking and clarity of
forecasting to be able to do clarity of
design that has to increase and I think
that is our whole goal here is how to
have the type of sense making that is
necessary to rightly steward the level
of power we have a non-destructive way
I will probably start upsetting people
now but sure so there is a narrative and
it's important to say I could give
examples of this too for almost every
narrative and I am quite happy to do
that so if I'm upsetting anyone I
hopefully should be upsetting everyone
kind of in the equal distribution that
is doing what I think is some degree of
disingenuous narrative confirmation so
let's look at the world view that I
would call kind of naive techno optimism
or techno capital optimism and we can
see you know gates Steven Pinker Hans
Rosling like there's a whole kind of
underlying thinking and so when you when
you see statistics quoted by Hans or
John Mackey or whatever that say the
world is doing better than it's ever
been because in 1850 X percent of people
lived on less than a dollar 50 a day and
now only this tiny percent live on less
than a dollar fifty a day therefore
abundance is going up and that makes a
better quality of life for everyone well
that might actually be a true statistic
that it went from 60 people to 18
percent of people or something I forget
what the exact statistic is that might
be a true statistic but that is
misrepresentative in some really
important ways taken out of context that
in 1850 people's lives were mediated
largely not by dollars a lot of those
people who they were talking about were
lived in log cabins that they made
themselves not mediated by dollars and
grew their own food and so the idea that
dollars mediated their life actually is
not a good representation of economic
quality of life nor is the fact that now
obesity which is mediated by you know
more dollars is a radical cause of life
expectancy challenges and all kinds of
psychological and physical issues and
kind of rampant a new BIC witness and
you know when the story comes that there
the world has always had violence and
we're less violent now well kind of like
we're in a fairly short period of having
to be less violent of certain kinds
after developing the bomb but now the
the Bretton Woods convention that
mediated that has almost completely
broken down we no longer have tension
between two nuclear equipped superpowers
but a multipolar situation where a force
nash equilibrium like meets you sure
destruction isn't even possible the
tensions in the situation are heat
heating and yeah we never had weaponized
AI drones before right we didn't have
CRISPR based bio weapon so like the fact
that there might be less violence of
some kinds at the moment but radically
more violence capacity and less ability
to do anything effective towards it
while orienting more towards it is a
stat that's not being or a it's not a
stat you can't even make a proper stat
on it it's a trendline that isn't being
paid attention to nor is the radical
amounts of species extinction or coral
bleaching or micro plastics in the ocean
or rampant addiction rates or etc so I
can take a true statistic out of context
of all the things to assess and say
quality of life is getting better I can
take another true statistic and say
quality of life is getting worse I can
group some group of those statistics
together to make a compelling argument
with a book on either side
and neither of them are representative
of the whole picture and so something
can be true in isolation but it is way
too reductive and as a result is if
shared as representative and isn't is
actually a weapon to convince a
narrative that is not actually a
reasonable narrative and so this is
where I would say you know like when we
look at climate change we have kind of
like a Greta versus Trump narrative
warfare on climate change right and we
have people see letters circulating on
Facebook depending upon which side
they're on that's a X number of
X percentage of scientists all agree
that climate change is real and both on
the only ones who think otherwise are
paid by oil companies and then also X
number of thousands of scientists say
the Clinton the IPCC climate change
thing is bunk and there's other stuff
that we need to look at and who actually
looks at the science in detail
themselves looks at the methodology
looks at the models looks at where the
funding came from and the sources of
bias to actually be able to sense make
themselves they just defect to the
authority that is most associated with
their in-group and the whole thing that
ends up being oriented around co2 and
either co2 is really a problem or co2
isn't a problem and that framing isn't
even the right conversation because we
look at okay what are the arguments for
co2 is a problem well there's arguments
about a lot of things but let's just
take for instance coral what's going to
kill the coral that's gonna kill the
oceans
well carbonic acid can affect coral
that's true and increased temperature
can affect coral that's true but that
doesn't address nitrogen runoff from you
know radical amounts of NPK or other
nitrogen based fertilizers are creating
nitrogen affluent that causes both dead
zones and the oceans and messes up the
phosphorous cycle for the coral or
having overfished most of the large fish
species in the whale that create the
trophic cascades from the apex predators
that are actually necessary to maintain
the coral so again it's like even if
there are some stats about co2 that are
true they might not be representative of
them of what we're claiming they're
representative of that it's actually a
multifactorial situation and to try and
get something through we think we have
to orient it in this particular way and
overhype that particular thing now of
course I can actually use nitrogen
fertilizer to grow more plants that
sequester co2 that will actually
increase the rate of nitrogen runoff and
even though I'm sequestering co2 I might
be killing coral faster and so this is
an example where it's like no better
sense making actually has to happen and
even facts lots of times the facts are
distorted like it's just
science right but sometimes the facts
aren't distorted the
act is true but is one out of lots of
metrics that matter or taken out of
appropriate context where it is so not
representative that the solution that is
recommended is totally an appropriate
solution and why is this particular
topic important and why do you think
it's so important for now so we were
talking earlier about Facebook and the
way that echo chamber type phenomena
just built into algorithms can let alone
the social travel type dynamics that are
made easier not in person lead to echo
chambers where people think that most
everyone believes kind of the way they
do because that's what they're seeing
except those bad guys over there that
are far that are far enough away that
they only get the caricature eyes
version of them and so you know I've
intentionally I still use Facebook and I
actually use it largely
as a tool for understanding social
phenomena and so I've intentionally
followed made friends within followed
people on every side of every political
topic who are leading thinkers that
other people pay attention to and so of
course I'll have a thread where there
are some all right type people who are
commenting more then left people think
that I have become a Nazi or at least a
Nazi supporter and then decide to
unfriend me and of course then more
conservatively oriented people will see
further left perspectives in my thread
talking about LGBTQ rights or whatever
it is and think that I am a whatever
pejorative you know call me etc type
thing that they think and I'm just
actively trying to see what the various
groups in the world think because if I
don't understand why it's compelling
like if I don't understand the partial
truths and the values that they care
about I don't have a chance of
understanding reality and if I don't
understand even beyond that why it's
compelling I don't have a chance of
possibly engaging in a
constructive or meaningful way so all I
can do is villainize them and engage in
warfare and then to various degrees win
or lose but to some degree all lose and
like that's a very very simple thing I
would suggest everyone do if you tend to
be left-leaning and most of your friends
kind of agree with you about climate
change or abortion rights or whatever I
would actually really like you to find
follow-up in Shapiro follow the proper
pterion institute follow you know their
follow Heritage Foundation and Cato
Institute and whatever and actually seek
to understand both where they're sharing
things that you actually didn't know and
even where you really disagree why it's
compelling with an answer that isn't
just because they're all stupid because
you actually don't have any chance of
healing a culture war otherwise you only
have a chance of engaging in it and if
someone happens to be more right
oriented and of course saying right left
is itself over simplified but we'll use
that as a simplification for all of the
perspectives that are engaged in some
kind of warfare that actually need to be
engaged in some kind of more generative
dialectical conversation study
intersectionality like follow some of
the thinkers that are actually giving
arguments for and history for why some
of that's important actually read some
of the postmodern thinkers read Foucault
and darrid on whatever before just
saying all post-modernism is stupid and
again look to see are there true
insights and critiques in there and can
you factor them to understand them and
even where you don't think they're true
can you see why they're compelling and
so that's a very very easy step so I'm
speaking to why it's important because I
think that we have more issues in the
world today from now weaponized drones
actually available for sale pre-made and
the nature of the environmental risks
and the massive human migrations that
are impending and
and the culture wars and the fact that
the cultural wars are oriented to a kind
of war that is beyond just on Facebook I
think that we have more different issues
on more fronts that are more
consequential with the answer not being
everyone increasing the quality of their
sense making to find solutions that
aren't war because to find solutions
that aren't war requires that their
solutions for everybody there is a
degenerate movement towards more
groupthink that becomes more polarized
and that is a movement towards warfare
in a time that is one that's never
desirable but it's especially not
desirable with a world that has as
centralized and fragile and
infrastructure as ours where people
don't actually grow food and the
populations of cities depend upon
infrastructure that if it failed would
totally suck and where the weapons
technology we have is unlike anything
we've ever had like we can see that
these types of patterns have happened in
the past and led to war and resets and I
think that that's too costly to happen
again and so outside of everyone
recognizing that and having that
motivate their willingness to do
something really uncomfortable which is
to be willing to disagree with the
in-group that they're a part of even
where the in group will use ostracizing
and shaming as a way to hold them in
line and to really engage with other
people in perspectives and to not do the
lazy thing of just defecting to the
sense making that someone else that you
hold as legitimate Authority gave you
but really engaging earnestly with all
of the perspectives that you can to try
to understand what makes sense to then
also understand what a way forward that
doesn't look like war looks like I don't
think there are any good chances for the
world unless a lot of people started
doing that just picking up on something
you said just then I've often thought
that it's really impossible to do good
sense making or to orient towards truth
unless we're prepared to disagree with
our in-group the essential
thing too good sense-making is a
commitment to earnestness like a sincere
profound commitment to earnestness in
our sense making which means that the
enemy of that is bias of any kind and
which means vested interests of any kind
and so the desire to fit in my group is
a source of bias invested interest
because my group might have things wrong
or be missing stuff and if they're
willing to use you know apostasy
punishments if they're willing to use if
you're not with us you're against us
line in the sand kind of stuff then
they're not engaged in good faith in
trying to understand they think that
they have understood enough and now
they're engaged in winning a war and so
there is if you want to find a way out
of war and so you want to engage in the
kind of good sense making that could
inform that then you might be against
them if you aren't with them right and
so and we can see this again on in
fundamentalist interpretations of lots
of religious views and cultural views on
both sides of you know the culture war
we can see the way that the Left evolved
a very profound tool of memetic shaming
to be able to hold a common narrative
and to hold the argument that they had
the only source of legitimate Authority
and that looked like largely kind of
capturing control of most of the
academies and you know government
institutions and lots of types of media
for some period of time but then saying
you're a racist or you're an anti-semite
or you're misogynist or you're a bigot
or you're xenophobe was effective for a
long time to just have people not be
able to engage in conversations it might
have had some actual legitimacy we can
see though that of course and I'm not
saying anything new here that that that
as a weapon right that tie
of social shaming as a type of narrative
weapon when any like in a physical war
when any side gets a new weapon the
other side start their engineer start
working really fast to make a counter
weapon defenses and better versions of
that weapon and so this is the thing
that when you think like oh we've got
some new narrative that's gonna be
awesome or some new stat or some new
method of public engagement or getting
the voters that don't normally vote out
or whatever the thing is the moment it's
successful everybody will
reverse-engineer it and attack the basis
of how you do it
and so we can see that the coalescing of
and the kind of concretization of the
alright was to a large degree in
response to a counter response to those
social shaming tools which didn't come
to the place of saying like okay I'll
embrace being racist I will embrace
having traditional views on gender roles
more fully than I might have previously
so that that shaming tool doesn't work
for me anymore and grab her by the
is totally fine like we'll vote for that
guy again and so and you know there are
similar kinds of tools used on the right
for being able to create in group
cohesion and so yes I think their
earnestness and sincerity and the desire
to understand reality clearly is the
foundation and then the courage to
actually ask those questions and say the
things you that you think and notice in
the presence of an in-group that is
trying to force you to defect to the
center of what that groupthink is defect
on your own self
there's courage but there's is this
interesting combination of courage and
humility that has to be there at the
same time which is the courage to say I
don't know if I agree I don't know that
this perspective is adequate even if I'm
compelled partially by it I don't know
that it's adequate there are some other
counter
a lot of people believe that I'm not
going to rule them all as just dumb or
pathological and so I don't know if this
perspectives adequate and that more
thinking is needed there's courage to do
that because if you're not with us
you're against us as a powerful tactic
but to have that confidence and at the
same time say I don't know yet what I
think is true that is the humility side
that doesn't just have a new hubris that
is going to try and be the center of a
new narrative warfare and get people to
you know defect on the other sides to
come join that side so I think like
earnestness and sincerity empowered by
really deep courage and a deep kind of
epistemic humility is going to make
someone misfit for every end group
currently which is the valley crossing
that people have to go through to
basically leave the forces that are
irate arrayed in a war that we're all
sides are wrong to hopefully have enough
people who do that
that start to find each other and don't
do a new tribal groupthink thing but all
engage in earnest actual thinking
themselves an actual conversation
without orienting towards groupthink
that can start to make a new stranger
[Music]
and I'm interested to apply this to what
you might call the this sort of sense
making space that we've been kind of
investigating so these concepts of game
be non-rivalry Stein Amex rule Omega
like this is what's been quite shocking
I think for me and maybe for you I don't
know is that even these these particular
concepts can be weaponized as well for
self-serving ends how does that work and
has that surprised you the moment that
there is a ambiguous idea like game B
which is kind of a placeholder for what
would a healthier civilization be then
to the degree that that starts getting
traction and people are interested
people being associated with it because
it's getting traction and it seems like
there will be power there whether their
motives are really of game B or not is
obviously going to happen and then also
people trying to capture the flag and
say game B is dot dot dot the thing that
they're doing is also going to happen so
I I think actually you know placing a
flag like that that attracts capture is
not a straightforwardly good idea I'm
not saying it's definitely a bad idea
but it's definitely not a
straightforwardly good idea and I think
conversations like this hopefully can
lead to more more earnest exploration on
our own part not even not calling each
other out like there is a time this is
again there's a way to help support
collective intelligence that if we see
someone doing something that we think is
off that we share it in a way that is
actually a good face trying to help them
do better
there's also another method of call out
culture that is really just a weapon to
take out people who are not part of the
narrative that we're creating you and I
saw in certain online forums
conversations I think I think Jordan
Hall and Jamie wheel and I had a
conversation sitting right here on this
couch and we talked about rule Omega and
that was shared and then we saw people
invoking rule Omega when as a tactic to
get other people to include them in a
conversation where the the way that they
showed up in conversation did not compel
the other people to include them and the
way we actually articulate rule Omega is
that it cannot be invoked by others it
has to be granted
shall we just recap what rule Omega is
it's basically giving the benefit of the
doubt and calling out assuming the other
person is trying to express some
meaningful and helping to tease that out
in the interaction so rather than mixing
it yeah and so rule Omega is this kind
of process where with those we are
seeking to collaborate we grant a level
of giving the benefit of the doubt you
shouldn't do this with everyone right
like if if somebody comes up to me on
the street and they seem like they're
trying to con me in some way I don't
give them Rule megha and assume that
they have good intention and you know
are thoughtful that would actually be
done and if someone is engaging in
mostly rhetoric with me and they they
also don't seem that they are seeking to
understand clearly that it actually is
not warranted and so rule omegas this is
basically when I am trying to engage
with people who might think differently
but I think that I'm not positive that
I'm right and they're wrong if there's a
difference if there's a difference I
think I might possibly have something to
learn then R Omega is how I would engage
that would best increase my chance of
learning the thing which is only
interested only relevant if I want to
learn stuff that I maybe don't already
know and especially learn stuff that
might even be different than stuff that
feels actually important to me and this
is where there is a courage and an
earnestness and the sincerity that's
really critical now there's a level of
give the benefit of the doubt that in
general is a nice rule of thumb to err
in the direction of right try and hear
where someone is coming from but when
someone else is on the offense in a
actively kind of weaponized way or
whatever I might not do that I also have
the right to not engage with someone
factoring the very limited time of life
that I have and that I can't engage with
everyone that doesn't feel like the best
use of my time to advance the the things
that I care most about even if it's
caring for everyone I might not see that
as the right place to go so if someone
says rule Omega give the benefit of the
doubt therefore you have to listen to me
and engage with me and answer all my
responses that's actually weaponizing
give the benefit of the doubt
and there are similar things where
insofar as
we were referencing I don't remember the
quote from Ecclesiastes but everybody
knows it there's a time to kill and a
time to heal and the time to sew and a
time to reap and a time to every purpose
under heaven something like that which I
take as that all of the rules are
generally rules of thumb where there are
some exceptions there are edge cases
where I can't just say I'm following the
rules in which case I'm actually not a
human with choice I am a bot I have to
say I'm reserving the right to make a
choice outside of any rule set aligned
with the best principles principles
aren't rules principles are are
considerations but where I don't
necessarily know what I will do because
there might be a time for any particular
kind of thing so there is a time to not
give the benefit of the doubt there is a
time to try and get over the energy of
conflict and really do apartheid
reconciliation peace and reconciliation
work there's other times to draw
boundaries where the other side is
actually really not engaging in good
faith in a boundary is actually
necessary now I can weaponize the idea
of boundaries and draw them where I
actually should be crossing the boundary
to try and listen I can also weaponize
the idea of break down the boundaries
and listen to each other when drawing a
boundary is the appropriate thing and so
the moment anyone holds there is a
principle that is sometimes true
therefore I can say it's true whenever I
want it to be right this is another
place where it's not just truth can be
weaponized in terms of data but a true
rule of thumb can be weaponized when it
is actually not the appropriate thing to
do
the moment that we say game B or IDW or
whatever it is and it seems like a lot
of people are being attracted where then
if someone became associated with that
thing or made a project of that type or
made a media channel of that type or
became a speaker there they would up
regulate their public presence or
profile or something now it becomes a
honeypot that's going to attract people
for actually exactly gamej reasons 2x
floette gained the virtue right and so
this is the virtue signaling thing which
is actually maybe a good thing for us to
talk about now insofar as game B's
talking about a better world insofar as
it has epistemic how do we do better
sense making those epistemic scan be
weaponized and we can talk about how
critical thinking and how dialectics and
whatever can be weaponized but insofar
as it's also talking about not just what
is true but what is good right like in
the true the good in the beautiful kind
of sense what are we what are the kind
of world were wanting to build then of
course any virtue can be weaponized
which is virtue signaling and again
these I'm talking about topics that
everybody is talking about right now I'm
just hopefully trying to talk about them
in a slightly different way to say
everyone on all sides is are oriented to
do versions of this as opposed to those
guys are virtue signaling and us calling
them out is us demonstrating our actual
virtue but we're not virtue signaling
and so one way that I think of the
distinction between real virtue and
virtue signaling is virtue signaling is
when it's clear that an enough people
hold a particular trait as a virtue that
if I seem to have that virtue it would
be good for me right the people would
like me accept me agree with me buy my
stuff like my ideas whatever it is so if
I signal if I communicate in some way
that I have that virtue it's beneficial
for me in straight self-serving ways
right so I have a reason to signal the
virtue beyond my authentic living of it
and this is where rather than I'm just
doing what I'm doing and people notice
the virtue that I happen to to be living
I am intentionally trying to seem
virtuous of a particular kind more than
I am trying to actually live that thing
right and this is where the you know
Jesus saying don't let the right hand
see what the left hand was doing and I
think every culture that has wisdom has
some quotes like that because virtue
signaling has is forever right and it's
whatever the dominant culture is
whatever the thing that is seen as
virtue there
so during you know during the early
Soviet empire Marxist ideology people
would virtue signal being more Marxist
right
and during Dark Age Catholic reign the
virtuous signaling was about being
better Catholics and you know so now
left and right have their own versions
of virtue signaling to their own base
and so politicians and companies and
social leaders are oriented to signal
the thing they would need to in that way
a real virtue is something that is that
I care about that I value actually
hopefully something that is sacred to me
that I am willing to experience personal
sacrifice for not that my signalling of
it creates personal gain but I am
willing to lose personal gain in service
of this because it's more important than
personal gain to me so I'm willing to
lose some dollars to have my company not
do that thing because I hold a virtue or
an ethic that won't have me do that
thing even if it would make me more
dollars or I'm willing to lose some
followers or get some not you know
people dislike what I'm saying or
whatever to stand up for something
because I actually meaningfully believe
in it right most people are willing to
be disliked by the group that they
identify as enemies though they might
even take pride in it because they're
doing in-group out-group Machiavellian
stuff but am I willing to lose likes and
support by the people that I'm trying to
in group with is where it's actually
consequential because losing the ones
that I've already lost isn't
consequential so then I get to weaponize
see I'm willing to make a sacrifice and
have enemies which is actually
weaponizing the idea of sacrifice itself
we can also see that so yeah the
difference between virtue and virtue
signaling is real virtue is not trying
to signal to other people something it
is trying to actually live something and
it is willing to stand for something
where it is personally disadvantageous
and so you can see someone's virtue in
the
series of choices they have made that
have been hard choices so when someone
tells me that they're interested in
impact investing with their financial
services fund I go through and I say
show me in record the series of
investment choices you made where you
turn down money because of an ethic just
show me the the record of those and
usually they can't do a good job at that
and then I say off because I know
that now impact investing just happens
to be the virtue that signals a
particular niche of capital or whatever
but there's no real earnestness in it
right so I was having a conversation the
other day with somebody about this and I
was thinking about the kind of virtues
the kind of self sacrifice and courage
and valor and heroism that would have
someone jump on a grenade to protect
their fellows and how profoundly
beautiful and incredible that impulses
and that actual developed capacity and
commitment in oneself and then the way
that other people weaponize the most
beautiful traits in someone right so
like develop soldiers that have that
virtue and then apply them to a
false-flag war where they're told the
war is for one reason and that's not
really the reason that it's for so those
who are running the false flag war are
weaponizing the energy of patriotism of
self-sacrifice of whatever in people and
we can see that like as you know suicide
bombing where a young person is willing
to give up their life in service of the
thing that they believe is right only
when the infidels are gone well you know
the world be remade and and I'll come
back and etc and like that the other
people are actually infidels they're
against God and against a good and
they're doing the holy thing
and yet it's clearly some people who are
fighting political and cultural wars who
don't really believe in 72 virgins in
heaven but believe in other much more
strategic things who then end up
weaponizing those people's deepest
virtues that are more important in their
own life weaponizing the sense of the
sacred against them and against others
this most thing to be able to
actually turn what is most sacred into
what is most defiled and that also is
Ubiquiti like it blows my mind when i
think about we talked about this before
but when we think about things like
christian holy war when think about the
inquisition and it's like okay so people
who are claiming to believe in Jesus as
the Savior who said let he who has no
sins cast the first stone and if they
strike one cheek give them the other in
seventy times seven and you know on and
on all these types of things and Father
forgive them for they know not what they
do how we figure out in the name of the
religion that believes in him to torture
people who think differently or to burn
them at the stake it's like what the
 how do we figure out how to do that
well there's a there's easy ways he also
said you know I come not to destroy the
law but to uphold it and then I can go
back to Leviticus and then I can see
where we were supposed to kill people
and whatever right so basically so there
are individuals who take tools and
weaponize them in relationship with
other individuals there are also
individuals and groups and positions of
power that seek to weaponize groups of
people and so they seek to share
compelling narratives to scare people to
create a false enemy that will scare
everyone and unify them together against
that enemy that was either created or
exaggerated to begin with or whatever
and
they are basically weaponizing people
and people's courage to be willing to
step up and fight so it's actually
weaponizing that which is most beautiful
and other people for the most
purposes only we're talking about giving
examples of all the things that can be
Mis applied and you know weaponizing is
a strong term for all of the cases but
but yes applied with some intention that
has some knowing or not knowing
distortion and some harm that will there
is no doubt or not that will occur from
it we can talk about the weaponization
of science the philosophy of science and
even more the practice of science and
the funding of science we can talk about
the weaponization of philanthropy of
we've talked about the weaponization of
market dynamics quite a lot we could
also talk about the weaponization of the
critique of market dynamics to to then
promote other things that are even
nummer we can talk about where
postmodern ideas became weaponized and
then also over reactive critiques of
post-modernism became weaponized we can
look at where critical thinking was
supposed to be a tool to help identify
these things and it itself can be
weaponized in many cases to lead to
people who are overconfident and just
simply looking for tools of rhetoric
that have very little actual curiosity
and are trying to support certainty
rather than the kind of comfort with
uncertainty that is of the basis of
earnestness in the philosophy of science
itself so you this would be a impossibly
long video if we got into all of that
but we could write we could look at
examples of the applications of Buddhism
that I think are pretty badly weaponized
and of you know pick the religion picked
or whatever and and yet also examples of
things that are authentically good
meaningful and maybe even necessary
in all those places so hopefully we've
covered enough that there's enough
examples that people can start to think
through them and I think one of the most
interesting things would be if people
did and started to give examples of
where they have seen this occur in
various domains and especially if they
didn't just give the examples of where
they've seen the people that they feel
are other do it but that where they've
seen groups that they identify with do
it and maybe where they can see both
sides of a debate both in doing some
kind of weaponizing and what engaging
without that might look like if if there
could start to be in the Facebook groups
and then the YouTube thread like people
actually discussing that that would be
generative and of course YouTube is
degenerate enough there would be trolls
what I'm hoping is that most people
recognize that they themselves are
sometimes susceptible to a subclinical
degree of troll them where they're not
full-blown trolls but they're also not
engaging in the most generative way and
hopefully seek to do better yeah the
troll spectrum we're hoping to move
people down
to share here I don't believe that I am
an expert in any of the topics I'm
talking about right now I'm talking
about them because there are certain
phenomena that are quite clear to me
that I see happening in this space that
I want to address and I don't see it
being addressed yet and I actually feel
a certain responsibility to make sure
that insofar as we have shared insights
that we also share how to be thoughtful
about the interpretation and use of
those insights but I'm sure that there
are people who have studied the history
and evolution and tools and technologies
of propaganda and narrative warfare and
information warfare much much better
than I have I would be super interested
in having those people on and same with
like psychiatric diagnosis and various
lines of it I'm sure there are more
nuanced thinkers so I'm going to share
the way that I think about it and I
would be surprised if in five years I'll
still think the same way about it and
that's important because I like this is
my best current thinking in an area that
I know a little bit about so I would ask
that people take it as a stimulus for
your own thinking including where you
disagree rather than as a am i right or
not right and if I not right throw it
out and don't even have stimulated
thinking and if right then also don't
have stimulated thinking the ability to
treat someone as an authority and then
either accept what they say and don't
think or reject what they say and don't
think like both of those are so
uninteresting so my hope is that this
video if it does anything stimulate your
own deeper thinking and own exploration
and study and learning and conversation
on these topics okay so and and if you
disagree with me about something I'm
super interested to know because like I
said I'm sure that conversations where
people disagree is and I and in some
places their right is why in five years
I will think differently on these things
than I do now just like I think
different there are lots of things now
they did five years ago so one of the
places where my thoughts have updated
was when I studied the literature on
cluster be dynamic
it really both helped and bothered me
Plus to be 9mx mean meaning the sort of
dot often called the dark triad yeah
yeah
and so I'll specifically say the thing
we call antisocial personality disorder
the sociopathy psychopathy and
narcissism I'll particularly focus on
those ones I had always previously taken
people who behaved in those ways through
a before I had studied that literature I
took those behaviors as like from an
attachment theoretic perspective that
they had you know some kind of avoidant
attachment where they had been
traumatized so they couldn't trust well
or you know something like that or they
they were traumatized in the traumas
perpetuating itself in some way but I
took it that way where then my goal was
to help heal the trauma and be
redemptive right to be compassionate
redemptive and I have a and I think lots
of people have a very deep don't want to
just villainize throw people away
punished but recognize that insofar as
people are hurting people it's often
because they were hurt and the answer is
not just a punitive answer right and we
know that the just punitive answer
itself leads to escalating warfare that
leads to a world that's because
we can't keep handling group punitive
dynamics which is war with escalating
texts so but I was very oriented in that
way and I noticed that there were lots
of people who had addictions and lied
and did violent things that I spent time
with and they really changed like the
someone helping them have new
experiences really change him awesome I
also noticed some people didn't which I
always took as a failing of my capacity
to be more effective with them and as I
started to say the literature I saw that
where the failings had occurred and
corresponding with the places where I
had the most regrets in my life which
usually involved giving the benefit of
the doubt so I trusted someone were
actually felt that
shouldn't I kind of knew that I
shouldn't but I talked myself into it
out of give the benefit of the doubt and
be redemptive which means I gas lit
myself right when we Gaslight other
people what that means usually is that
we share some kind of rationally
compelling arguments that has them
override their own intuitive sensibility
sometimes we will use our virtues to
Gaslight ourselves and this is again
where we have to be careful because is
it that I have a real intuitive knowing
and I'm gaslighting myself in it with an
inappropriately applied generalization
or is it that the thing I'm calling
intuition is actually bias and Prejudice
and using logic to help clear it as the
right thing
this is tricky and I can share
no absolute rule other than no both of
those things can be the case and really
be thoughtful about it and create
friendships with people that you also
think are very thoughtful and kind of
wise and explore the topics with them
and like I don't have an algorithm and I
don't believe there is one I believe one
can simply understand the different
types of failure case and be attentive
to it
I think the attempt to reduce it to an
algorithm will always be damaging so I
noticed that there were places where I I
gasp let myself in overrode my own sense
that someone was not trustworthy because
I wanted to offer trust to them in a way
that would help them be able to trust
because obviously offering trust in good
faith can help other people be able to
trust but of course if I trust someone
and as a result invite them into my life
or circles or whatever in certain ways
where then other people that trust me
now can be hurt by those people then I
actually became untrustworthy myself to
the other people through my own poor
discernment or poor boundaries and those
were the places where I usually had the
deepest regrets from like man I actually
did something that led to other people
getting hurt or me not upholding
boundaries that I should have and it was
it was actually out of my own desire to
be redemptive and have good faith where
it was inappropriate
and so when I start understand the NPD
sociopathy I started saying oh there are
certain people where whom I'm not going
to say healing isn't possible a
redemption isn't possible but it is of a
different type what what it would take
to heal it like that the pathology is of
a different type it has created some
very powerful self reinforcing loop that
eats most types of therapy without
actually addressing the loop and simply
uses them to get better at doing the
thing and so you either need to not
engage or engage of some type that could
be effective which I would say I don't
see anyone who is generally good at that
currently so then there are some times
where rather than being redemptive the
higher value is actually being
protective which is again still not
punitive right and it doesn't close the
door on ever redemptive but it certainly
says I'm not going to try and do it and
fail where I'm actually not equipped to
do it because of certain things that I
notice so yes if there is someone who is
oriented to power in a way that maybe
has some defended blind spots where they
don't even see that they are or they
don't hold it that way or they don't
hold that there's a problem with it or
whatever and I show them hey the reason
I don't trust you is these three things
then what they know is oh I will make
sure around him to never demonstrate
those three things again and now they
have gotten better right at being able
to be covert in that process so we do
have to be careful about hey when I
offer feedback is this going to help
someone actually heal because they have
the earnest willingness and desire and
capacity to heal or is this going to
help weaponize their orientation now I
have also seen obviously there are
certain circles that don't talk about
healing and in psychotherapy very much
they might talk about religion or
tradition or just science or whatever
then they're in the circles that talk
more about things like healing and
healing trauma I don't know any places
that attract narcissism sociopaths
better because there's a lot of
vulnerable people
that would be good sources of
narcissistic supply and who are willing
to hear like that's just your ego
or me doing this as me just being
authentic or being vulnerable or
expressing my emotions or whatever else
that basically allows bad behavior under
the name of some therapeutic or
spiritual idea and this is why we see so
many spiritual teachers that we then see
later we're being sexually or
financially or emotionally
psychologically abusive with people and
in the therapeutic space because
basically insofar as they're oriented to
weaponize relationship and mind control
the domains of mind control in the
domains where there is legitimate
Authority like a priest or a therapist
or whatever where people are offering
some degree of trust and vulnerability
to legitimate Authority there are no
more powerful positions to be able to do
that thing now of course also economics
politics military you know those other
things but these are particularly
sensitive in susceptible areas and so I
have seen I'll give some examples of
weaponization of psychological tools
especially that show up in what we might
call progressive new-age whatever kinds
of circles that there are versions of
this that are slightly different that
showed up in the Catholic Dark Age or
the whatever right like what what is the
way that the the virtues the
psychological tools spiritual insights
get weaponized for power games but I'll
share that these ones here because these
you know because rebel wisdom hosts
circling because people here are
interested in psychological development
so we need to be aware of these
people can use the virtue or the
statement of the virtue of transparency
to just be assholes and it's a weapon I
it's a weaponization of the idea of
transparency I remember the first time I
saw this like which some it was like
shocking and disgusting to me I saw this
married couple that was there's many
many years ago that was doing this like
radical honesty group and he was saying
things to her like your face looks
really ugly today and she was saying
things to him like I feel hatred arising
and I want to throw you out the window
and I was like and then they're saying
we're just being radically honest and
transparent and that's a virtue I'm like
no it's not like this is actually not a
virtue this is you taking the lowest
parts of your nature and amplifying the
 out of them and in ways that don't
actually serve anything other than
cruelty and so it's very easy to see
like that's not a healthy example of of
transparency so then on the other side
people can weaponize kindness or I'll
say miss apply it but it can also be
weaponized right which is no no we don't
want to say things that are
unnecessarily hurtful so then the
overcompensation and that side can be
well I'm not gonna tell them those
things because it would hurt their
feelings which is actually now a
rationalization for lying or lying
through a mission which then like the
other person doesn't have consent and is
that information being withheld from
them and so there is a dialectic
relationship between something like
honesty or transparency on one side and
kindness and thoughtfulness on the other
side that are both relevant and neither
are the absolute virtue that trumps the
set of things that all need considered
to show up well right so this is
important and I will specifically see
that some people just being dumb and
believing a teacher will do this
nonsense right but nobody's particular
narcissist but narcissists who want to
kind of say mean things to people well
then after
words and people are all upset say
you're shaming me for my honesty and
transparency you're trying to get me to
emotionally repress this you're the part
of the patriarchy again that is trying
to shut down emotions this is just about
honestly embracing and accepting
emotionality right hogwash I am
responsible for my emotions and I don't
want to suppress them where they'll blow
up and I also don't want to
unconsciously act on the lowest parts of
n triggered and wounded parts of my
nature I want to notice them and
responsibly do what it takes to heal
them without perpetuating harm and I
don't want to perpetuate harm and then
pretend that I didn't and say no no
you're responsible for the meaning you
made this is another classic example
right which is a first person or a
second person emphasis and in relational
dynamics you can't hurt me because
whatever you say is just you saying
things it's the meaning that I make of
it that hurts me well that's partially
true and it's empowering to me to the
degree that I hold it because even if
you're an asshole I don't have to get
really bent out of shape about it but
the moment I tried to tell someone else
that the only reason they feel hurt by
me is the meaning they're making up on
it this is again like rule Omega can be
offered not invoked I can take
responsibility for not having my
feelings hurt by what someone else says
but I can't tell someone else they need
to take responsibility for it therefore
I can be an asshole right now this is
again tricky as because we can see
where people will do that they will just
be an asshole and then say I'm not being
an asshole I'm just being me
authentically and you're choosing to be
unsolved in but then on the other side
of that where is it important to
actually help other people take more
sovereign responsibility and say look
I'm actually not being an asshole I'm
not being unlawful and considered I'm
saying something that is really true and
important and consider it and the
reactivity that you hold about it is
actually taking you out of relationship
right so again it's easy to air on
either side of this so if someone gets
their feelings hurt am I responsible
kind of sometimes yes sometimes no to
some degree as to some degree no right
and how do we tell the difference that's
the key question the moment I offer a
algorithm for that that will become the
new weapon and so what I can say is you
can endeavor earnestly as best you can
to notice where you're actually coming
from and the effects of what you're
doing and where others are actually
coming from and the effects they're
doing and also listen to other people's
perspective on the way you're doing it
and I don't have a better answer than
that so there are certain things that
seem obviously in bad faith there are a
lot of other things that clearly the
other person doesn't think it's in bad
faith but they're making a mistake there
are other things that might seem like
they're in bad faith but it's just
because the person saying something that
pisses me off but they're actually
showing up in good faith and I just
don't want to hear it and so like here's
a protocol that I hold in relationships
for communication when I'm communicating
with someone I endeavor to and I
definitely do not always succeed at this
but I endeavor as best I can to
communicate when I'm speaking in a way
that they will actually hear what I'm
intending to share regardless of what
their filters of hearing are which means
I'm gonna try to empathetically put
myself in their shoes enough that I can
customize how I communicate where
they'll be able to hear it not just say
 the way that makes sense to me
you don't hear that here cuz I'm talking
to a huge number of people and I don't
know how to do that for a huge number of
people but when I'm talking with
somebody one on one that's my goal
not as a manipulation but as a meeting
someone where they are and saying my
goal is not to talk at someone and just
 throw words at them like bullets
right my goal is to actually communicate
in a way where they hear what I'm saying
and I hear what they're saying
communicate is to find some communion
right and so if I'm talking at them and
they're not hearing what I'm saying I
want to take responsibility to say okay
well even if their react
and they're going into unconscious
reactions even if they seem to have
cotton balls in their ears that are
 up the way they're hearing stuff
I don't have to communicate with them
but if I am choosing to communicate with
them and to try to find some commonality
or some communion how do I check that my
communication is landing and how do I
use the frames the words the metaphors
that might be able to make sense to them
as opposed to just say it's your fault
that you're listening badly on the other
side when someone is talking to me as
best I can I try to take responsibility
to hear where they're coming from even
if I think they're communicating poorly
right so maybe they're really angry and
they're clearly exaggerating you've
never blah blah blah blah blah and it's
not true they never blow a lot but that
like they're angry they're exaggerating
but I'm trying to listen to is there
some true thing here rather than got
caught up on what is false is there some
actual need that isn't met that I can
hear is there and because that's on
either side of the communication that's
me taking the responsibility to try to
have effective communication come as
much as I can now I also want to try and
support them to do that but I can't
force it I can only support it and then
I have to pay attention to what is
effective and actually supporting it and
then I also ultimately decide whether or
not I keep relating with them there
there's so much nuance here and then
again it's very easy for people to
weaponize the idea of nuance generally
the answer is that it's very easy to
have a partial truth that polarizes that
isn't held with other partial truths
that polarize or like a fact right like
the the facts we gave as examples
earlier where I'm cherry-picking out of
datasets that is true but not
representative and so then usually the
answer is include more stuff which is
more nuanced more complex but then I
have seen people weaponize the idea of
nuance when someone is actually stating
something that is simple and actually
has truth and clarity and simplicity and
the other person doesn't want that
boundary to exist then they say you're
not being nuanced enough right and so
this is why it's like the Dow that his
name was not the eternal Dow the virtue
that you say is the one that trumps all
of the other ones the the protocol that
is the protocol it doesn't exist and you
know if I want to try and talk about
integrity
I usually don't think of integrity as a
virtue or a value as much as I think
that it about it as the degree of
congruence between my behavior and all
of my other virtues or values and so if
I value kindness and I also value
transparency and I value truth and I
also value connection and I then how
well am I able to navigate high
correlation between the way I'm showing
up and all of those values
simultaneously is kind of my integrity
assessment we were talking about
weaponizing certain psychological things
and there's some more examples that are
important so we talked about weaponizing
transparency then we talked about
weaponizing kindness I have seen so
people can weaponize their own
vulnerability where it's like I watched
after brené Brown came out and did her
stuff on vulnerability that then I saw
all these things on Facebook of life
coaches crying in the camera with tears
in their eyes showing how vulnerable
they are and you know then if you want
to learn how to be vulnerable to their
packages for sale and like oh
like that that's like weaponizing via
virtue signaling where the more
vulnerable thing if they were being
really vulnerable wouldn't be them
crying about this thing that they've
already resolved and is really not
actually consequential to them which is
not real vulnerability it would be them
saying I'm broke right now guys and I
need to pay the bills and I really want
you to buy my package and I think that
it's beneficial for some people and like
that would be awesome actual
authenticity and vulnerability which
very rarely happens I have seen like one
of the worst ones is weaponizing apology
and and remorse so again associated with
something like narcissism generally if
the person feels that the person who's
challenging them or upset with them
doesn't have power and they do they will
just say this is your ego making up
nonsense and they'll Gaslight them but
if the other person has power and they
can't do that because it's a whole group
of people calling them out or it's a
very someone with a lot of following or
whatever then the most effective
game-theoretic thing for them to do
might be to start crying and say oh my
god I'm so sorry this goes back to a
childhood wound of mine and it's really
vulnerable and I'm working on it and I
thought I had healed this pattern and
still showing up thank you for showing
it to me I'm really gonna work on it I
want you guys to hold me accountable and
I have seen people do this with tears in
their eyes and a week later do the exact
same thing when powerful people weren't
around to hold them accountable and that
is basically weaponizing fake remorse
and apology and whatever so you have to
so if I notice that happen what I know
is that no words that person says will
mean anything to me
so I would need to see if the that
doesn't mean that I've closed off
redemptive possibilities it means I need
a different kind of signal so if the
person said no I've really made a change
I'd be like awesome I'm gonna watch that
that bad behavior doesn't happen for
three or five years and in including
where you have to actually face
consequential things right and so again
the guy beats his wife when he's drunk
and then the next day apologize I love
you I'm sorry I'm never gonna drink
again and whatever right and the pattern
keeps rinse repeat it's not an apology
at the level that will actually change
the pattern therefore it is a weapon to
keep her bound to an abuse cycle so when
is an apology
or remorse or accountability real well
it it's when it is at the level of depth
that will actually change the behavior
if it isn't then whether the person
thinks they mean it in the moment
not you shouldn't trust it right so I I
can obviously give a million examples
what I'm hoping is I've given enough
examples that you can start finding your
own examples now does this mean that
anytime someone is crying and
apologizing that they are weaponizing it
not earnest now sometimes they might
really be earnest and they're going to
shift forever or they're going to start
a process that will work with a
difficult you know difficult set of
dynamics that might involve a little bit
of relapse but earnestly is oriented in
a different direction versus they're
just doing the Mia Copa they need to to
get out of accountability in the moment
and then go back to power seeking as
soon as everyone's attention is off of
them which is why three months isn't
enough right and now can some people
play a long game sure we have seen some
great political strategists to play a
long game so even the principle of wait
a few years is not a perfect principle
to rule fun
another way of thinking about what we're
discussing here is that when people are
communicating with other people in
person or via some kind of media what is
the basis of why they're communicating
what is the actual motive or agenda or
ordinay ting basis of that communication
because it's a it is a shared thing
there's an interpersonal thing happening
is the communication for the
interpersonal benefit for the benefit of
those people and the whole the larger
holes that they're part of in the
ecology whatever is it for some private
benefit is the motive being shared is it
not being shared these are important
inquiries and humans are smart and we
have a world where there are ways where
we can advantage ourselves at the
expense of others there are ways where
the expense to other can be hidden so we
have plausible deniability on it or
seems diffuse to a lot of people so it
doesn't seem that bad or seems
rationalize Abul because if I don't some
other bad thing will happen so there's a
lot of reasons why someone can even feel
moral and right by doing something to be
self-serving that involves sharing
something that is to some degree
distorted meaning not true or not the
whole truth or in a representative way
or whatever I don't think the history on
this is clear I think there's still a
good bit of debate on theories of it
Gelman and gerard and you know various
thinkers on the history of linguistics
have different thoughts on the evolution
of spoken language and you know then for
mobilizations of spoken language but I
think it's pretty clear that language
did not evolve just based on individual
selection it was that groups survived
better based on their ability to share
information and coordinate better I eat
to share sense making I went and I saw
where the predator was or where the
berries were where the water was and I
come back and share so the ability for
the people to share their sense making
and then to be able to coordinate that
has a group intelligence that is better
than just the individual intelligences
their ability to communicate created
groups that survive better so than those
individuals that did the effective
community
in groups did just a group selection
found more than an individual selection
phenomena which means that the evolution
of language was actually for the
survival of the group this is something
that forests as Landry has done a lot of
work on and yet today we share
communication very often in self-serving
ways not for the benefit of the group
but for the benefit of self or self and
some proxy some fealty relationships
like family or political side or company
or nation or whatever it is but that's
still self and group I identify with in
context of externalize harm to some
other group that's also connected to our
context but even just in personal
relationships and if you just look on
Facebook the amount of sharing that is
self serving in through language when I
think language actually evolved as a
collective intelligence tool is a real
underlying fundamental problem and I
think then to the degree we do it it
leads to everyone doing it leads to a
multipolar trap that leads to a broken
epistemic Commons and information
ecology we're almost nobody actually
trusts anyone or thinks really well or
communicates in earnest effective
that empowers each other I would like
when I'm communicating to share things
that actually empower you to be more
sovereign not to try to capture your
sovereignty so that you believe and do
in service of what I want right and I
think I think the reason that we're
sharing these videos is actually not
trying to say this is my worldview
believe it but to say this is the way
that anyone selling a worldview
including where I'm selling worldviews
in other places can have Distortion
intentionally or unintentionally so how
do you better equip yourself to notice
that included including the worldviews
that we're selling to ourselves
including the worldviews we're selling
to ourselves and yeah like the
distortion is to self most of the time
and that's actually why I said one of
the things that good sense-making
requires it a lot more courage but also
a lot more humility because
one of the main problems is faulty
overconfidence and then there is a
failure on the other side which is to
simply embrace not confidence but give
up on sense making I got no idea what
the fuck's going on and playing video
games or I got no idea what's true so
I'm gonna vote for a strong man leader
that I think will at least protect me
and more right so we can see the number
of Russian citizens that say that they
think Putin is lying even to them in the
news but also still support him because
they don't think that truth is a
possibility and that a good strong
politician facing huge opponents and
enemies like the West has to lie and
they at least think that he's gonna keep
them safe and serve their interests
better than some other people wouldn't
and so you can see there
when people's epistemic certainty is low
and they don't know how to make good
choices for themselves or what's true
they start defecting to wanting strong
man leaders more we see this in the u.s.
right now you can also see that because
strongman leaders know that helping to
decrease everyone's epistemic certainty
is actually in their interest and that
will always lead in the direction of
dictatorship towards despotism and if we
want anything like a more democratic or
more Republic process where more people
are engaged in their own governance they
have to do the sense make them to be
able to meaningfully engage with other
people that they are going to be bound
with and if you you know if you don't
want to and you don't commit to do what
it takes to be actively informed and
civically engaged then you consent to be
ruled by those who seek to rule if you
are willing to just adopt belief systems
based on who the dominant group think
closest to you that seems serve your
interests as then you are consenting to
be ruled and to the dissent towards that
particular kind of dictatorship and if
you want something like a democratized
process democracy doesn't mean voting
it's the it means a process by which
more people are engaged in their own
governance of which voting is one tool
but the founding fathers said voting is
the death of democracy I forget I think
it was Jefferson said it because the
democracy really meant can more of us
engage in better conversations than the
monarch says what happens right or the
whatever kind of rulership there is and
to the degree we have a town hall where
we have an actual good earnest dialectic
conversation we might not even need to
vote because we come up with something
where we all agree that's a good idea
and the vote is if we can't to sublimate
physical warfare with a voting warfare
right but it's actually a warfare where
some people are now actually unhappy
with the way the whole thing is moving
forward but they at least think that
still participating with that system is
better than defecting on it and going
into war so they're willing to do it and
try again in the next four years right
or whatever the next thing is but if we
want something other than despotism it
the only way to check power actually
this is an important point that I would
like to make them closing anyone who has
asymmetric power whether that's more
money or political power or cultural
influence or whatever and usually those
come together right more money also
means that I can buy cultural influence
through media and marketing and paying
other people to say things that are
aligned with what I want and being able
to pay lobbyists and campaign budgets to
get political power so we can just talk
about power itself and all of those as
expressions those who have more power
within a power asymmetry both have the
incentive and the capacity to maintain
that power asymmetry and increase it so
they have the ability to make news that
does the bidding of what that has the
populace believe things that continue to
serve them having more power in that
system they can get representation they
can create technologies they can corner
markets they can whatever it is corner
scarce resources that allow them to
continue doing that they can suppress
opponents so this is why we
that sometimes after a war things will
be kind of state you know leveled the
playing field will be a bit leveled and
then whoever starts to get ahead will
start to see this increasing wealth
inequality and power asymmetry until we
get this power law distribution that is
so extreme that it actually doesn't work
for the base and then there's war again
or some kind of breakdown but I don't
think we get to make it through that
process more at the level of
technological development that we have
and I think we need to do something
fundamentally other than that so we have
to say why is it that that power law
distribution is inexorable right that it
keeps the inequalities keep getting more
intense and people argue against it and
their arguments typically those who are
at the top of the power law distribution
argue against it as a kind of
apologizing and they'll say no
technology democratizes power because
look at these new entrepreneurs who
weren't born into old money and they got
power okay I can use edge cases to
actually prove a rule but so the the
internet was supposed to decentralize be
a great equalizer and decentralized
broadcast media where they were you know
a handful of major news outlets where
there were the only people that could
share their idea and now with YouTube
anybody could and in myspace Facebook
everybody could but then of course what
it means is you've got Google and
Facebook that own pretty much all of the
platform for the online capacity to
broadcast anything that have way more
centralized power than any of those new
stations previously had and so it the
technology that supposedly was going to
decentralize it the you remember that
revolvers were going to be a great
equalizer in a similar way right the
technology that's supposed to
decentralize the power a cemetry will
eventually end up getting captured to
create a more intense power asymmetry
because the technology equals more power
and that ends up being captured by those
who are better at doing the more power
thing the only way out of that
I know of is a radically empowered in a
healthy and effective way base that
because otherwise we say okay well
that's not possible so we can't really
have everyone engaged cuz people are too
lazy and stupid and unwilling and
whatever and so we need to at least just
pick better representatives
representatives will do a good job will
create a thing called a state that is
gonna regulate and bind the predatory
aspects of market so the market can't
cut down the trees in the areas we call
state parks and they can't do organized
crime even though it's profitable and
they can't
whatever dump all their stuff in the
drinking water so we're gonna create
regulatory bodies that keep them from
the bind the market so then the markets
primary goal is to capture those
regulatory bodies right any anyone who's
doing well in the market that is gonna
do less well if the regulators are
successful their primary agenda is to
debase the integrity of the regulator
and they can do that with legislation
because the lobbyists are lawyers that
have to be paid for by somebody and who
has the money to pay them as the
corporate interests the campaign budgets
have to be paid for by somebody the
campaign budgets of your opponent will
get a lot of you know support and you've
only got four years in office blah blah
blah right so it's very easy to see how
the market is up capturing the
regulatory forces to then end up doing
their bidding so now we have banks that
get bailed out when they actually should
go bankrupt and oil companies that are
subsidized like that's not a market what
the and that's also not the healthy
kind of binding the predatory aspects
that's a crony capitalist type thing so
if the regulator's are supposed to be
able to bind the market type dynamics
where the the predatory parts of the
market they got asymmetric power over
everybody else well who is it that's
going to check the regulator's well
though the accountability of the
representatives to the people where the
people are actually educated aware
engaged enough to be able to do that is
supposedly the idea which is why in the
founding of you know the United States
and we can look at examples and other
attempts at a democratized process said
we've given you a republic if you can
keep it in the foundation will be the
comprehensive education and engagement
of all the citizens George Washington
the most important part of education
will be studying the science of
government not stem stem makes great
makes people who are great weapons but
doesn't make people who can see where
the system is being weaponized right
studying history and politics and those
dynamics so that people can do civic
engagement is where that would happens
you see how much the study of the
humanities and civics in the versions
that would be relevant for this got cut
after world war two stem and law got
much more focused the version of the
humanities that got left was a version
that actually couldn't fight the
dominant system effectively at all
because it goes against itself which is
particular kind of very Lim
post-modernism not to say that there
aren't relevant parts of post-modernism
but it is not the kind that can actually
check forces and so you can see that in
World War two there were a few really
smart stem guys that were super helpful
right von Neumann and touring and fine
men and whatever so we wanted to find
all of them create SATs and standardized
tests to find them and train them in
that way so that they would be effective
tools or weapons towards the system and
we didn't want smart guys thinking about
different systems like Marx or you know
whatever so we wanted to make sure that
those who were going to study the
classics and the humanities were
typically the kids of the elites who
went to nice private prep schools went
to an Ivy League and then came into the
position to do that thing how much of
that was intended versus just the
emergent property of the system because
seeing Sputnik said well not studying
enough science is a real national
security threat it doesn't matter what
how much it was just a strange attractor
phenomena versus a strange attractor
that was then noticed and acted on that
really matter but a symmetries of power
have the orientation to and capacity to
increase themselves
[Music]
if what we're doing here not just with
this video which is a little part of but
with rebel wisdom with all of these
videos and articles and conversations
that we're having in these kinds of
shared spaces is like the beginning of
the kind of more widespread education
and human development that is needed to
be able to have a healthy civilization
that doesn't fall prey to increasing
power asymmetries and all of the
attendant problems that come along with
that and I don't see any solution other
than the comprehensive development of a
lot more people and all of the things
we're talking about here like you can
see that's not very simple education I'm
not just talking about stem and I'm also
not giving rules that you can just
understand and follow you've actually
got to be able to say does this
particular rule of thumb apply or does
this one or do it how do I hold them and
you know and so this is actually
deepening people's depth of care so the
level of thoughtfulness and
consideration and attention that they
bring to anything and then they're
increasing their tools that they bring
and increasing the earnestness and
sincerity that they bring and increasing
the courage with which they do that and
the humility with which they do that is
all part of the development of humans in
the way that we need to not have those
humans just captured right the idea that
the wicked and the weak must work
together and so we want to work to
address the weak as much as the wicked
otherwise there's no basis for the
wicked to do anything bad and yet like
well the kind of development that we're
talking about isn't trivial and so my
hope is that there are more people that
are inspired by this and simply didn't
have resources maybe didn't have
awareness maybe didn't have resources
and start to create a demand for more
supply that is not self-serving but
actually serving the development of an
authentically increasing collective
intelligence that is the only thing that
has the capacity to actually address
radical asymmetries and the corruption
and problems attendant of them rebel
wisdom is a new sense making platform
bringing together the most rebellious
and inspiring thinkers from around the
world if you're enjoying our content
then you can help us make more by
becoming a subscriber which will give
you access to a load of exclusive films
also you can then join our group zoom
calls to discuss the ideas in the films
and you can send us ideas for questions
for upcoming interviews we're also
looking for talented people to help us
out with editing graphics music that
kind of thing and if you're a regular
viewer you'll know we talk a lot about
the value of embodying or actually
living out the ideas that we talk about
so that's why we run regular events in
London check out the links on the
website for more and hope to see you
soon
you