welcome everyone back to trim tab Space
Camp we're here today with Daniel
schmuck Tim burger trim tab Space Camp
as we all know is this opportunity for
all of us to think big and to explore
the world around us and understand the
wider context within which we all live
we're looking at different sense making
frameworks we've learned about ecology
and gyein systems and rapid prototyping
in this course and leave it to Daniel to
go meta and teach us about sense-making
itself Daniel is a good friend and
student of buckminster fuller's started
reading him before he could read
actually his parents would greet him
synergetics as bedtime stories and he
was kind of a protege of Fuller's
amongst others and just a look to you
Daniel as a source of wisdom and
confidant and advisor for the Buffon's
reporter Institute and just such an
honor to have you here today
thank you so much for making the time
omits this wilds global crisis and thank
you for all the response work that
you've been doing for this really
appreciate very happy to be here I
remember when you and I first talked
about this type of course happening for
Bucky fuller Institute where people
could learn good sense making tools and
be able to apply them so I'm just really
delighted this happening now I think
it's a great service
mm-hmm yeah we met a great time so we're
gonna explore sense-making today could
you pick us off with just telling us
some of the core principles of sense
making and how we can maybe apply that
to this global crisis conversation
sentence making and the reason we use a
term like sense making is how do we make
sense of the world and reality that we
live in
which is kind of a common vernacular for
epistemology
how do we go about knowing things and
what is the basis for appropriate belief
in something and this obviously a not
only the basis of the philosophy of
science which is how do we go about
knowing objective things about the
object of world mmm but all of
philosophy the epistemic of whatever it
is that we were claiming is true about
anything what is our basis of our truth
claim and so someone can easily study
this field for their whole life and
scratch the surface of all the good
thinking that has been done and our
basis for right action in the world to
be effective at anything is going to be
our basis of understanding the nature of
the world and the nature of being able
to consider what the effect of a
particular action are gonna be so
overview of sense-making 101 like what I
hope we can do is share a few principles
that are a valuable start to just add
something to the picture that can also
inspire people if they're interested in
terms of where they can go further and
maybe be able to show the application of
those two things that are currently
trending questions with regard to this
you know covet 19 global crisis and the
attendant set of world issues that are
happening so I'm going to assume also
that the basic philosophy of science and
kind of basic Karl Popper sensibilities
and kind of understanding of logical
fallacies and critical thinking is at
least somewhat familiar if that's not
true then take a look at those terms
that I said and at least go read the
Wikipedia page on them logical fallacies
critical thinking philosophy of science
popper those would be starting places
those are by no means an adequate frame
for sense making but they are common
valuable frames good starting places so
I'm going to kind of assume those and
build on there if I use terms that you
think would be unfamiliar please stop me
and we'll unpack
so the difference between science and
epistemology writ large just to kind of
say it is science is an epistle of
science isn't epistemology it is a
process of knowing about the objective
world we find ourselves in meaning
objects that can be measured and then
where we can do repetition on
measurement and then be able to abstract
patterns from those but measurable
things are third-person things right we
can all measure something independently
get the same type of measurement and
then be able to so measurable and
replicable science exists within the
domain of the measurable in the replica
if you imagine we have a two-by-two
matrix of things that are measurable and
unmeasurable there are a lot of things
that are real and are unmeasurable like
an emotion you can measure a neural
correlate and you can't get anywhere
close to actually measuring all the
things that are happening we don't even
begin to understand how to do that we
can do very rough you know qejy whatever
kind of stuff you can't measure in
motion it's a first-person thing you
measure third-person things you can't
measure the inside of a black hole you
can mathematically infer stuff you can't
measure things that are below the scale
of measurability
there's a lot of things that are real
that are unmeasurable which means
they're formally outside of the domain
of science but that doesn't mean that we
can't that any claim about them is
equally true right there are still
methods of sense making that to be more
reliable than others and then replicable
there are certain things that are
measurable but not replicable because
it's not a control kind of situation
where we can replicate it so formally
the thing that we call science the
processes of science exists within one
of four quadrants in which the real
includes all of those so when we talk
about sense making more including all of
it and so science is necessary but not
sufficient and it ends up becoming
actually bad epistemology when you
collapse the real to the objective right
because then subject it is not real
if you make real an objective synonymous
subjective is also real but it's not
measurable and you can't do
repeatability
measurable things ring and infer
subjective things are also not
subjective right that's it's actually a
whole different quadrant of things and
even some things that are objective or
not properly measurable or where there's
causation but there's no way to assess
necessary and sufficient causation in a
formal way there's Nexus causation like
in complexities we have to apply
different kinds of principles so and
this is when you hear people talk about
the problems of reductionism right
trying to reduce all of the real to the
objective trying to reduce complex
situations to a subset of the variables
and that can be very useful reductionism
is super useful but it also has limits
and so it would be bad sense making to
use reductionism without understanding
its limits it would also be bad sense
making to reject reductionism in a kind
of overly sweeping sense now when we're
looking at social situations there's and
trying to make sense of politics and
economics and whatever there's a lot of
things where we won't really be able to
measure what's going on there's
information that our company secrets and
trademarks and patents that are
intentionally kept classified or
obscured by governments there's stuff
that we haven't figured out yet and you
know there's still consequence to what's
happening now and we want to figure some
stuff out that we don't have the ability
to do the appropriate formal science on
even if it was in the domain of science
and why are certain agents doing the
things they are has to do with intent
which is outside of measurability we
could only measure the effects of it and
try to infer it so since making of
what's actually going on and how do we
know and how do we get enough confidence
to inform right action and when do we
not have enough confidence to inform
right action and how do we have a clear
basis for what our confidence margin is
and what our confidence margin for right
action based on the consequent she ality
of the situation what should it be this
is like kind of how you start to think
about what the topics that sense-making
is addressing well I'll actually speak
about confidence for a moment one of the
things oh well actually come one step
back the essence if you wanted to say
there was an essence
the essence of good sense making is
earnestness in the desire to understand
what's happening and an earnestness that
both wants to know what is rather than
wants to believe something in particular
and an earnestness that is willing to do
the work that it takes to actually come
to understand that rather than jump to
premature beliefs because that is
comforting or allows you to be part of
an in-group or seem knowledgeable or
whatever else back to a couple things
we've learned both in ecology and in
rapid prototyping just like the
importance of humility and curiosity no
not being attached they may be committed
to something but not attached to what it
may be in the case of rapid prototyping
and then in the case of ecology yeah
just being humble and curious about the
world around you and seeing it anymore
is that kind of dynamic though right
it's so curiosity and humility and
earnestness these words all kind of go
together here right and so it was a very
nice definition of science Eddington
gave that science is the earnest
endeavor to put into order the facts of
experience so what are the facts of
experience how do we know and like what
do we what am i experiencing what are
others experiencing can I trust that
they're recording the facts of their
experience you know in an adequate way
and how do we put into order some kind
of sensibility of them
so if earnestness and like depth of
curiosity is the kind of essence of
science and epistemology in general then
bias would be the enemy of it and bias
can come from lots of sources it can
come from wanting to be part of an
in-group that believes a thing so you
where it's costly not to believe that
thing because you'll be excommunicated
from your religion or seen as a
conspiracy theorist or status quo or or
whatever it is that you're particularly
in group would happen to see as bad
that's going to create a source of bias
if you want to be seen as in the know
because you have particular kind of ego
identifications or you want the previous
thing that you did your PhD on and got
famous for it to keep being right even
there new stuff is
that might suggest otherwise right ego
stuff can obviously be a source of I
want this to seem true whether it
actually is true or not financial
interest is probably the main thing that
messes science up because somebody's
funding the science and typically that
funding is coming from some existing
pool of money that made the money by
doing something that makes money that is
going to fund stuff that makes it more
money so it is not interested in things
that are not going to make money it's
interested in things that probably will
and that means that either self-dealing
and you know even if so it's totally
possible that someone is doing science
in a way where they're actually doing
authentically bad science because of
financial interest they are hiding data
and whatever but it's also possible that
someone does quote-unquote good science
but that where the preponderance of
evidence is misleading because they're
only looking at the parts of the whole
picture that have profitability so if I
look at pharmaceuticals for instance and
the research into health care doctors
currently because the regulatory
landscape in the US aren't allowed to
prescribe something if it is not
fda-approved
to prescribe that thing FDA approval
process requires phase three clinical
trials that cost most to the billion
dollars who's gonna pay for that well if
pharma company can pay for it if they
can make that money back and make enough
money back so to be able to make that
much money you have to look at a
patented thing because otherwise I put
in the research money I put in the
billion dollars and then I'm selling
something competing on the margins with
other people that can make the thing at
the same cost and didn't have the
upfront billion dollars so I've got to
be able to recoup that money by having a
much higher price that nobody can
undercut me so we can only patent
synthetic molecules for the most part
not things that are in plants or
nutrients or whatever so those things
are just never gonna get the same kind
of research funding so then you'll have
a preponderance of evidence that says
these things are more effective than
these things but it was because they
were and it's not even necessarily that
each study was bad but it's that it's
not well distributed the distribution of
what's being studied in the distribution
of reality don't match right and so
that's another place where bias is going
to
be able to affect a mess-up sense-making
so because of that I would say that we
have less real science in the world and
I would like to see and we have a lot
more of the R&D arm of capitalism and
this becomes one of the things that for
individuals trying to make sense of the
world when you're even if you're reading
scientific papers trying to make sense
of all of the papers in a space together
trying to make sense of the biases of
the author's trying to make sense of the
bias associated with the funding looking
at the methodology itself these are all
things that are worth factoring when
trying to make sense of something I was
gonna say something about confidence and
certainty so it's very one of the major
sources of biases emotional biases do we
talk about cognitive bias a lot in
science and that there are like all of
these logical fallacies our cognitive
bias but a lot of them come from
emotional or identity or existential or
social kind of needs we're believing
something actually feels like it is
meeting some need or way for me to live
so I have a basis other than just
knowing what's true to want to believe
something in particular so a lot of
people who are seeking security conflate
that the way to get security is
certainty about the nature of reality
and so they will seek excessive levels
of certainty with an insufficient
process for gaining it because they
actually have a certainty bias because
they're unsafe if they don't have that
right or something like that that's an
example it's not exhaustive
so fundamentalist religion would be a
classic example where I am utterly
certain about the absolute nature of
reality the name of God what happens
after you die and all this kind of stuff
and it's like really that whole idea
only came about not that many thousands
of years ago and before that the people
were just a certain about other and
that you know that that particular God
named it every member posed and but
there is the you can see in the face of
the uncertainty and the unknown of death
if someone is not friends with the
unknown if they're not friends with
uncertainty and they have
then where they can't see they can
project scariness into that space then
they want to be certain and so they want
to have faith even if it's not epistemic
ly grounded it's actually very
interesting people's fear of dark and
it's like why is it that I'm more afraid
of the exact same environment when I
just can't see it then when I could when
it's the same environment with the same
agents in it and I'm not even somewhere
that has nocturnal animals or whatever
like what maybe sometimes that's
warranted but a lot of times that's not
warranted right so where does that come
from well if I can see I know there's
nothing bad if I can't then my mind
starts projecting so there people have
this of dark water of deep water you
know where they can't see and death so
and unknown in general so it's very easy
to have a bias towards certainty and now
that can be expressed through people who
are quote unquote using scientific ideas
just as much as it can religious ones so
there are people who are quoting science
but what you can see is they don't think
of science as a process of knowing they
think of it as a body of knowledge and
that there are these things called facts
and that they're totally well known and
that those people who understand it or
right and other people are not just
wrong but stupid and and and they you'll
notice that the bias and the nature of
their communication is to always have
pretty high certainty even it's just
even if it's just very high certainty
that other people who are presenting
something that doesn't look like the
science they want are certainly wrong
and so you're like oh they've got that
same bias going and they're plugging in
a science set of languages rather than a
religious set now on the same side
people can have a bias towards
uncertainty but these are still biases
so this is classically what happened
with post-modernism right and
post-modernism said science actually
claimed some that it shouldn't have
claimed it actually had the wrong
epistemology and a had bias going and
this was specifically in the social
sciences where whatever Victorian white
men
were looking at the racial superiority
of men or the white race or looking for
monogamous pair bonding in nature
because of Victorian ideals when they
did geology or whatever like oh this is
actually a pretty significant
confirmation bias messing up the thing
that we're calling science but being
accepted scientific ideal so then they
became this idea that science was just
the same as all the other I'm giving an
extreme example so forgive me obviously
Foucault and Derrida were not stupid and
they didn't say this but a lot of the
people who don't read them all that well
make this kind of generalization that
that there is no truth there is no
absolute truth there is no way of
knowing what is more true and that
anyone who claims to have more access to
or a valid process of truth is just some
form of imperialism and because science
was in spreading industrialism at the
same time that empires were using it to
suppress the lower-class and kill
indigenous people and ruin the
environments that those are somehow
conflated and that in all perspectives
unreality are equally valid and we need
to listen to them all equally and there
are no valid truth claims this is
gibberish
right because recognizing that social
science is subject to bias in a
particular way where you have
extraordinarily high complexity and a
high basis for bias is very different
than say physical chemistry that does
not conform to like that's very very
simple and doesn't have the same kind of
bias being admitted so and also then the
fact that some people did social science
badly doesn't mean that it can't be done
more earnestly and better so it doesn't
mean does it mean that we always want to
be looking at bias yes in science that
we shouldn't consider science unbiased
yes but does it mean that all truth
claims are equally valid no social
science thing is the acronym weird weird
populations why educated industrialized
rich and democratic there's a narrative
you know rightfully so narrative that a
lot of the social scientists sciences
have been stuck
on weird populations those you know
people who are kind of readily available
in industrialized college settings so
that's one thing that people have been
pointing to more and more and I think
it's it's really important right now for
us to kind of just point out like where
where are we exhibiting different you
know racist or colonialist perspectives
but yeah also not throwing out the baby
with the bathwater and I think that
differentiation you made of science
being um methodology rather than like
new set of truth that's already known
it's really critical you know as we're
putting out the design science you know
decade as Buckminster Fuller Institute
like getting people to kind of blend and
Design Thinking with all that we can
glean and understanding the world
through science it's really helpful to
have that differentiation so when you
think about the social sciences here and
what we said in the beginning about the
measurable repeatable I can measure a
chemical pretty well I can do different
types of measurements I can use
microscopy and spectrometry and whatever
and and then contrast that and a lot of
other people independently can and the
physical properties the chemical
properties of it will conform pretty
well I can't measure what someone feels
or really the nature and nuance and
complexity of what they think or the
sense of their relationships or their
motives are or whole populations or how
those change I can observe certain
things about the output behaviorally but
then I have to infer a whole lot and so
the total complexity of social science
is way more complex way more variables
and there's way more that I can't
directly measure right it is out it's
not third person it's first person and
second person and so that was absolutely
an overstepping of the idea of what
would fit into the rigor
domain of science and was the nature of
the truth claims could be so while it's
true
so yes it's true that there's a lot of
stuff that we have excessive certainty
of that we shouldn't it's also true that
we can overcompensate and pretend that
we don't have the certainty on some
things that we should and that there are
not better epistemic processes even if
none are perfect for coming to
confidence in something so this question
of what is for a particular topic in
that domain what is the appropriate
epistemic process to come to a to
relative confidence why do we think that
it's that as opposed to something else
and what are the axioms that we're
drawing upon and how do those reify
themselves and what is an appropriate
level of confidence and what is an
appropriate process to come to that
level of confidence to inform certain
kinds of action right those are all kind
of important questions now I'm I'm
getting into this a little bit more
formally than I thought we would and to
get into the more probably daily
practical stuff we'll get there in a
moment and it might go beyond the course
of what we can do in this short time but
I wanted to say a thing about certainty
and uncertainty is a mature relationship
to certainty there's a rabbi friend of
mine that actually first told me this so
it came from that background but a
mature relationship to certainty is it
were comfortable having certainty where
it is warranted knowing that it's never
a hundred percent but there might be 95
or 99 percent based on the total amount
of data that we have relative to the
total situation and we're also
comfortable and uncertainty because if
like the postmodernist were we're scared
of certainty or uncomfortable with it or
like on the other side we're
uncomfortable uncertainty both of those
are biases that won't actually have us
just think clearly
so we want to be friends with
uncertainty knowing that the unknown and
actually the unknowable is a very large
infinity and then we also want to
endeavor earnestly to gain the
certainties that inform appropriate
right action responsible right action
where we can actually take
responsibility to affect the things that
we care about in the world so I don't
want to be attached to that what I think
is right but I do want to be attached to
understanding reality as clearly as I
can so that I can act as effectively in
service of the good so if I am working
towards helping hunger and I work really
diligently and earnestly and make no
progress and more people are getting
hungry I want to be able to say that I'm
failing right like I it's it's very
important and then I want to be able to
say I should do something different
rather than continue doing that thing
because I actually am result oriented
here not just process for me I actually
care about the people getting fed or the
coronavirus getting solved and so I want
to make sure that the prompt that my
understanding of what's going on it
informs what I think would be effective
that informs the things that I try that
then I retest to see are they working is
actually working okay
that's all very basic but it's still
worth ten framing up I think we can get
into how does what are good tools of
epidemics but probably I think the place
where maybe the most value can be
harvested the fastest is what are the
most common places where people mess up
like how to you you're probably since
making badly if especially in this
moment as we are all trying to make
sense of this crisis and what it means
and you know a lot of people in this
course looking to like what is the
opening that's being provided by all of
this right and wanting to step into that
without being tone deaf - I think it's
something that a lot of us are looking
into and part of that is just making
sense of the work what's happening
the tragedy worse okay so with regard to
that you know the tragedy worse is there
an opening to make it better the better
and worse are not what we'd normally
think of as epistemic questions their
ethical or existential right like what
is good and what is bad and but that's
absolutely relevant so there's bias
there and let's speak to it so there is
a bias that I notice really damaging
people's sense making when it comes to
coronavirus and it also damages their
sense making regarding climate change
and existential risk and kind of risk
writ large I'm gonna oversimplify on
purpose to start the topic and knowing
that I am oversimplifying and we could
get into a much richer discussion of it
there are it's it's easy to have a bias
that we could kind of flatly call a
positivity bias that doesn't want things
to be really bad like just doesn't want
to believe that things that can't be
with it doesn't want to feel it and so
wherever there people are claiming that
 is bad they're likely to think that
it's probably alarmists those are
probably people that are catastrophizing
there's probably some good innovation
that's gonna come along that will solve
it like they there's a before even
researching it there is a immediate bias
either to be kind of almost
aesthetically repulsed by it or to move
away or to assume it's probably wrong or
probably won't be the whole story
whereas when evidence comes along of
things are getting better or it's not
that bad there's an instant resonance
before doing a similar level of sense
making it's like oh this is look see
things are getting better and there's a
kind of positivity bias that I think is
actually worth having and the kind that
isn't worth having
the kind that biases our assessment of
what is is terrible the kind that is
committed to understanding what is very
very clearly including all of the
negativities that are current than the
negativities that could be the risks so
that we are empowered to help make
things better and the positivity bias is
I want my thought word indeed to all be
working towards making things better
which requires understanding what is
that kind of positivity bias is great
it's not messing up our sense making
it's applying our sense making in an
empowered and constructive way but I'm
not gonna be good at making things
better if I'm not seeing what is clearly
so there is a you know and you think of
it the term spiritual bypass but it can
be a psychological bypass or a kind of
epistemic bypass of any kind it's any
spiritual idea or philosophic idea or
bias that wants us to not be with the
some pain right so in the kind of
spiritual bypass whether it's like well
they reincarnated to have the they
incarnated to have those lessons or
their soul chose this or there will be
some silver lining in it or God works in
mysterious ways it's some way of being
able to say I don't have to feel bad
about this thing that otherwise I would
feel really bad about because I don't
feel like I can hold that be with it
which is kind of like a pseudo
sociopathy right one of the things about
sociopaths is that others can be hurting
and they don't feel bad which is why
they can hurt others and so any idea
that makes us able to not feel bad in
the pray in the presence of others
feeling bad is taking beliefs that are
moving us in the direction of a
sociopathy like set of behaviors so when
I'm seeing people who are gasping for
air and dying in that way and their
family members can't even be with them
on their deathbed because they would get
sick upset about it right and that it's
unnecessary and it could have prevented
that I'm super sad for them and I'm
super mad at the people that are
making choices that they for poor
reasons big regretted it or done a
better job and I don't I wouldn't want
to feel any other way
like there would be something wrong with
me if I didn't feel those feelings it
would mean that I like I had to be
fractured inside I'm speaking to this
because I see this ramp
plea with people latching on to oh
there's this new drug it looks like it's
gonna work before there's really good
sense making that we know enough about
the drug because they really want
something that's gonna work oh there's
this great new diagnostic test oh
there's this one epidemiologist has said
it's really not that bad oh look there's
this thing that shows empty hospitals
maybe it's really not that bad and
they'll latch on to that before
really studying it but reject the other
which means that they won't be part of
making things better so this is a very
common bias and of course it goes
without saying the exact opposite bias
is also common which is a catastrophism
bias which is whenever there is
something that looks like it
could be that something isn't that bad
or there might be a solution someone
tends to think that it is probably gonna
fail and when they see anything that
looks like a possible risk they assume
it's probably gonna happen and they
emotionally and it's it's like okay
let's say we look at the situation today
where the response to kovat has started
to damage the food supply well that's a
huge deal because messing up the food
supply and wars and riots over food
supply and insufficiencies of food
supply whatever could kill a lot more
people than a virus and that's a place
where our response to virus might be
much worse than the virus itself and we
this is a big deal so is there a big
deal when you start messing up the food
supply yes does that mean that the food
supply is already so messed up that it's
inexorable that two billion people are
going to starve no we can still totally
do stuff about it but there are some
people who I've talked with over the
last couple days who've called me
freaking out saying did you see like
their locusts in northern Africa and the
Middle East and crops rotting in India
we're losing the food supply everybody's
gonna starve well it's true there are
locusts in northern Africa in the Middle
East and it's a big deal and
crops are rotting in India it's not true
that two billion people are gonna starve
it is true that they could and but
what's happening is that possible
typically we want to do worst-case
scenario forecasting so we can prevent
it because if you don't know that it
could happen then you don't see what the
escalation pathways are then you can't
prevent it and but then if we prevent it
the people with the positivity bias will
say see you were just catastrophists for
doing that nothing bad really ever
happens all that bad ever happen it
would have happened had we not done
these things it only didn't happen
because we did the worst case scenario
planning and saw what it took to prevent
it so I want to do worst-case scenario
but know that it's a scenario it's not
that it's already happened and then I
want to see how to prevent it so I want
the positivity to be oriented towards
action not towards sense-making
so does this make sense on positivity
negativity bias and how they mess up are
sense-making especially where there are
high consequence high pain topics yeah
yeah and it seems like there's just kind
of this through line
kind of like the ego getting in the way
like people want to have the bias toward
certainty but a bias towards certainty
kind of shows up in this way to
intermingle with the positivity in the
catastrophic bias of just people
especially right now because
everything's so up in the air people
just want to have some grinding you know
and so I've seen in myself and in others
the just biased towards okay I want to
make sense of this I want to know you
know what's happening in what order with
what timeframe and I think something
that we've seen again in a through-line
through a lot of what we're learning is
just like the world is dynamic it's
always shifting change is the only
constant and so how can we kind of be
more comfortable with not knowing
exactly what's gonna happen but be in
that state of mystical widening our view
is still having like facing that with
like a deeper hunger for knowing as much
as we can yes and the deeper hunger that
is not a hunger that jumps to false
conclusions because we want them there
but it does the hard work that it takes
to actually endeavor towards so you know
I really want to know what you were just
saying right I really want to know
what's gonna happen what could happen
what the right order of operation should
be how we should tend to think that's
I'm working on knowing that stuff but I
don't think that I can scroll my
facebook feed and read for several hours
and have a good sense of those things
it's kind of like I want to be buff and
I don't want to workout that hard like
it's just not gonna work right this so
there is an input output equation that
has to happen and like being buff or
being able to play the piano like being
able to make sense of a topic takes the
work that it takes and so now this
brings us to the next bias well I can't
do that much work because I'm not an
expert in virology or in epidemiology or
in immunology or a industrial sanitation
engineer or in diagnostic medicine or in
the privacy consideration
for contact tracing or in macroeconomics
or in domestic politics security or in
the nature of what's happening with
geopolitical positioning or in supply
chains of food how the could I
possibly know that but there are
authorities that know this so I'm going
to defer to the authorities I'm gonna
cognitively offload that complexity now
there is a bias in terms of how people
relate to Authority that's important and
it's similarly I'm oversimplifying has a
bias um two directions both of which are
bias which means not clear which is
there are people that tend to think that
most of the people who are in the
primary authorized positions are
probably trustworthy which would be a
silly thing to think and other people
who assume that they're always
untrustworthy and corrupt which is also
a silly thing to think and those are
very kind of sweeping generalizations
that keep us from actually doing sense
making because we're not looking at what
are they actually saying what is the
track record of where they've been right
and wrong on this topic so far and
historically and where is there a
divergence or a convergence of opinions
of people and am i biasing towards some
of them because of political association
or because of positivity and negativity
bias or things like that
so can I find virologists that are
saying oh this is not mutating in a way
that's gonna have a worse train yes can
I find other ones that are saying oh the
next train is probably gonna be many
times worse yes who are experts so how
do I possibly make sense of this if I'm
not a PhD virologist and there are
eminent ones who disagree you know
pretty intensively and on every topic we
can say something like that right well
you actually can this is the nice thing
is that the the you have the benefit of
being able to look at where experts are
converging where they're also diverging
and what the basis of the divergence is
and possibly having less biased in them
because you didn't get a Nobel Prize
saying this thing where you have an ego
invested in defending this particular
thing and you don't have research grants
that need to believe in this thing and
you haven't had all of your attention in
this one part of the picture where this
virologist is looking at this this one's
looking at this was looking at this you
can have an epistemic flexibility that
can look at those and also look at what
then
nature of the bias they might be running
is and try to get some parallax across
those and so but on this one about
authoritarian versus anti-authoritarian
bias this is one of the most
common things that I see that messes up
everyone's sense making so
there is a mean complex you can see all
over the Facebook say which is I'm tired
of tinfoil hat wearing
conspiracy theorists talking nonsense
and armchair epidemiologists this is the
place for experts if John Hopkins and
the CDC say it that's what's true nobody
else should be weighing in on this what
we should listen to the things they say
and empower the experts on this and
vaccines work and I don't wanna hear
anything else about it and whatever the
authorities think are appropriate
measures are the things that we should
do right and that everything else is
gruesomely responsible and then of
course we also hear this other memeplex
that all of the authorities were
completely corrupt for various vested
interest purposes and we can't believe
any of them and everything that they're
telling you is false and and I think
both of these are pretty close to
equally gibberish yeah you know ahem
lungs razor it's a philosophical razor
that's like don't attribute to malice
what can be adequately attributed to
ignorance yeah I think so many of us you
know yeah our trust has been broken and
have them anyways and then we like think
yeah they are out to get us and I think
it it can be a waste of precious semaine
brilliance ok so there's very strong
bias in both directions when it comes to
conspiracies conspiracy are there times
where some people conspire meaning share
information with each other they don't
publicly share to advance particular
agendas that if publicly shared wouldn't
work all the time like that is the
nature of the world now does that and so
like for every Watergate and Enron
there's a million of those that are not
publicly caught but like that's what
Machiavelli told everyone to do
that's what Sun Tzu in the thirty-six
stratagems that's what military theory
and political theory is all about right
how do you conspire with some in-group
to advance a particular agenda in
against out groups and anyone who'd get
in the way and when you look at Genghis
Khan and Napoleon Alexander the Great
when you look at the barbarism of the
12th century we're genetically those
people still
the same brains and the same hormones
like we're not that different we have
just like we we were more civil in some
ways we also just hide it better so you
know our lovely previous Democrat
president we bombed a lot of civilians
to death in the Middle East with the
largest military the world's ever known
but it wasn't here right and factory
farms are as brutal as anything has ever
been and their mass scale and most
people contribute to it financially
they're paying other people to do their
dirty wet works for them and then
feeling civilized and so we should not
wrongly assume that we are more
civilized than we are and that there is
not a ton of malice or even just
having accepted that that's the nature
of the world and you know rationalize
ladder climbing in politics we also
shouldn't assume that every time that
there is something that
doesn't make sense that it is highly
coordinated balance because coordination
is actually fairly hard and very often
it is just incompetence and or the
nature of the incentive systems so
assuming any of those things means you
aren't thinking
if you're assuming it's probably
ignorance you aren't thinking and you
aren't paying attention you're bringing
your own bias into it if you're assuming
that the authorities are probably
well-intentioned or they're probably not
you are not thinking and so this is what
I want people to notice in their bias is
what things tend to bother them there
are a lot of people were if it comes
from an authoritative claim they're just
bothered off the bat or if it sounds
conspiratorial they're bothered off of
that this is not good sense making or
there's something that's a rule of thumb
like you just mentioned that they take
as if it was almost absolute like they
apply it kind of feverishly what I'm
wanting is for people it's like
ecclesiastes a time to kill and a time
to heal and so and to reeben there's a
time for every epistemic tool like
there's a place there's a place where
they all apply and so what you want to
do is go into a situation and say maybe
malice is happening here maybe simply
incentives and politics are maybe in
competences maybe it's actually being
handled brilliantly and my overall
assessment of why I'm being handled
brilliantly is wrong I don't know and I
don't know just because it's an
authority or just because it's a wealthy
person or whatever or just because it is
part of Trump or you know the people who
are against Trump if Trump happens to
like hydroxychloroquine no one should
automatically like hydroxychloroquine
more or less because Trump happened to
say it because the fact that he happened
to say it has nothing to do with
whether it works or not and obviously
Trump didn't just pull
hydroxychloroquine out of thin air or
some doctors and scientists told him
some data about that now so we should
actually look at the data on that very
closely and carefully during the Obama
administration and all the
administration since Nixon Washington DC
primarily ran what they called the
benign China hypothesis China's not
trying to become a world empire and you
know free trade with them and blah blah
blah and
you know we started hearing Trump China
China China China and people being upset
that there he was wanting to do certain
kinds of tariffs or trade war type
things whatever but being concerned
about what the Chinese geopolitical
agendas were
he was right he was actually right the
benign China hypothesis was gibberish if
you read the hundred-year war and you
look at the activities of Chinese
Communist Party there's absolutely
global agendas it would be silly to
think otherwise
and he wasn't right out of nowhere he
was right because Bannon and others
happened to give him insight there and
it happened to resonate with that as
just kind of a dealmaker kind of guy
when he sat across from them he probably
had the sense of like oh it feels
like these guys are playing some pretty
serious game that I some some go game
that I don't feel well set up for now
he's been wrong about a gazillion things
and so again wanting to over norm that
he's wrong and stupid and evil about
everything or right and the savior on
everything is not thinking now of course
it's fine if I'm trying to sense make
there might be some people who are right
often enough that I look to them as
sources of higher signal lower noise up
front but I still check and there might
be other people that even though they've
been right a couple times I assume it's
probably low signal enough that I
generally don't check I can't generalize
on that in consequential areas so
hydroxychloroquine I'm gonna use this
because this is a very good example of
where sense-making is tricky where it's
consequential
so hydroxychloroquine is a anti-malarial
primarily but it also has antiviral
properties has been used as an antiviral
and is used in rheumatology heavily for
rheumatic conditions it's a drug that's
been used for many decades very heavily
since Vietnam the United States military
has put most US soldiers on it before
they deploy to areas that have malaria
as a malarial prophylaxis so before they
go to for the first four years know
there
they lived in Ivory Coast yeah exactly
and so we have a pretty enormous amount
of data on the long-term effects and the
safety and the whatever of
hydroxychloroquine is it a totally
benign drug no it's not vitamin C it can
absolutely affect hearts this thing
called the QT interval it's
contraindicated with some meds and some
conditions but do we at least understand
the contraindications in the general
safety profile well especially as a old
generic drug that has been around
forever and men in combination with all
the other drugs and has a generally
pretty good safety profile relative to
advanced coveted pictures yes do we have
randomized control trials that show that
it's effective placebo can you know
double-blind placebo-controlled
multi-location type thing no
slow those take a long time to do now
those are awesome like randomized
control trials are totally a good sense
making tool in epistemic tool but there
are a bunch of people who have been
taught that it is the only tool that
exists to make sense of pharmacology
which is that or nonsense that means
that those people are not actually
making good sense of the world or
thinking they are they've been drilled
in this kind of over norming on one tool
because it happens to be a lovely tool
when we can do it and it also happens to
be the one that the FDA wants and so it
also happens to be the one that you
better take if you want a
maximum-security position to have your
malpractice not get you in trouble
so this is another source of bias on it
right what is the maximally defensible
position is also a major thing okay
by the time the randomized control
trials are done heaps of people will be
dead and I see yous will be overwhelmed
in case fatality rate will have spiked
precipitously
so should we give people drugs that
might be more dangerous and not
effective just based on pendulum dowsing
no but are there ways of making sense of
something to enough degree to effect
some kind of action yes so with regard
to hydroxychloroquine I'll use this as
an example there were randomized control
trials for it and SARS SARS cough one
right that's meaningful it's a different
virus this a novel virus but there's a
lot of similarities and mechanisms there
were randomized control trials for it
and other viruses including other corona
viruses there have been in vitro trials
on that are very effective on this one
I'm sorry too
and there are a lot of non randomized
control trials but open label trials
ones in China ones in South Korea ones
in France the one in New York but then
heaps of doctors that are using it that
are not nothing right they're not really
people controlled but they're not
nothing now
there are some things that just placebos
don't really affect right placebos don't
do a good job of healing broken bones
and so we don't need placebo controls
for things that don't really produce
placebo effects and so placebos don't
kill viruses now do placebos with
modulate your immune system to some
degree sure right but is there an amount
of effectiveness that placebos have on
viral conditions statistically so you
can remove that statistical artifact and
then be able to still look at is there
effect beyond the sisters just
statistical artifact so that psycho way
of saying hey we can actually kind of
make sense of this here
factoring placebo considerations even if
we're not doing the placebo control
trial so we brought a group of doctors
together group of MDS to work on doing a
literature review of hydroxychloroquine
and by itself and in conjunction with
zinc and as if through myosin and
doxycycline and other things like that
and we looked at the mechanistic trials
in vitro trials the animal trials the
current home and ylabel trials previous
ones and we were looking at
preponderance of data and looking at
relative benefit to risk in different
populations that's actually trying to do
sense-making with all of the available
data factoring the consequence of action
and inaction now I don't get malpractice
lawsuits for inaction in the same way I
get them for action so that ends up
being a source of bias and the cya you
know cover your ass kind of way that is
different than just trying to sense make
how do I save the most lives and so I
know doctors many of them who have spoke
within the last few days
who gave themselves prescriptions of
hydroxychloroquine for themselves in
their family and said this is absolute
what I do myself and my family based on
all the literature but I'm not allowed
to prescribe it at my hospital because
the hospital said we would be fired for
prescribing and because for outpatient
treatment because of those concerns that
hospital policy I believe is gruesomely
negligent in life-saving now are we
suggesting that people drink fish bowl
cleaner obviously not are we suggesting
people prescribe to themselves know
that you don't look at heart conditions
and comorbidities no of course not
what we're saying is should prescribing
physicians who've taken a Hippocratic
oath and who are scientifically literate
people be given emergency authorization
to be able to prescribe as they see fit
based on the current literature and
preponderance of data for life-saving
purposes
yeah I think that's a good emergency
authorization where they're not worried
about getting fired or malpractice
things so that they can actually be
focused on doing the right thing here
now again with regard to
hydroxychloroquine there's pretty good
evidence that in late stage infection it
doesn't help very much but there are
very few antivirals that help in late
stage infection in the entire corpus of
medicine and the general rule of thumb
with infection as a whole is treat early
rather than late because once it gets
bad it's much much harder but especially
with viruses is that only in the very
beginning do you have meaningful chance
so a lot of people know if you get
shingles or if you get herpes acyclovir
can help if you get to it within 24
hours at most 48 hours after that we'll
do almost nothing in that time it does a
lot if you're in late stage aids the
cocktail the antiviral cocktail doesn't
help that much if you're in very early
stage it will prevent disease
progression so if you do a randomized
control trial for hydroxychloroquine or
even the open label trials or FDA
provisional emergency approval for late
stage as an antiviral when pretty much
no antivirals work late stage and then
you assume what that means about the
drug writ large in factoring for early
stage that would just be silly that
would be going against the preponderance
of knowledge we have about viral
mechanisms and antivirals writ large
so the randomized control trial should
be for early stage right which is kind
of akin to like how we've been testing
people we've only been testing the
predominant you have been testing the
very sick rather than a random sampling
and so we don't really have a good idea
of where the denominator is correct so
we do need background random testing for
epidemiological forecasting and being
able to think
out herd immunity and inoculating with
less virulent forms of the virus and
other things with them but sand on this
one for a moment
so one should we wait for randomized
control trials to be able to make sense
of something no we should look at the
preponderance of all of the data the
risk and the reward think about
different populations of risk
sensitivity and comorbidities and
whatever differently and be able to
actually apply all of the sense-making
we have to the scenario and know that
the sense-making we would do if we had
all the time in the world is different
than the sense-making we would do when
there is consequence to inaction which
is why I said we have to have the right
relationship to certainty and
uncertainty in the basis to come to it
factoring the consequent she allottee of
action and inaction now would we like to
do randomized control trials to get more
knowledge of course should we be doing
them late stage only well if we want
let's say I wanted to and I'm not
ascribing malice where it is very likely
ignorance but if I wanted to do an
information warfare tactic to prove that
Trump was wrong in an idiot or to make a
generic drug like hydroxychloroquine
that nobody can make much money on seem
and effective so some patented drug can
make a lot of money or whatever if I
wanted to do that I would set up a late
stage trial that showed that it wasn't
effective and then over generalize those
results across the board now it also set
up a late stage trial where the placebo
is vitamin C which one of the major
studies is doing right now where vitamin
C is widely known to be an effective
antiviral and then I get plausible
deniability that I'm doing good science
because it comes from a prestigious
university when what I'm really doing is
info warfare to an advanced and agenda
so now we start to get into I struggled
through watching this David Icke thing
the other day it was very painful there
was extraordinarily little signal in it
not none but very very little
conspiratorial stuff
that said
so Hong Kong had almost nobody died
because of good response and South Korea
didn't respond quite as quickly but they
responded well and still very few deaths
okay well they're littler places Islands
whatever
well Germany's not an island it's not a
little place in their CFR is extremely
low Czech Republic extremely low
Vietnam poor poorer relative country
doing great
well some of those Asian ones had SARS
so they were prepared Czech Republic
didn't Germany didn't
those are both landlocked they aren't
Islands those are you know democracy
he's not dictatorships could we just not
have responded better
well we allowed four hundred and thirty
thousand people to fly from China since
the thing happened the United States
because border closing is xenophobic no
it's not we're closing the border two
viruses that happened to be on people
from wherever the they came from
close the border to them coming from a
new European country if that's where
they're coming from so this isn't now a
place similarly where if somebody jumps
- the problem is xenophobia or racism
they're not sense-making again we should
absolutely shut borders during
pandemics where viral transmission is
like physically transmitted you should
shut borders between counties within
states where there's very highly
different distributions of it within the
counties to be able to prevent excessive
spread just like you are we're stopping
the transmission between people and
people even within the same city right
so is it possible that all of the
profound getting everything wrong that
we have done w-h-o until a few weeks ago
telling people not to wear masks and PPE
and whatever that that's all just
stupidity and incompetence well that
would be impressive would be impressive
is it possible that there are some
agendas where if things get worse they
do better
well if the EU it's already under a lot
of tension gets more tension because
some countries get in other
countries that could help them aren't
helping them because they only have
enough to help themselves
they're kind of break see you apart so
that the EU can't bring in the Eastern
European countries because Russia wants
the Baltic States would Russia have the
goal to do information more fair kinds
of tactics to get the Baltic States back
I don't have to say they are doing this
to say everything in the precedent of
unrestricted warfare in the history of
how these things happen
says that they would of course have that
orientation is the way that China would
be trying to do the Belton Road
initiative take advantage of the fact
that they're the only supplier of PPE
and on the other side of this and the
groups will sign the bottom line on
things to have fine print that they
wouldn't have otherwise if they're gonna
die of the plague and you know and
similarly if there are groups that want
increased surveillance capacity to this
why should we trust the authorities
carte blanche no that would be silly
should we assume that they're all
corrupt and controlled by reptilians no
that would be silly should we actually
try to do sense making on each specific
thing itself rather than do this over
generalize thing that unfortunately we
can't do in this particular world of
cognitive offloading yes that's what we
have to do so with hydroxychloroquine we
can see ok late stage versus early stage
is this really a placebo or is this not
a placebo it randomized control trials
are desirable are they the only thing
mechanistic studies other viruses what
can you tell from another virus to a
novel virus what degree of certainty
would be needed based on the consequent
she ality these are all examples and
there's like a dozen more I haven't got
into of epistemic she would want to
think through to know how to make sense
of this and that you should favorite
ways like there's Bayesian decision
theory like those different ways to kind
of make sense of things with probability
and yeah do you have favorite tools that
we like to use I'm upset at the idea of
favorite tools each of them it's like I
build a house with a screwdriver
screwdrivers are awesome all of them and
for the things they're good at their
network theory and graph theory
are the best things for the thing that
they do and probability and statistics
and different statistical tools
mathematics in the domain that it's for
computer modeling agent based modeling
you know machine deep learning on large
data sets first principles thinking and
the place where first principles
thinking applies Bayesian analytics
where that applies you know
crowdsourcing versus expert sourcing
when do we use induction and deduction
and abduction favorite tool
intellectually is a Silius favorite tool
to try and fix a car or build a house
mm-hmm yeah I like wrenches to fix a car
awesome they ought to screw drivers and
they suck for welding so if someone
actually wants to be able to fix a car
you got to have a lot of tools know how
to use them and know which one to use
for which situation and if someone wants
to make sense of the world same thing
and if that seems like too much then you
should just accept the idea you probably
won't understand the nature of the
reality you live in and be able to make
good choices
yeah so well within that it kind of like
it helped I mean it brings up people's
diocese of like wanting certainty and
wanting yeah book positivity uncertain
to come up for in that just like oh
can't you just explain it to me in
Canada I'll just be okay it's been
taught over and over again as like an
okay response to the world well this is
the psychology of a child that wants a
parent to be able to dependent on what
and it's actually interesting I don't
want to over norm here I don't want to
do bad since making over normal talk
that a super complex but I will draw a
parallel that has at least some truth
value the way people related to their
parents as kids often reflects itself
somewhat in the bias they have towards
authorities later their parents and
teachers and whatever other authorities
from childhood so the people that did
better in school and did better with
their parents and kind of did well with
the standard model more often than the
other crew will tend to think that the
standard model is well and think that
the current authorities are probably
trustworthy and good and the people that
didn't do well at those things and
didn't have trust where the authorities
are more likely to have that generalized
sense right that's not an absolute it
can come from lots of other things later
life events but those are interesting
things to look at and it's also
interesting where it's like I want
someone to just reassure me that
everything will be okay
how old is the psychology having that
thought I don't know what's going on and
I feel scared how old is that okay so
now we need to do therapy for inner
child trauma stuff that is going to
hijack our adult brain being able to
make sense of the world and it will make
us susceptible to other people being
able to influence us more than they
should yeah and dangerous authorities
and would ever start to come into is
they can prey upon that mm-hmm
yeah I think one of the root causes of
so many of our are interdependent crisis
right now is that
avoidance of that inner work avoidance
of that being even okay to talk about
those things you know and seems like
there's a trend towards you know being
okay with therapy or coaching as kind of
like a therapy like tool what people are
becoming more yeah it's just it's less
stigmatized than it once was but people
realize that their effective choice
making and requires effective
understanding about both the nature of
the world and what the affect of a
particular choice or injunction is going
to be then a sentence made clearly
becomes a very high goal and once they
realize that a lot of the bad sense
making comes from psychological
predispositions biases that come from
those places then psychological work
actually becomes part of sense making
so do you know as much as I might want
to learn math or statistics or Bayesian
analysis I might also want to be able to
do bias assessment and be able to see
where those biases arise from and clear
them yeah so this moment that we're in
is an opening for a healing at a lot of
different levels and one of those is
finding as people are in stress
situations some of their kind of
unaddressed trauma is arising and I
think similarly kind of like our
unaddressed root causes of you know
what's creating the ecological crisis
and and climate change and everything
yeah there's an opening right now for us
to see right like the the true meaning
of apocalypse is an unveiling of a
greater truth that was and that was
unfair --nt before that moment happened
so yeah curious to hear what you think
of and all of that insights making and
in this moment I'm gonna share something
that I have to share a dialectic of
things for it to make sense
so where people notice that there is a
psychological process that seems more
like a child than an adult psychological
process I want to be reassured I want to
be comforted I don't know what's going
on I want to know that an authority is
taking care of it or can tell me what's
true
anything that they do from there will
not help
if they're trying to act on the world if
they're sharing information or whatever
so the only thing they can do from there
is actually respond to the site address
their own psychology until they come to
a more empowered place and then from a
more empowered place try to sense make
the world and then act from clear sense
making don't act from those places so I
really want to see people showing up in
a adult way
but the dialectic with that if you can't
just snap your fingers and get there
because you want to there's work that it
takes if the if there are unresolved
child trauma type things that keep
hijacking you into that state pretending
that that's not the case and saying oh
yes I feel very calm and centered and
I'm speaking like an adult I'm freaking
out inside whatever like then you're
just schism in your self and so I want
to see people showing up as an adult and
that means I want to see them seeing
where they aren't and doing what it
takes to actually get there rather than
pretend and where they aren't there
I don't them to have shame about it but
I also don't want them acting on the
world from that place I want them acting
on themselves and then I want them
acting on the world when they're in the
right place to act on the world I want
us supporting each other in this if you
see somebody sharing information and
trying to act on the world from a place
that doesn't seem actually clear that
might be propagating problems then
lovingly try to support them to recenter
neither add to it nor attack them
because that's not going to help right
just try to lovingly help them recenter
and be open to another's do that with
you in fact ask for it seeking the
counsel of people who you consider wise
counsel is a sign of wisdom itself
[Music]
now with regard to traumas coming up to
heal right now yes and this is another
thing so I want people to show up as
adults and that takes whatever it takes
right so people if people are at home
and they have extra free time maybe this
is the time they can be doing Skype
therapy sessions and they can be reading
the things and doing the meditation and
doing the journaling that they've wanted
to do great we it's either solitary
confinement or an author on write like
can be this great mental health crisis
where we get a huge amount of benzo
addictions that just ruin everything for
a long time or a emergence into people
going deeper into their own wholeness
together and with each other
now we want to work on which of those it
is for our self and with our communities
and with the world as best we can the
same with the educational crisis this
can be the generation of kids that all
got no education for some time and had
upset parents traumatizing the out
of them at in a small place or where we
actually reinvent schooling well in a
much better way in education because we
need to so in all these ways the same
with health care the same with the food
security system the same with our risk
prevention system the same with
macroeconomics it can either get much
worse or we can use as catalyst makes
things much better to be able to do the
larger macro things we have to be in the
right place to be capacitated to do that
so we work on that first and then the
other and it's somewhat you know ongoing
lay back and forth as needed in addition
to I would like people show up as adults
where it is possible being able to show
up in a way that is calm and clear and
grounded and not biasing towards seeing
things as better or worse than they are
but very clearly and then biasing
towards how to make things better
effectively the people who can do that
or the people who will lead the
solutions and other people will look to
but you can't pretend you've got to do
what it takes to actually have that
happen and this
image of that coal pressurizes into
diamonds by pressure by intensive
pressure right or the steel becomes hard
through the temperature of the forging
process and the banging on it right
so as there's increased pressure we can
either have it fracture us or turn the
coal into diamond where we become
clearer and more crystalline and precise
and and to have that as a frame that as
the pressure gets more I actually go
slower clearer more grounded just even
as an intention can be helpful to urgent
slowdown yeah it's it's really important
and counterintuitive and you know I
think yeah just overall kind of this
this appetite for bias and really
understanding it is a powerful outcome
of this time as we're all trying to
ground US Special Forces has this
statement and there's a lot of versions
of this Prinny Lee but slow is smooth
and smooth is fast and not saying go
slow when urgent actions needed it
saying go fast but mistakes aren't fast
mistakes end up being super super slow
doing doing like you're trying to clean
the kitchen so fast before guests come
in you break glasses and now you gotta
 take the time to clean it up and
it's way slower than how do you moved a
little bit slower so you don't want to
break right you don't want to
spread misinformation you don't want to
act on this information so you got to go
slow enough to go smooth where each step
is actually a right step and gets to
build on right steps which is actually
the very fastest thing you can possibly
do so I'm actually encouraging people to
go fast but actually fast which means
clear
smooth Oh fun of all the work we're
approaching and at that time here yeah
we covered a lot of principles and
biases and just a lot of insight is
there anything else you would offer one
thing we're asking people's are there
any vocabulary terms that people can
insert into their daily weekly use that
would enable them to kind of upgrade
their their ability to make sense of the
world there are certain things that you
unfortunately though this is not
absolutely the case a community of
practice that in general looks at
critical thinking and logical fallacies
and they're the ones that look at bias
the most or very very frequently in
terms cognitive bias that whole field in
my opinion admits a certain bias which
is kind of funny which is that it is
biasing towards analysis over synthesis
so we wants to make sure that it's not
having any wrong ideas and it rejects
wrong ideas but it's not necessarily
making sure that the very partial
reductionist ideas are being put
together in good overarching frameworks
which is the synthesis side so it there
is a need for synthetic thought and
creative thought as well as very
analytic thought and so the the tools of
critical thinking generally help you
with the analytic thought more and so
those are necessary but they're not
sufficient and there are places where
there are rules of thumb that are not
true there rules of thumb
so like the Occam's razor right
sometimes the thing that is true
actually is more complicated then you
know the hypothesis than something else
so it's just a general kind yeah and and
we might say that statistically that is
a
often the case but it also even depends
upon the scenario like the simple
economic models are always really wrong
and the simple biological models are
always really wrong as the causation is
actually complex so really depends on
the domain so in terms of terms I think
people just going and looking up
epistemology and reading the Wikipedia
page or the Oxford philosophy page and
just kind of having a basic sense is
good looking up and then if you want to
do the Wikipedia rabbit hole thing so
it'll if it mentions Bayesian analysis
take it take a little trip down there
and maybe go watch a couple YouTube
videos on Bayesian analysis and on
network theory on graph theory on
statistics on learning basics things
about statistics on as you're hearing
the terms epidemiology and biology and
immunology so much maybe just read the
Wikipedia page to start like do I know
what a virus is do I actually know what
RNA is what's the difference between a
and DNA do i I'm hearing PCR and
serological and immunological do I know
what the words mean how about I just
look up the words that I'm hearing
especially before I use them that and I
don't have to read a textbook read a
Wikipedia page to at least have a
beginning sense which will actually help
to Humble you because you'll realize
that there was much more that you didn't
even know that you didn't know about and
then you'll probably as you know more
actually be more humble in your
presentation than has you knew less and
just repeated a word so okay in terms of
words I would suggest every word that
you're hearing
it seems important that you're tempted
to say again look it up first mm-hmm
yeah and kind of we ask every I guess
luxury to come up with an activity I
feel like that could be a good lonnis
starting with a piston watt epistemology
go down a rabbit hole kind of see where
you go and see what you learn any other
kind of guideposts along the way as
people are going down that journey that
they can should consider in terms of
doing good sounds making not just
starting with the epistemology page but
starting with anything on kovat you're
reading or looking at maybe all the
terms that you don't know what they mean
fully mm-hmm and we'll read about them
and then follow those rabbit holes super
valuable and just a super simple thing
we are creating the information ecology
for each other the epistemic Commons for
each other and just like it's not good
to throw trash on the ground and pollute
because shared space and the effects
it's not good to put trash information
out it pollutes the information ecology
so before you share something you
remember there was this this early Greek
that held us thumb up to the moon close
one eye and said at arm's length my
thumb exactly blocks out the moon
therefore the moon is the size of my
thumb and my I can block out the Sun
therefore the Sun must be the size of my
palm and I don't know if that's a true
story it's a story that is told in
philosophy sometimes and if you didn't
know the depth perception was a thing
that affected size it's a rational
argument right where the axiom is that
distance doesn't affect relative
perception of size right it's not
understanding the nature of a visual
cone it's a rational argument it's
gibberish
very easy to have rational arguments
that are gibberish because they have
wrong axioms are missing something it's
entirely possible that you read
something that makes sense to you
because there's a rational argument and
it makes sense everywhere that the virus
has been bad there 5g was recently
installed and everywhere there's 5g the
virus is bad ho and 5g just just got
pushed through oh
welco fact check that first just look at
a map of all the places that 5g is and
then look at a place map of the places
that the virus is and see if the claim
made is true before you share it because
it's not in that particular case and so
just because something sounds compelling
and it seems maybe plausible upon first
blush doesn't mean that it's true
and but if you put it out even if you
say what do you guys think of this
because you didn't want to do the hard
work of making sense of it lots of other
people who don't wanted to do the hard
work of making sense of it will be
compelled the way that you were and it
starts to affect background thought
you're actually polluting the
information ecology or throwing
styrofoam that your intellectual
styrofoam into the right and so just
don't do that and at least do enough
research to see that it's if something
is probably not grounded and then if you
don't know how to go further then do an
adequate preface I looked into this
here's what I could find here's what I
couldn't find I'm really trying to
figure this out does anyone have good
data on such-and-such and then tag the
people that you think are probably the
people who might be able to figure it
out right start small
wider landscape yeah yeah I think that
makes a lot of sense and just like I
think well yeah I'm going to like
primary source you know just being
having an appetite for doing our own
research I think so many people have
become my customs are just giving
information from other people who have
already done the synthesis and kind of
going back to a couple points ago you
were saying there's a lot of a lot of
kind of analysis oriented tools and not
as many synthesis tools or those thumber
or networked in that realm how can
people kind of balance that out for
themselves so this thing that is often
attributed and quoted to Einstein
talking about imagination being as
important or more important than
intellect and creativity and those types
of thinking or intuition right so there
was this process that Einstein had where
he would be working on the math on the
chalkboard or on the paper until he hit
a diminishing return and he just wasn't
making progress and then he would take a
break and he'd go puff his pipe and look
at the clouds and kind of zone out for
plays violin kind of zone out then at a
certain point in the zoning out an idea
would pop and then he'd go back with
that idea to the whiteboard and work on
it so now I'm going to say a metaphor
for what's happening neurologically that
we don't know if is actually how
neurology works but and times I'm
specifying that this is not a absolute
mechanistic statement it's a metaphor
so that there is this kind of left
hemispheric more cereal more analytic
process and then there is a more right
hemispheric more parallel more synthetic
process and the corpus callosum has a
largely inhibitory or shunting process
between those and the analytic process
actually has to shut off for a little
while for the synthetic process so the
analytic is this axioms these data these
logical transforms this because this
because this therefore this so
logistically right and the other one is
a pattern analysis of look for
everything like this and then AHA that
seems to come out of nowhere I think of
his intuition but didn't come out of
nowhere it's just that process doesn't
happen consciously in the same way who's
actually beyond the bit bandwidth of the
conscious mind
and that that then can give a new
insight but we don't take it as absolute
truth we didn't have to plug it back
into the other process and see how it
works but then once you hit diminishing
return there go back to this one and I
think it was Wigner might have been
teller but I think is Wigner who about
the physicists the great physicists who
developed modern physics said we all
knew that in terms of raw horsepower von
Neumann was the smartest like he could
just figure out and he could do the
math faster than any of us is obvious
but for all of his cleverness Einstein
still was the one with the deepest
insights and some reason for that it
wasn't just straight clock speed it was
something else right so I would say
there is the study read fact check and
then also go let yourself have that in
mind don't distract onto the laundry
list or whatever and then meditate look
at the clouds oh now and then see what
ideas come and journal goes down and
then go back right let yourself kind of
have both of those processes and then
find the facts as best you can and then
also step back and consciously try to
put them together
what kind of overarching picture or
narratives or whatever might make sense
but be careful because it might not be a
simple narrative it might be lots of
overlapping ones right but try to see
with this overarching kind of frame make
sense of lots of these and then say well
if that was if this narrative was true
what else would be true and go look to
see is that there not what would falsify
or verify this narrative or this
hypothesis or kind of overarching
structural frame
you
so yeah those are some things what other
offerings are ways to people I think you
shared these there were these couple
videos we did with rebel wisdom they
called them the war on sense making it
was basically we're here we're sharing
tools of sense-making there we were more
sharing tools of propaganda they're
commonly used in the media landscape
that mess up your son's making to be
able to recognize them so you won't be
wrongly affected by them the intention
of those videos was to kind of inoculate
people against bad sense making those
are worth checking out and then if if
you want follow me on Facebook I don't
post public stuff very often but I if I
do I post it there and podcasts and
other stuff some of it historically is
on civilization emerging calm but it's
not very updated
Facebook's FRA the best place I find
that the the earnestness and the
curiosity
comes from something that you could
think of as a spiritual impulse there is
like actually a reverence for reality
that wants to understand it there is a
respect for and yeah there's a respect
for the integrity of reality and a
reverence that wants to and it's almost
like if you have a lover and you really
want to love them well you want to know
their childhood stories and what they
love in their favorite color flower and
their favorite songs and whatever so
that you can actually love them well and
it doesn't mean that you'll ever fully
know them you shouldn't ever think that
but that you want to know them better as
an expression of the love that's there
and so and that's not the only thing you
want you don't just want to know them
you also want to have union with them
you also want to serve them right well
the same is true the reality writ large
where you want to seek to understand it
not that you will ever understand it
completely but the desire to understand
more is a kind of cognitive or
intellectual closeness or intimacy with
reality it's a sign of a certain respect
and reverence and love and there's
something just profoundly beautiful in
that and it's also and that's where it's
motivated by what you just call pure
desire to know or pure learning but
where it's motivated by the desire to
make a difference in the world I would
like these people not to be dying I
would like to have a solution that
doesn't create an authoritarian state
because I care about freedoms that then
also is I want to understand reality
enough to be effective motivated by my
love for people for nature for reality
and my desire to serve so the basis of
where the energy to do the work comes
from is actually love and the deep the
more you deepen your love and care the
more energy you will have to do the work
that it takes to have that love and care
be active and manifest in serving that
which is loved and care of them yeah
I've been talking with a couple people
lately of like what is the the contagion
of love you know that we can kind of
match this moment with as so many are
feeling so much fear
and I love ya the idea that that love
can we get reverence can be good you
know then one more understand the new
curiosity and yeah it's it's kind of an
anti do it was to like the fear and shut
down about a lot of people are in right
now it's like a lot of and uh yeah the
curiosity and Invitational tone that
this all is a really lovely antibody
it's a minute there's a little thing I'd
like to offer here so good and
philosopher a friend of mine shared with
me it was very profound as
fear is not the opposite of love fear is
a reaction to love it is sourced in it I
can only be afraid of something being
harmed that I don't want to have be
harms that I care about and so when
people are totally apathetic ready to
commit suicide don't feel fear around
dying don't feel fear around hurting
other people whatever because there is
no love or care that is binding them
still if I and let's say I don't feel
any fear over something being destroyed
I don't care about them like it let
it burn down so the fear is a response
to something I love and care about where
I'm thinking about it getting harmed in
the future I'm afraid of going crazy I
it's because I actually love life and my
own ability to be sane and to connect
and contribute and to take care of my
family and to experience whatever it is
right like there's actually a value
reverence on that now the fear might be
a unconscious response I'm not
consciously saying I would like to get
afraid now so it's an unconscious
response and it might be a disempowered
or disempowering response but it still
derives its energy from the depth of
what is cared about so I can do a
conscious and empowering response
instead where I say oh I care about this
thing so instead of focusing on
automatically unconsciously what the bad
outcome is going to be in feeling like I
can't do anything so I just get afraid
what is the good outcome I would like
and what can I do about it
so I get empowered in that so I move the
fearful to careful full of care right
and act from there anger also comes from
love sadness also does the apathy would
just be like I'm not angry not
and so they might all be unconscious I'm
not choosing to feel that they might all
be disempowering or empowering but you
can find conscious and empowering where
the anger becomes more like passion and
the sadness becomes more like depth of
appreciation and gratitude and fear
becomes more like carefulness and
proactivity
any of those emotions don't think of
them as bad think of them as signals of
something that is cared about and then
trace it back to what is it that I
actually love and care about and then
what is it that I want to have happen
and how can I actually be empowered
towards yeah I had a realization a
couple of months ago instead of washing
away fear seems cinema the side of a
river I'm seeing it doesn't step in
stone and the other side of the river
being bravery I'm saying it as yeah the
logical response but I love it in
children with love yeah and that fearful
careful play on words this is very
relative thank you so much for your time
and for all with this wisdom yeah I'm
really looking forward to seeing the
conversation that it can sites and then
our turn tag trainings yeah thank you
also probably work that you're doing in
this limit thank you for making this
series and for having me here and I'm
very excited to see what comes from the
people going through all of these and
how they're sense-making in solution
capacities increase in what they can do
with that