[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
hey folks Rhett here again with dr.
Heather hang for the third in our series
of darkhorse livestream conversations
about the current predicament the world
finds itself in we are going to start
with some announcements some structure
about how we are going to move forward
with this livestream and correct some of
the the problems we ran into in in the
previous two heather would you like to
say sure so I think what we're going to
do now that we've enabled super chat is
do two consecutive live streams so we
will take 45 minutes or an hour here and
talk about some of the topics that we've
been wanting to talk about and not take
any super chat questions but our Sun and
tech support Zachary is busy logging
them right now
will take maybe a two five minute break
or so and then immediately launch into a
second live stream of again about 45
minutes or an hour in which we answer
the super chat questions we may not do
all of them we're going to reserve the
right to edit
we're looking for nothing pre-modern
nothing postmodern only modern questions
that actually are interested seem to be
interested in in furthering knowledge
and compassion that we are trying to
bring to this topic and I don't know if
there's anything else to say about that
right now to be clear you can lodge your
super chat questions during this stream
we will look over them in the break and
then we will return to those questions
in the next one at the point that we
move to break you will have a link that
you can click that takes you to the next
stream the link will be in the
description I don't think the one that
you will see on screen is clickable but
if you scroll down you'll find it yeah
just I guess one more thing is that
we're gonna try to do this on Tuesdays
and Fridays for a while at least while
we're all in some kind of lockdown
together we've had to move it a little
bit later because as of today zach is
back in virtual school which means he
has obligations up until about 20
minutes before we're starting here so
we're gonna in general try to be doing
this at 3:30 Pacific time we know that's
a little bit late for a lot of people we
apologize on Tuesdays and Fridays yes
unfortunately for people in Europe this
is quite late the streams will be
republished as Dark Horse podcast so
that you can use them on a podcast app
alright so shall we start with
connection erections yes one major
correction for me I said in our last
stream that coronaviruses were
retroviruses that is incorrect corona
viruses are RNA viruses but there are
three kinds of RNA viruses and corona
viruses are not retroviruses which means
that they do not reverse transcribe from
RNA to DNA and they do not insert
themselves into the genome of the cells
as I said so that is in one sense a
technical correction and in another
sense it's very important because it has
implications and in fact it changes my
assessment of the likelihood that we
will see a viable vaccine these corona
viruses are better targets for a vaccine
than retro
viruses are by virtue of the fact that
they are more slowly adapting and
therefore the targets of a vaccine that
is to say the antigens that the virus
produces are a a much more slowly moving
target so I would say my estimation of
the chances of us having a vaccine in
short order
I have improved substantially as a
result of the fact that this is not a
retrovirus that we're dealing with still
think the medical situation is very
serious I did want to say though I saw
at least a couple of comments where
people had suggested that I was
portraying the viral situation as
extremely dire and that effectively I
was leading the viral situation of the
vaccine situations of viral situation as
extremely dire and suggesting that maybe
we were all doomed which is not at all
my perspective even if we were to do
nothing about this virus the huge
fraction of people who seem to get the
disease and be asymptomatic suggests
that there's a way for selection to fix
this problem without our intervention
the problem with that solution is that
it involves a tremendous amount of
needless suffering and death and a
tremendous amount of tragedy for
individuals who would lose people that
they care deeply about so we have to
avoid that outcome for deeply human
reasons but we do not have to avoid that
outcome in order for Humanity to survive
this as the virus currently functions it
creates a lot of devastation but it
leaves a lot of people uninjured and so
that's that's quite positive I am
however quite frightened of the
consequences of this crisis for society
and so we will get back to the societal
implications later but to the extent
that people read me as very concerned I
am concerned about the virus I'd like us
to avoid as much tragedy as possible but
I'm much more concerned about what this
reveals about the fragility of our
system all right let's see Oh
other Corrections more minor I had one
during the last podcast whether people
actually eat Pangolin turns out they do
eat Pangolin but it is also the case
that Pangolin is being used as a
medicinal at the scale scales understood
to have medicinal properties especially
in Chinese medicine and so Pangolin
shows up in these wet markets for both
of those reasons and let's see the final
correction you were gonna talk about was
whether or not SARS Cove 2 was found in
dogs all right so I had said that very
little by way of viruses is transmitted
to dogs and by dogs to people and that
remains true although I did see a report
where two dogs had been diagnosed with
kovat 19 now there's also a lot of
debate about the quality of the testing
and in the case of one of these dogs the
animal was categorized as having died of
kovat 19 but the animal was something
like 17 years old which is a really long
run for a dog so in any case it is not
highly transmissible to dogs and there
are no known cases in which a human is
picked it up from a dog as far as I know
but it is it doesn't and that doesn't
put the lie to the idea that humans in
prehistory may have been selecting
against dogs that did transmit diseases
because again this this virus human
interaction is brand-new we have no
history with this so even to the extent
that prehistorical humans were really
good at getting rid of dogs who showed
sign of diseases that could be
transmitted to humans the fact that this
relationship between SARS co2 and humans
is brand-new suggests no history yeah no
history so there are two questions one
are we are our dogs unlikely to carry
things that we would catch because our
prehistoric ancestors did a good job of
eliminating dogs that carried things
that we caught and then there's a
question about whether they may have
selected for something in dogs that has
special immunity to things in which case
it might have some implication for
for kovat 19 but we don't know this is
all evolutionary speculation that's
right
watch us with our arms so with regard to
me excuse me Corrections that I want to
make I this this could be the subject of
a conversation that lasts hours and of
itself but getting back to this question
of bush meat and exotic meat and what it
is who tends to eat these things and
what the risks are to the rest of the
world when people do eat these things I
I initially categorized the types of
situations in which these things are
eaten into - and although Brett tried to
add the third category which is far more
important in the current conversation it
wasn't one that I paid any attention to
you so let me just walk it back a little
bit and say I understand bush meat to be
meat what meat of wild animals that is
hunted in the place where both the
animals and the people hunting them are
from and I think of exotic men in
generally bush meat is a term reserved
for tropical places for the developing
world rather than the developed world
but you know you just like peccaries
being hunted by the Huaorani and the
amazon has thousands of years of history
and so those peccaries are unlikely to
cause much harm to the wool Ronnie who
eat them North Americans hunting deer as
most North Americans now hunting deer
don't have thousands of years of hunting
deer but certainly there is a thousands
of years history of Americans hunting
deer in north and even South America and
so that is also unlikely to cause any
long-term long-term harm to anything but
the deer meat and obviously so I I think
of all of that as bush meat and there is
you know a long evolutionary history of
hunting meat that is wild and I don't
think I don't think that anyone really
is making the argument that people
should not be allowed to hunt wild
animals anywhere ever again okay so
that's one category and
is fairly common generally honorable and
fine right
the second category which I mentioned in
our last livestream is the is what I
think of as exotic meat where people are
creating demand in the system for the
meat the flesh of wild animals from
places that they aren't and may never
even have been and so the you know rich
rich Londoners in fancy restaurants
ordering up whatever it is from for
instance Africa is an example of this
and there's just no justification for
this whatsoever but it is a tiny tiny
piece of the global market for exotic
and bush made there's no excuse for it
and we shouldn't tolerate it but the far
larger issue is in the far larger market
is for what you know either either meat
of wild animals or the parts of wild
animals like Pangolin scales for
instance or Tiger penis right in places
where those animals are local and then
encouraged through because of culinary
cultural reasons and humans don't have
as long a history as extensive a history
eating or using these things and they
are much more likely to bring out
zoonotic diseases like the virus we're
now dealing with I don't know if you
want to add anything more things I would
say again the gold standard for errors
in this regard is the eating of
chimpanzee which as far as we know was
people who live nearby too rich in
pansies are native but chimpanzee is not
on anybody's ancestral menu it was being
hunted because it could be hunted and
because it could be sold and the price
that humanity paid for HIV jumping the
gap from chimpanzees into humans was
absolutely immense so we have to prevent
that irrespective of what category it
falls into it's just too dangerous
to contemplate you know and it's not the
only reason obviously as you said before
not to eat chimpanzee but it is
sufficient unto itself for us to
stamp out all that kind of behavior
which does mean that the people who find
themselves hunting these animals and
selling them have to have viable
economic alternatives that's right
so Zach dude can you pull up the yang at
all 2020 paper if if it's easy great if
not it's not a big deal
yep yang at all its near the top of the
second page of notes that I gave you so
the in that third category of meats that
he could eaten and are often often end
up being dangerous but often also
provide much of the protein yeah thank
you
for four people where this kind of meat
is sold we have this this concept of wet
markets which is you know phrase that
probably many of us have never heard six
months ago but now is on the tip of
everyone's tongue and let's just talk
about what what that actually means
because as is almost always the case
when we have a new linguistic term
entering common parlance under times of
duress it's being politicized as being
weaponized so what a wet market actually
means is that perishable goods are sold
so a produce market a market devoted
entirely to selling mangoes is a wet
market a market entirely devoted to
selling dead chickens could you put that
back up okay thank you
and so as this paper is suggesting live
poultry trade in some wet markets is
quite different from markets that sell
only dead dead chickens so in the u.s.
we generally have entirely markets of
animals that have already been killed
and generally butchered as well and what
market does not make a distinction
between whether or not it's meat is
being sold versus produce or whether
that meat is live or not
but what this article finds is that in
in several excuse me in several regions
in China when they compared the
transmission of virus between areas
where markets were selling live chickens
versus I think it was
between areas where live chickens were
sold but between in in those areas live
chickens themselves were not being
transferred the viral load in humans was
much higher it's been unfortunate couple
days since I looked at this paper so I
think I've got that right but the the
long and the short of it the take-home
message you could take it down if you
want sack is that virus virus is
transported far faster in markets and
between markets where live animals are
being sold than we're dead markets are
being sold so this raises the question
of is it really wet markets all
inclusive you know since you since you
lotto that we are trying that we are
talking about what we're complaining
about wet markets or should we be
actually making the distinction
distinction between is it is the meat
being sold alive or is it dead and if
it's dead it has a far lower chance of
of transmitting virus and also is that
meat wild or domesticated and again
there's plet there are plenty of people
in the world who hunt wild animals and
do so honorably and without great risk
and special especially if they aren't
then selling that meat if they're if
they're keeping that risk within
themselves but what market the term wet
market does not distinguish between live
versus dead meat being sold or wild
versus domesticated animals being sold
both of which are going to be important
factors in determining the risk of those
wet markets so we should probably point
out that there is a reason that people
would prefer to keep live animals in a
wet market which is that once the animal
is dead a clock starts with respect to
how long that meat is viable and so
anyway keeping animals alive as a way to
preserve the meat and so what we have is
a trade-off and again I would say if we
are to make requirements about what can
and can't be sold we have to give people
a viable means to do what they're doing
if they're in a place where
refrigerating meat would be impractical
or freezing it would be impractical than
keeping the animals live as you know
it's part of the supply chain for the
meat and so anyway we have to provide
viable alternatives to the extent
one of these mechanisms is putting
humanity at dame in danger which which
it is yeah this this reminds me actually
of one of the last times we were at the
animal market in cuenca and the andes in
ecuador and they were selling guinea
pigs
and I asked the guy is this what are you
selling this for is that food or pet he
said how'd you like whatever you want to
do with it come you know let's go at
that either way yep so anyway that we
shall so before we leave that topic we
should probably just say the
precautionary principle is a very
contentious matter clearly what we have
here is a circumstance where some
version of the precautionary principle
has to rule there are behaviors that go
back thousands of years and we have no
reason to think that they are dangerous
and then we have other behaviors which
have just been invented or have only
recently become possible like hunting
chimpanzee or hunting chimpanzee for
sale at a market and we should treat
those with much greater care i know
historically that you've really enjoyed
talking about bats so let's do it bats
bats bats yeah yep so I wanted to talk a
little bit about why bats are showing up
in this story and why they showed up in
the Czar's story and there are really
two components here I've seen a lot of
ink spilled over this question
none of it I thought to good effect yet
and so there are two two components if
you're asking yourself why why is it the
bats are transmitting disease to humans
there's one fairly straightforward
answer and then there's another one
that's more interesting the
straightforward one is that bats
probably comprise a much larger fraction
of the biota and in particular the
mammalian biota then you would think so
it turns out there are something like a
thousand species it's actually so we
actually have more than 6,000 species of
mammals now with the fractions holding
steady but the fraction is holding
roughly steady yeah it's not that so
when I was in graduate school I studied
bats and bats were a quarter of all
mammals that were thought to be four
thousand species of mammals the
that they're now thought to be something
like 6,000 is not a result of a lot more
mammals having been discovered it's a
result of a lot more fine gradations
having been named whether that's durable
or not but nonetheless bats comprised
something close to a 5th to a quarter of
all mammal species and so when we talk
about bats we often think about you know
things that we sort of vaguely see
flying around and we think that there
are only a few species in which case it
would be truly remarkable how many
viruses were being passed by them but
when you know that there are a thousand
species of them out there doing all of
these different things it is less
surprising I think just to back up a
little bit why would we expect mammals
to be the source of these own otic
diseases because we are mammals and
therefore we expect the transfers to be
easiest between more closely related
species so it's it's been proposed for
instance that that Tsarskoe of two came
from a bat yes but then it's
intermediate host was a snake in fact an
elite bit like a relative of a cobra or
a sea Krait and it's probably not the
case as it turns out but that would be
more surprising a bit then if for
instance it had an intermediate host my
Pangolin because snakes are so much more
distantly related to us than our mammals
so why you know why mammals why are so
many species of rodents implicated in
transfer in transferring diseases well
half of all mammals are rodents 1/4 ish
of all mammals are bats so we've got you
know why mammals because we're most
closely related to mammals because we
are mammals and then why are rodents and
bats always the ones who are being
implicated well together they make up
three-quarters of all mammals so this
question about phylogenetic proximity is
clearly important the mechanisms for
viruses that transmit within a species
to jump to and other species are more
likely to be present if that species is
closely related but they're obviously a
large number of cases of things like
bird flu right that's a pretty big
phylogenetic gap
yet we see viruses having jumped it and
that leads me to the second point about
bats which I don't see forgive me if
I've missed somebody's description of it
somewhere but there's a very obvious
reason for viruses to be coming from
bats and that has to do with the virus's
preference I use that term in quotes
because obviously viruses don't have
real preferences but to the extent that
the virus's purpose is to get itself as
deeply into the future as possible
bats are an especially good host why
because they fly same reason that birds
are an especially good host because they
fly and so few they present fewer
barriers to dispersal as a host and
therefore they open up more landscape
metaphorical landscape and literal
landscape for the virus within them yes
they in fact they provide a solution to
a dispersal problem and it won't be all
bats either you really have two
different kinds of dispersal problems so
actually is that could you put up the
picture first of me on the forest floor
you have that one yeah okay so here's a
picture of me a couple months ago
actually before we had ever heard of
kovat 19 on the floor of the Amazon
taking a picture of one of the species
that I studied when I was in graduate
school Heather and I were in the Amazon
and I managed to find a few of these
guys can you now put up the picture of
the bats now there we go so here we have
some tent making bats these are this is
this is the picture that Brett was
taking when I was taking the picture of
Brett yep there you go so that's a
little bit meta but anyway these bats
are new world frugivores and they are
roosting in what's called a tent which
is a leaf that they have modified into a
structure that protects them from being
seen and protects them from rain so
these guys have the potential to
disperse a virus from one place to
another in other words a river wouldn't
be any obstacle to these animals moving
from one part of the forest to the other
but they aren't very good as hosts
because you see a
number of them roosting together here
whereas there are many species of bats
that roost by the thousands and
sometimes the hundreds of thousands in
these very large caves so such an animal
would be an ideal host because to the
extent that it became infected the virus
could spread within this very large
colony and then all of the individuals
in that colony would be capable of
spreading it across the landscape such
an animal meaning not these guys right
so it isn't going to be all bats but
there are going to be certain baths
certain ecological parameters which make
bats a particularly good host from the
point of view of doing the viruses
bidding which is what the virus is
interested in right the virus wants to
get into the future and one way to get
into the future is to hitch a ride with
a creature that can cross boundaries
like for example you know in Indonesia
any animal that is restricted by water
isn't going to be able to get from one
island to the next a bat is going to
often be undaunted by the water and many
of species will regularly transit
between islands so it makes a good host
from the point of view of the virus
leaping from one place to another so we
always have to think in this
evolutionary form and one way to say it
is to the extent that the virus is
trying to get into the future it hooks
its wagon to the star of some creature
that is capable of crossing these
boundaries therefore which viruses is is
it that we see in the present they're
the ones that have done so well in the
past what were the characteristics that
allowed them to do well in the past well
the fact that they are transmitted
between bats and other bats and from
bats to intermediate hosts like maybe a
Pangolin then they would be potentially
successful so we shouldn't be too
surprised and in fact this is a general
property that isn't even really about
viruses if you think about the the
flavor of the spicy flavor of capsaicin
the sensation of hotness in food Chili
Peppers particulars that is a molecule a
secondary compound that has been loaded
into those Chili Peppers and it appears
that it was loaded in to dissuade
mammals from eating the Chili Peppers
why because the chili pepper plant gets
into the
future better if the seeds are carried
off by a bird why should the chili
pepper plant prefer a bird over
something like a monkey well because the
bird flies and therefore will take the
seeds farther so a preference for a
flying vector is seen in many different
contexts and it shouldn't surprise us
when it shows up in in bats so let me
just finish off the the prediction for
the story you just told which is a true
story about capsaicin and hot peppers
and mammals all having an aversion
except for humans many of which have
developed developed a a predilection for
the spiciness and hot peppers birds
cannot taste it the capsaicin is still
in the peppers when birds eat it but
birds have no reaction the same way that
that mammals do to the capsaicin and hot
peppers yep
that's that's correct I should have
should have said that all right so I
think except bats that's all you get
that's that's all you have for bats only
well oh did you want to actually you I
thought you might want to say something
about the three clades that you think
maybe maybe not but you say a similar
strain of corona virus is likely and
around alofa de hippo Sarah the hippos
adarand's if I said yeah I've misspelled
that and maybe something similar in my
Otis maybe this is too too much in the
weeds but no not really all I would say
is I'm not an expert on the kinds of
bats that have been implicated here they
are old-world insectivores they are
potentially good hosts for a virus
because they many of the species in
these couple of clades do roost in large
cave settings where the virus would have
a better chance of spreading one animal
to the next it is interesting that we
have seen analogues of this virus in two
closely related families the hippo
sedara T and the Rhino Lofa T and that
now a distant family has shown a similar
virus this is a species of my Otis and
my Otis is found all over the world
these actually if you know bats in North
America it's almost certainly at least
in this family it's a Vesper Tilley on
it right that's particularly
up in the northern reaches it's the only
family that gets to you but but in any
case one of the things that happens in
these large cave roosts is that
frequently many species are roosting
together and so you can imagine a virus
that had the special characteristic of
being able to hop from one species to
the next and found itself in a roost of
bats that maybe 95% Ryan elephants but
has a few myotis here there would have
an advantage now this does point to one
opportunity here which is to the extent
that the virus is good at jumping from
one species to the next it is not a
specialist and therefore from the
perspective of coming up with a vaccine
or something that's actually a hopeful
sign because what it means is that the
mechanisms of adhesion the antigens on
the surface of infected cells for
example are going to be generalist in
nature and that generalism means that
they are probably a bigger target for us
to hit with a vaccine yeah so a couple
of reasons today that we are thinking
well maybe a vaccine we still should not
be banking on it it should not be the
one and only strategy but maybe it is
more likely than we at least were
thinking a week or two ago yep good okay
do you want to launch into conspiracy
hypotheses which is the the term that
you invoked the last time and I said
there's no way this is going to catch on
everyone calls them conspiracy theories
but let's let's go ahead and try to call
them conspiracy hypotheses maybe a few
words first about why you would rather
call them conspiracy hypotheses rather
than conspiracy theories sure so you
would imagine that Darwinists would be
particularly sensitive about this issue
because sometimes we have to field these
accusations that evolution is only a
theory when in fact when we say that
evolution is a theory we mean something
very strong by it which is to say that
it is a well tested idea it's not to say
it couldn't be displaced by something
else but as far as we know evolution is
the explanation for all living creatures
because it is the only explanation that
has withstood tests so when we say that
something is a conspiracy theory we
don't
mean to drag in that level of certitude
in fact in the case of conspiracies we
have a significant problem which is that
the the whole allegation of conspiracy
suggests that somebody is trying to make
X look like Y and so in order to
responsibly deal with things in this
quadrant we have to be very careful to
rate our level of certainty and not over
rate it so to say that something is a
conspiracy hypothesis leaves open the
possibility that it makes predictions
and that we could discover that it is
true but it does not claim that it is
true I guess the one risk of using this
phrase conspiracy hypothesis is that it
is it is very common for people to
misunderstand when you say I've got a
hypothesis or here's a hypothesis that
what you are in fact saying is I think
this is true or I want this to be true
and sometimes when you say I have a
hypothesis you are saying I think this
is true but that's not always the case
you whenever you are confronted with an
open question you know why is X you are
expected to come up with as many
possible hypotheses as could possibly
explain X and then discern between them
and so all of those hypotheses are
unlikely to reside in your mind is
equally likely to be true although it is
what you know what we aim for when we
are doing science so saying we're going
to talk about some conspiracy hypotheses
does not mean that we think any of them
necessarily are true and certainly some
of them we absolutely don't but it the
term as you've already said conspiracy
hypothesis reduces the likelihood in the
head of the person speaking that it is
it is a certainty mm-hmm
all right so how should we address the
question of conspiracy hypotheses well I
mean it's one of the things that's
happened sorry one of the categories of
conspiracy hypotheses has mostly
disappeared which is even until a couple
weeks ago maybe even a week ago people
were still saying this isn't real it's a
hoax have you even met anyone who's
all right and mostly this one has
disappeared I haven't I haven't seen
this too much there's still people
claiming different levels of hoaxes enos
but the idea that the entire thing is a
fabrication and that SARS Cove too
doesn't exist and the Covenant no one
has ever gotten sick from or died from
Cove in nineteen I have not seen that
popping up in the last week or two so
originally when we were talking about
distinguishing between conspiracy
hypotheses one of the things that we
were talking about was you know
conspiracy hypotheses conspiracy
theories and in common parlance almost
always have the tinfoil hat implication
because so many of them are correct but
right and the idea that this was a hoax
and from pretty much the beginning was
kind of crackpot but there are a lot of
other ideas that don't fit the
mainstream narrative right
they institutionally that what's the
what's the acronym your brother has
which one gin the gin yeah Kate an
institutional narrative yes
so the gated institutional narrative is
one thing we know it's not been true in
some regards so anything that goes
against the Djinn the gated
institutional narrative might be
considered a conspiracy hypothesis are
some of them going to be true of course
yes yes the Djinn in fact uses the idea
of conspiracy theory to dismiss viable
ideas right so it calls them a
conspiracy theory which automatically
tinges them with this sort of exactly
unhinged wild-eyed connotation right
which is which is exactly how the game
is played so I think I think we don't
need to talk about any of the idea that
this doesn't exist that it's not real
right that we're not experiencing an
actual global pandemic or the social
response is to nothing but beyond that
yeah so let's let's just launch into
some of these things there is this
question that routinely comes up which
has to do with what to make of the fact
that this virus appears to have emerge
in Wuhan which just so happens to house
a lab that was studying such viruses
from bat sources with a possible eye
towards utilization I must say I'm not
in a position to evaluate any of the
facts here I certainly assume that there
is a viral adji lab that matches this
description and given that that is the
case it is a very difficult to dismiss
coincidence it could of course be just
coincidence or it could be something
more well let's say there's there's
three possibilities right within within
just this framework it is a coincidence
and this emerged from some clade of bats
jumped into pangolins or maybe cobra
like things and then into humans and the
fact of their being a competent and
relevant virology lab very close to
Wuhan is a coincidence that's one - is
at the other end of the spectrum this is
in fact a bioweapon produced and and by
by that lab and they just didn't take it
very far it just seems like poor
planning but okay
and then there's this intermediate one
which is that there was something in
development and there's all sorts of
actually new wants possible within here
that there that we there's actually I
don't think I have it in the notes so I
don't have it for you exact but there's
a paper from a couple of years ago which
in which some of the authors are
actually out of that lab in which they
say look we know from SARS one which of
course wasn't SARS one at that point was
just being called SARS that there was a
risk that there's a reservoir in bats of
similar viruses and we would like to
know more about it and here's what we've
done to try to understand it so we know
that that lab was indeed investigating
SARS like coronaviruses in you know in
the virology lab in Wuhan within the
last couple of years that is a totally
legitimate appropriate in fact admirable
thing forever allergy lab to be doing if
they understand this is a risk that
could produce a global pandemic were
they then or some members of that lab
considering developing it as a
weapon that's a possibility but hard to
hard to know what the likelihood is is
it possible that it escaped by accident
this is maybe the third sort of
middle-of-the-road hypothesis that
doesn't match either come on guys it's a
coincidence what are you talking about
or this must be a bio weapon from China
and we need to get them so escape could
mean a number of things it could mean
that you know somebody goofed with a
sample and or something like that it
could also mean because what they were
doing was apparently looking for SARS
like coronaviruses in bats that they
were going into caves and that somebody
in the lab contracted it and you know
they're working in Wuhan in this lab and
the thing escapes into the world and the
coincidence is too much for people to
ignore from the point of view of it
being a bioweapon yeah there are a
couple things I'm more compelled by the
argument that it's not a very well put
together by a weapon and that that
argues against it being one and this is
there's a new paper again I don't have
the reference right here for Zack to
pull up there's a new paper that says
definitely not a bio weapon but the
argument is primarily this isn't what
people who were engineering a bio weapon
would have made and I'm not fully
compelled by this is an argument because
it imagines that you can see into the
minds of people who would be trying to
engineer bio weapon accurately and it
seems like they would be exactly trying
to not have their Bynes seen into but it
is nevertheless an argument that's been
made in at this point the published
scientific literature well like I said I
like this argument a bit better than you
do unless there was a Phase two if this
was a bio weapon then I don't think it's
sufficient in itself to be a very
effective one but it doesn't mean that
coupled with something else it couldn't
be so I guess the prediction of the
hypothesis that it is a bio weapon is
that there would be some second blow
that something would emerge it is
possible that it was constructed as a
bio weapon and that it has evolved
through some mechanism either understood
or not understood so if we step into the
flu
like RNA viruses there is a mechanism
for recombination between viruses that
would allow some novel virus to emerge I
don't believe we know of such
potentially a bio weapon that got away
from them right well imagine that they
put together a devastating bioweapon and
they released it and then evolution
shuffled it because evolution isn't
really interested in human bio weapons
evolution is interested in creatures
getting into the future and so if it
quickly changed into a form that was
more effective at being passed and less
effective at doing whatever devastation
then that would be a win from the
evolutionary perspective and it would
upend the intent of whoever created it
but I should say were you in wuhan
creating a bio weapon it would be
foolish to release it there this is what
I was trying to suggest earlier they
really didn't take it very far did they
right they didn't they'd put it right in
their backyard if if this is where they
developed and this is where it was
released and I mean at risk of stepping
into even more dangerous territory than
were already in the idea that you can
engineer something and have total
control over it is obviously hubris of
the nth degree and is exactly the reason
that we have a much more cautious and
nuanced dare I say take on gently
modified organisms then most scientists
are supposed to because you just cannot
assume that the thing that you put out
into the world will stay as it was if
it's an evolved in entity yeah if it's
an evolving entity then it may have
other plans now were you somebody else
who wanted to create a bio weapon and
you wanted the blame to fall on the
Chinese for example you might release it
in Wuhan and then people would be unable
to ignore the the coincidence but
nonetheless I would say I'm far I'm far
more compelled by the idea that it got
away from somebody who was associated
with this lab and that that's the reason
but which I'm sorry to interrupt but
which says nothing about the intention
of the people who are working on it
right it it could have been the most
honorable Public Health driven work out
there and it could have been totally
execrable
and there's no there's there's nothing
in
this story as it escaped from a lab as
to which of those are anywhere in that
spectrum it might have been oh yeah so
anyway I think the important thing if
you're going to traffic in conspiracy
hypotheses is to recognize that at the
moment we don't have sufficient
information to sort between these
various things all we can do is sort of
say the chances that the Chinese
developed a bioweapon in the form of
kovat 19 and released it in Wuhan
doesn't really add up it doesn't fit
very well with the virus it doesn't fit
very well with the release in Wuhan why
would they do that rather than transport
it which is obviously easily done could
somebody else have transported it there
so that the viral og lab would take the
blame conceivably but again it's not
very well constructed did it evolve out
from under somebody did they build a
weapon that then evolved into something
much more benign who knows but and again
just a just a circle back a little bit
all of these are conspiracy hypotheses
only because they are outside of the
gated institutional narrative yeah I
mean I would say their hypotheses and
but I mean so the point is that that the
Djinn yeah the gate institutional
narrative makes rogue of hypotheses
anything that doesn't fit but it's
already telling you is true and so this
is we are we're trying to be thorough
recognizing that there is so much
information we don't have the
information that we do have is changing
regularly and we don't know if the new
or the old is actually true but we are
trying to sort of walk this weave this
line through all the information and
almost none of the things that we've
talked about here are part of what we
are being told by our government or
public health leaders and this is really
it's there's several things contributing
to the problems with what we are being
told one the data is truly crappy right
we don't have good data because the
testing isn't high quality it isn't
widely distributed and that's resulting
in an extremely noisy data set that may
be more misleading than it is
informative
having nothing to do with human failures
though also given how high a rate of
asymptomatic carriers there seemed to be
absent worldwide testing of everyone
yesterday the data will inherently be
bad no matter how good any particular
government had been about developing in
disseminating tests yeah so the data is
crappy the political apparatus has gone
into high gear making use of the crisis
and this is something that should worry
us tremendously so among other things we
have seen a continuation I believe it
has not passed but have you've seen an
attempt to broaden the appalling
provisions of the NDAA 2012 for
indefinite detention and when NDA 2012
passed the indefinite detention was
specifically with reference to a
worldwide war on terrorism and in this
case what we've seen is a legislative
attempt to broaden it to any crisis so
we should look we should look this up
and we should come back to this on the
next livestream it might have been
extending it specifically to a public
health crisis and I thought it was
explicitly extending it to judicial
branch maybe or maybe that wasn't part
of it we should we should get back that
we should figure it out but nonetheless
there it does seem to be a number of
different fronts in which the chaos that
this is creating has opened a door for
some agenda that clearly existed
beforehand to move forward while we're
all occupied thinking about viruses so
that's that's a very destructive process
and independent of the simple fact that
the data isn't any good and then the
third but maybe this is actually just an
extension of the data not being very
good but I've started to see a lot of
analyses about how we are incorrectly
categorizing various things like death
by Cove at 19 and I want to take a
little detour here and just sort of
lodge an idea in the public
consciousness
we hear a lot in other circumstances of
people dying of the flu right old people
very frequently die of the flu but dying
of the flu isn't really what happened
what we've got is a situation some of
you won't know that I worked on
telomeres back in graduate school and
telomeres are the ends of chromosomes
which have a repetitive sequence that is
basically functions like a timer it is
eroded slightly with each cell division
so every time you get damaged or you do
maintenance you lose a little bit of
this telomere and eventually your cells
can't reproduce which causes you to have
you know your organs begin to fail this
is what growing old is about when you
are born you have effectively a fixed
capacity to do repair for a lifetime
when you get damaged you spend some of
that capacity if you do damage to one
tissue repetitively you can die of the
failure of that tissue even if the rest
of you is effectively young when we say
people have died of the flu what they've
done is they've gotten old and they've
spent most of their capacity for repair
and then the flu has pushed them over
the edge it has pushed some organ beyond
a limit and that has caused their death
but the fact that their death
certificate says flu and it doesn't say
you know old age by flu right those two
things multiplied by each other is
really what killed the person this is
this is exactly why diseases in the case
of kovat 19 it doesn't seem to affect
the very young in terms of killing them
but there's a separate reason why
diseases tend to affect the very young
and the very old most that those of us
in the middle of our lives are less
likely to be taken out by by pandemics
but it really doesn't mean that you
walked away from it just because he's
recovered so the fact that old people
are pushed over the line and end up dead
as a result of these things he is a
proxy for the fact that it is doing
substantial damage right it is spending
your lifetime capacity to fix some
tissue like
so we we should assume that that is just
simply going on and it's we should
assume that it is going on with the flu
you get the flu you recover you have
knocked some capacity off of your
lifetime total nothing is no cost right
there's lifetime cost that you are you
are taking a hit every time you get sick
you are taking a hit and you're spending
some of your total repair capacity but
in any case the reason that this comes
up is that in the case of kovat 19
there's a temptation to figure out you
know in the absence of good data there's
a temptation to find all data and so
people who die are being tested where
people who haven't died are not so
likely to be tested and that means that
we're catching a lot of cases in which
somebody was infected but they may have
had other pathologies I've seen this
described in several places now and it
is resulting in that's not even noisy
data that's systematically biased data
where if you've died we're much more
likely to figure out that you had
covered 19 than if you're still alive
and so it's creating a bias that we have
to be aware of this reminds me of what
you discovered with regard to the
hunting abilities of our cat Crenshaw
when you ran an entire 75 person
introductory biology lab based on his
kills let me just set it up and then
have you tell the story so we had this
cat whom we'd gotten as a 10 month old
he'd been on the streets he was a
stone-cold killer total sweetheart with
us but a stone-cold killer and he was
one of few cats we've had who we just we
could not always get inside at night
he'd go and walk about for days at a
time and he'd he'd bring us things he'd
bring us animals and we discouraged it
but it was very hard to train this cat
and as biologists are want to do when
the animals came in in good shape we
bagged him and put him in our freezer
because that's what we did so at some
point our chest freezer being rather
more full of dead crenshaw kills than it
was of the half a cow that we'd bought
Brett who was at that point teaching
introduction of natural science I
believe it was and had 75 students said
why did I run an entire lab having my
students to set these animals
let's clear out of freezer get rid of
the cat kills and see what we find it
was mostly mammals a few birds a snake
or two maybe and go for it so the thing
which I I still find stunning but did
not think to predict was that something
like two thirds of the animals that the
students detected had a completely
obvious pathology
I remember one in particular was a Robin
and its lungs were full of this powder
right and I mean it's just amazing that
the animal was still walking around at
the point it was killed and so the I
mean presumably some of the ones that
didn't have a pathology that an
undergraduate could diagnose still had a
pathology was just you know how would
you know an animal that had a leukemia
he wouldn't be able to spot it but I
mean you had animals with lots of little
tumors like many many obvious tumors
throughout the bodies of many of these
animals right yep they had very
interesting pathologies but the upshot
of this was that this cat was a very
good hunter but that he was clearly
ending up with animals who had been
compromised by some other force right
they were made vulnerable by some
pathology and then the cat ends up
bringing them home and so anyway it is
very much like that you know flew by old
age interaction is you know did the
animal die of being hunted by a cat or
did it die of a pathology actually had
died by the interaction of them exactly
so yes it is a it is an excellent
parallel yeah all right enough enough
conspiracy talk for the time being yeah
I think right what what time are we had
50 minutes all right that's good
do we want to so last time I mentioned
that we wanted to say a couple words
about the Works Progress Administration
and I started off thinking it was the
40s and I was kind of right and then I
went forward whether in the back you
said the thirties I was I was wrong
about that so this is this was
introduced by FDR as part of the New
Deal the Works Progress Administration
in 1935 and mostly killed in Cong
by 1943 as we were at war 3 million jobs
out of 10 million jobless Americans
during the Depression ended up with jobs
through the WPA alone and WPA workers
built highways and schools and
playgrounds and hospitals they restored
theatres and lodges they put creatives
to work in various ways through
federally sponsoring plays and murals
and literary works and we we were
thinking about the WPA probably three
four weeks ago as it was becoming clear
what was what was going on what was
coming at the same moment that large
this isn't a federally sponsored project
of course but near our house there's a
long in the planning piece of work
infrastructure work that is actually
began yesterday that's slated to be to
go on for seven or more months and that
is causing huge traffic rerouting and
you know it's got a snarl traffic a
tremendous amount for for many many
months to be done it's a new bridge
that's being put in both to facilitate
wildlife in fact salmon being able to
move the salmon are currently blocked by
the culvert that would go under the road
and they're going to have their habitat
restored as people are being granted
access to walk under the bridge rather
than across this busy road in order to
get into the State Park that's nearby
yeah so it's it's a terrific project
that needs to be done and of course it's
going to cause disruption we received
we've been receiving notices about this
for months telling us about how you know
the traffic calming measures and how
traffic is can be rerouted the most
recent thing that we received maybe a
couple weeks ago seemed apologetic in
tone you know we said you know we know
we know what's going on
covered 19 is happening but we really
think we need to continue on and do this
and my thought was why on earth are you
apologizing why is the city of Portland
apologizing for continuing with a
project that
past I assume admit I don't know if it's
being paid for by bonds or what but it
you know it's it got the funding somehow
it is widely understood to be important
and valuable and it is scheduled for now
at a moment when many people are losing
their jobs or they have less work than
they have had in the past and at the you
know the the lowest level of importance
here of all moments to be doing work
that's going to be disruptive of traffic
isn't this exactly the moment to be
beginning it right where there is almost
no traffic anyway and where people will
be the least disrupted because we're
already so massively disrupted by the
lockdowns that are in place and organism
as in so many other places in the
country so it's not the same as WPA but
it got us thinking but this is this is
exactly the moment that you know there
is going to be vast economic fallout
from the societal measures to flatten
the curve that have been put in place
the important necessary societal
measures have been put in place to
flatten the curve but there are people
who are hurting and there are systems
that are going to fail and lots of small
businesses put out of business and
something like WPA for the modern era
could fix our infrastructure rebuild our
arts and sciences and get a number of
things back coming again the way they
haven't in a long time
yeah so if you put this up against the
very stimulus packages that have been
proposed where people are going to be
given some infusion of cash those things
are good and it's necessary that
something be done because so many people
have been sidelined but something that
did double duty where people were put to
work doing things that were
epidemiologically safe for them to do
things that need doing and are being
paid for it would be a very positive
thing I have a concern I've seen over my
lifetime a paranoia in some political
circles about letting the government do
anything effective and that the only
interpretation that I can come up with
is that there is a desire for people
to prevent there's a desire on in some
quadrants to prevent functional
government so people don't remember that
government is important so if you live
in some industry where you fear
governmental regulation then getting rid
of government by rendering it feeble and
ineffective and then declaring it a
waste of money is a strategy and at this
moment we can't afford for those voices
to hold sway we actually have to see
government wield it effectively because
frankly there's no other way out of this
predicament that's right so I guess one
three three final points before before
you sign off our governments should be
getting testing of both sorts both the
so called molecular testing and the
serology testing underway and widespread
as quickly as possible we see
conflicting reports as to whether or not
that's happening I think mostly it's not
but I have high hopes that the various
labs that are working on it are making
progress what happens then with regard
to the supply chain and getting them to
people I don't know that I hope it
happens quickly we need to keep keep and
get support systems up and running I was
in contact with a with an acquaintance
of ours who has a you know in Oregon who
was trying to make her way through the
the latest bill that specifies what what
the lockdown means and who has to shut
down and all this and she's got a small
business she's raising herself into the
middle class but she's not allowed to do
her business for now and she's trying to
figure out if she's allowed to apply for
unemployment given that she wants to
resume work as soon as as soon as this
ends and what she said to me was I'm
hoping that support systems will work
right now and I think that's that's the
big thing here is that we need the
extent functional systems to work and
that I fear that there is a concern
among some that if support systems
cannot collect everyone apps
everyone that they should not be
employed to help the majority and this
seems anti-democratic so there is
legitimate concern for people who are
homeless for people who don't have
enough to eat you know how it is that
their extant support systems can help
them but we we need to be using the
support systems that are there to keep
for instance small business people from
going under permanently can I take you
back on your point about the homeless
yeah as I've been moving around the
world we have a lot of homeless here in
Portland as are in every major American
city that I know of there are a couple
of different concerns one is obviously
that these homeless encampments and
they're everywhere are going to be
centers of epidemiological spread the
information that circulates among the
homeless is certain to be a dim shadow
of what the rest of us have access to so
knowing how to control the spread is
liable to be difficult for them to to
figure out they also don't necessarily
have the means right if you don't have
running water then this becomes a much
more complicated problem so there's
likely to be a special epidemic inside
of these encampments the other thing
that I've been thinking about though as
I've watched the city absolutely shut
down is for the first time in my life
I've started to think about what these
folks eat under normal circumstances and
I can't escape the sense that probably
most of what they're eating is food
that's being thrown away by other people
and if other people are not at the
fast-food restaurants throwing away a
half a burger here a half a burger their
trucks then I'm imagining starvation is
actually going to be a special problem
and starting weeks ago as people were
beginning to be shy about going to these
establishments that they would usually
frequent did the food supply that these
people have been quietly depending on
suddenly dry up and if so what's taking
place especially in concert with what we
know to be true which is that food banks
are having a hard time staffing
whether or not there's food if they
can't staff them they're not there to
give that food you know yeah so anyway
it's a it's a it's always a puzzle that
deserves more thought than we give it
and in this case quadruple e so yeah so
one more point on my list here Zack
could you pull up the Willamette week
the March 26 Willamette week article on
the Forest Service
we have governments who are frankly
confused about what it is that we should
be doing here shelter in place has
become a stand-in for social distancing
now that's the nature one we're not
talking about chickens anymore we're
talking about the Columbia River Gorge
now that's on the the may be forth from
the bottom it's on the final page middle
of the page well I'm at weak link
so the fort so here in Oregon the border
between the Oregon Oregon and Washington
is the vast and mighty Columbia River
which is less fast and money now that's
been dammed in so many places but it is
a gorgeous 85 or so mile stretch of
natural landscape that is truly diverse
at the ecological level and and just
extraordinary and the it's the Forest
Service the u.s. Forest Service has
closed down every bit of land that it
has and he this strikes me when I saw
this I thought I didn't even know they
had that right I thought these were
public lands right I thought these these
lands belong to us so I have two strong
objections to this a I thought I thought
these lands were public lands I didn't
think that it's not they're not even
closing just trailheads and saying you
can't park here because we're doing
maintenance on the parking lot something
like we're not going to keep the
bathrooms open they're saying you're not
allowed to use our trails but they're
even saying you're not allowed to use
your trails you're not allowed to go in
the land regardless of whether or not
we've ever seen this that piece of the
land it is and and in part this was
prompted by the fact that the order that
came down last week I guess in Oregon
closed all the state parks and all the
day use parks so already people have
almost no place to go
be outside in the nature which is
exactly the thing that people are going
to need more and more and more the
longer this goes on I mean it is it is
patently insane and counterproductive to
keep people locked in the side where
they are going to be more likely to get
sick they are less likely to get exposed
to something new but if they've already
been exposed they're more likely to get
sick if they are if they are locked
inside without any Sun without any fresh
air without the ability to be active and
without the ability to see anything new
if the only thing we are able to see
that is new is the stuff that's coming
in our screens as opposed to being out
in nature we are all going to come out
of this much less healthy much less
happy much less able to be productive
when we're creating a needless
psychological crisis it's insane
now it does strike me as probably
motivated by the concerns of a litigious
society sure which is to say if you
leave the state parks open but you don't
staff them because the staff is
sheltering in place then what happens
when somebody gets lost that's a
question that has to be addressed but it
does seem to me this is like it's
addressable to me it's addressable some
parks better than others but you could
at the very least you know put rules up
at the front that say this you know the
way they do off trail at a ski resort
they say beyond this point this is a
drone risk this is not being patrolled
and potentially this could be a haven
for people so that anybody who was
feeling trapped as many people are and
will continue to be had somewhere to go
and lots of parks this is completely
manageable even without a staff
available this global Fiasco the
combination of the pandemic with the
economic fallout that will happen
everywhere does not need added to it the
disaster that is everyone in the world
emerging weeks or months later unable to
remember what it's like to be outside
and human and instead it could actually
this this could be this could have the
opposite effect
like if people now have nothing else to
do but get out into nature you could
find that a result of this is that more
people understand that there is value
but there is virtue that there is
pleasure there is fun in doing so and we
have more people actually using our
natural lands which is on balance a good
thing yeah all right it's an important
point so we are now going to end this
livestream and take a few minute break
and then we will return you have a link
in the description to this one that will
take you straight to the next one and we
will answer oh we are still working on
the link okay so check back in the
description of this if you don't have a
link to the Q&A section of this
livestream then it will show up be sure
to refresh and that will bring it onto
your screen and we will see you in a few
minutes all right
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]