hello welcome to Monday and welcome to
all of our new members who joined over
the weekend I'm super excited that we're
growing and I'm happy to have you all
here on Friday I promised I was going to
share more of my story and how I got
here you guys seem to like that idea so
I was gonna start with my childhood
because that seemed like the most
logical place to start but it was
Mother's Day on the weekend so instead
I'm going to read this thing I wrote
about being a mom yesterday it's here
notes I'm growing up I thought I would
get married and have four kids two of
each of the binary genders then they
would grow up and repeat that process so
I would have grandbabies
spoiler alert that's not it's not what's
happening motherhood was my first
intentional step off the prescribed path
and now I'm lost in the woods it's not
very feminine or girly girl I've always
been a nurturer I played with dolls even
when there were no dolls around to play
with like treating cars as dolls I also
treated my animals like babies I've
always wanted to be a mom I was in a
two-and-a-half year relationship with a
man who was on the fence about ever
having babies I felt a deep sense of
depression and once I knew it was
related did not mean a mother I had to
take action I told him I was having a
baby and he needed to decide if it was
gonna be with him or not
he chose not looking back I think
finding a man for which to have babies
with was my only incentive to date I did
not want to start that process over
again and so I found a donor and I had a
baby on my own and that's a whole saga
of itself but we're not really gonna get
into today her birth a cesarean in the
end was my first experience showing me
that motherhood is never gonna go as
planned but it will be both hard and
beautiful in its own process she has
taught me what love is this sweet
ever-present ache in my chest not the
angel singing from on high like I
thought it was gonna be it's more subtle
and more profound falling in love with
her I could not help but also fall in
love with myself since she has so much
of me physically mentally emotionally
there was no loving her in pieces I
loved all of her so I had to love all
me it broke my heart open and I also
fell in love with everyone else I often
see everyone regardless of age as my
children or at least someone's child
worthy of love a hundred percent not
just parts of them but all of them when
I entered the club of motherhood I was
blessed to get a glimpse into the real
and chaotic messy lives of other parents
not just the perfectly presented lives
we post on social media I got to see
that moms can be different and yet
amazing in our differences we cannot be
all of what society demands of us June
Cleaver at home
but cookie nutritiously his times have
changed and simultaneously being an
amazing career woman maintain all of our
outside relationships while maintaining
any version of a healthy mental state
you cannot do it all all of that
 I had to stop comparing myself
to an ideal idea of perfection or to
anyone else I'm not the mother I thought
I would be I rarely cook my child is
constantly in front of a screen
my house is amassed nearly all of the
time she's had two birthday parties in
her five years
she's only attended to extracurricular
activities from the outside I'm failing
a lot of the time but I have the best
evidence but I'm an amazing mother the
only evidence I need is my kid she's
happy she's unique she knows she is
loved and accepted a hundred percent for
who she is she's allowed to express her
emotions all of them she's telling me
how to do the same she is treated like
she is her own individual human and she
acts accordingly by which I mean she is
in no way obedient she is an extrovert
which means she meets people all the
time I often stand on the sidelines and
just allow these interactions observing
I'm an introvert most of the time and
these interactions used to cause me
anxiety because I felt I needed to talk
or that my child was being a nuisance I
had to get over that the other person
can stop the interaction if they want to
just like if they were talking to an
adult and I do not need to be an
extrovert just because my kid is she can
be an extrovert well I am an introvert
and we can get both of our needs met in
other areas of life I had to learn to
take care of myself too
my needs are important and I cannot
cross all of my boundaries just to meet
all of her needs and wants while
ignoring my own I need space more than
most to just be in sync away from
everyone and that includes my favorite
person her I do not want my child to
grow up and give all of herself to her
children I want her to be a complete
happy human and help with her own air
mass before she offers it to other
people my selfishness or boundaries if
I'm being nice is in her best interest
overall even if sometimes she has to pay
the price in a moment overall if she is
learning to set her own boundaries and
allow other people to have their needs
met as well it's a work in progress I'm
in awe of her spark her beauty I never
want to see it extinguished
I refuse to break my child's fit into
this world so I'm gonna fix the world
for my child so that all of the children
know they belong here
and her loves a hundred percent for
exactly who they are the whole not only
the good parts motherhood is a big piece
of who I am and it's constantly teaching
me when I am open to it it is the
driving force behind why I will not fail
at this project it's not an option
[Music]