welcome to the stola the stoah is a
digital campfire where we go here and
dialogue about what matters most at the
night's edge what's happening now
[Music]
let's begin check-ins I feel deliciously
stupid only like 5% though other than
that I feel this is a great opportunity
all right to practice thought ISM and I
feel pretty stoic and grounded and ready
and excited for Jon's talk so welcome to
the stoah I'm Peter limber the Stewart
of the stoah and the Stowe is a place
for us to go here in dialogue about what
matters most at the knife's edge of this
moment and sorry for the the mix-up we
John Raven and I were on a different
link and everyone else got sent a
different link I did not not sure what
happened there but glad to have everyone
here that we started when I handed over
to Raven who's gonna be the emcee for
today and she's gonna tell us how things
are going to go down so I don't overdo
Raven excellent thank you all right so
as per usual we'll have John talk for
about 20 to 25 minutes and then we'll
move that into question and answer
period
just put your question in the chat and
I'll call on you and you can ask your
question to John and John rabe is a
military strategist author entrepreneur
he writes the global guerrillas report
and he's been working on networks for a
long time very very early I think in the
90s you started talking about networks
and the power of networks and today
you're gonna be talking about them in
the rise of kovat so John if you would
like to introduce yourself and begin
your talk thank you being here a little
bit of background can you all hear me
all right good
well my background Air Force Academy
astronautical engineer pilot flew
special ops Tier one counterterrorism
for a while and then went off to
Forrester was the first Internet analyst
for them in 95 had all the internet
companies come through my door wrote a
report on I called a personal broadcast
networks back in 96 that kind of talked
about publish/subscribe and
buddy has their own kind of it's
basically the architecture of social
networking I started a company that
ended up selling for quite a bit of
money and in the finance space and then
I did oh I worked for userland software
we did the early blogging stuff and then
went on to write about networks and
warfare at the global guerrillas blog
open source warfare how that was very
difficult for our counter terrorism
organizations to deal with and most
recently I've been writing the global
guerrillas report and it's focused on
the intersection of technology warfare
and politics started off with a focus on
how that's changing our political
structures and our ability to deal with
problems and today I was hoping to talk
about how things have changed and how
we're dealing with that change three
parts first would be how the world has
changed to then how we've changed and
then what we need to do in the future in
order to get do better um my general
premise is that the world is different
than it was 25 years ago it's complex
everyone's familiar with complexity that
means the world is and the problems that
were faced facing are filled with
nonlinearities and uncertainties and
those changes make things very very
difficult to to deal with
you know we've we've interconnected at
an economic level we've interconnected
at a social level technology is
interconnecting us in ways that we're
not fully appreciating
that environment changes the nature of
the problems that we're dealing with
it's it's a very chaotic at times and
word not organizationally adept at
dealing with problems of that type um
the world is also changing us and you
know I go back to McLuhan and I've
written with you know how McLuhan talked
about how technology is rewiring us at a
very deep level
it's rewiring our brains it's changing
the way we think um and it's doing it on
a mass scale I mean we're talking about
social networks that have three and a
half billion people interconnected and
the way we've changed the way we think
is is that it's a turning us from
solitary thinkers you know literary
thinkers people who you know read and
then formulate opinions in in relative
isolation towards people who think in
public who do pattern matching who look
at bits and pieces of information and
then they assemble it into a cohesive
whole and they're doing it in a
collective fashion and that you see
incredible numbers of people now we
spend their whole day pattern matching
and an extreme end of that you get the
cue nods and you get the extremist
groups and then you get the development
of a kind of a tribal ization McLuhan
was always talking about you know how
we're becoming tribal man and he was
only at the beginning of this process
he saw it back in the 60s but you know
tribal man and thinks differently no
tribal thinking is this different it's
it's us versus them either you believe
in my pattern or you don't believe in my
pattern the patterns can actually be
used and also to
make a case that other people are
persecuting you and that they're there
doing bad things to you and that every
bit of information that you see makes
the case and you share it with everybody
else and they all agree with the things
you add to that that pattern
so those are the changes but the problem
is is that the complex problems that
we've been facing and we face three
somewhat so far this in the last 20
years the first one was 9/11 then the
financial crisis and most recently the
pandemic and those were you know started
with the initial event but they took
decades to figure out and deal with and
they were hideously difficult to deal
with over that period of time it's not
just 9/11 but it was the whole global
war on terror the misdirection into our
Iraq the ongoing counter insurgency in
Afghanistan the rise of Isis I mean on
and on and on and on and it just did not
go away was a complex from it was moving
in ways that would in which we couldn't
dampen effectively and the same thing
with the financial crisis with the
austerity and the political dislocation
of cost by that the D legitimization of
the of the political establishment
because they didn't go after the the
fraudsters who brought that on
and if you're familiar with the
financial environment that you know that
the mountains of fraud that were
involved in that financial crisis that
went unpunished and therefore caused the
DD legitimization that we see driving a
lot of the the political turmoil we're
currently experiencing and the current
one and we're just it's not that the the
virus was a surprise and we've dealt
with viruses that are difficult to deal
with and that they are unexpected when
SARS and swine flu we know I mean
they're always unexpected but this one
specifically had certain attributes and
a certain you know process of
development during the early phases that
made it extremely complex it interacted
with the global environment in a way
that made it very very difficult to deal
with everything from the AC mat a
symptomatic transmission to the two-week
a quarantine period that you need to
have versus a two-day foremost
respiratory diseases to its location in
a country that you know where it took
off were a country where they they
buried the information during the first
month I mean other places would have
been picked up earlier and then also
happened to be in a country that was
interconnected on an economic scale or
an economic level with every country in
the world that quickly spread so we mean
all of these little things combined to
make this a hideous problem in it and is
confronting our political organizations
in a way that they're not here to deal
with largely because the system that we
have is built for dealing with
complicated problems and we need
something new we need a different way of
thinking in a different way of making
decisions collectively
in order to deal with problems of this
type now one of the things I dig into is
the idea of David Rowan felts Timman
structure runfeldt was net networks and
network back in their early late 90s
it's a the timin structure is a it's a
kind of a layered approach to looking at
the way we make decisions on a social
level on a collective level and that he
pauses that we have you know three
established decision-making systems a
you know a tribal decision-making system
institutional and a market and that each
of those developed
over time and then we refine them from
their raw state to into something that's
a lot more effective than what they were
when they initially started you know
tribal most people would discount that
but it's actually very important it's
you know he started off as they kind of
the blood tribalism and the feudalism
and then and now it's a kind of
nationalism kind of a it allows us to
have the kind of cool cohesion necessary
to make decisions as a collective unit
tribalism is important because if you
don't view someone else presenting you
with information as somebody who's
related to you or connected to you you
often distrust the information that they
present it's an important component in
in coherent decision-making because of
what we're suffering right now is a you
know a decline in tribalism is that we
don't feel connected we don't feel
related we don't feel like we're part of
the same tribe right now and so when
people present information at the get-go
many people would just immediately
discount like that information was
mented to harmony meant to do me damage
and if you're trying to make decisions
as it collected as a
social unit this is just pure poison it
makes it makes for incoherent
decision-making institutions you know
bureaucracies basically you know max
favors you know bureaucracy is you know
kind of the cockroach of organizational
structures that that infested almost
every area of our lives lives but on the
other hand it done
it bureaucracy is great at mobilizing
resources at analyzing information
getting things done and it's the basis
for which we have you know it's the
basis of science it's the basis of
governance its basis of corporate
architectures it's everywhere and it's a
problem-solving system that we've used
effectively to do many many things over
the past past uh four or five centuries
and then the finally in markets markets
are great at information discovery they
are great allocating resources you know
the early ones ripe for abuse but over
time we learned to regulate them and
control them and put them to effective
use and they're the heart of capitalism
so we have these three effective
decision-making systems that we've tamed
over time and now we need to add a new
one and a new one that's made available
because we're being rewired and it's
because it's the only kind of
decision-making system that could handle
the types of situations we find
ourselves in in a complex global
environment me and the only one that can
actually handle the way we our internal
decision-making systems because we've
been rewired and the old ones don't seem
to work in terms of allowing us to
maintain cohesion and this is a
networked decision-making and people
have talked about that forever
it's very amorphous you know if you
tried to talk about it ten years ago it
was it was really kind of a non-starter
because it was a lot of hand waving and
you know it's out there you kind of see
it now we're starting to get a sense of
what it is and it was made possible
largely through what did the rise of
social networking that we started using
land in other places
back in 2001 and now is everywhere I
mean we have a social network that
connects up three and a half billion
people and one and then there's another
one that's about a billion people in
China these networks are
changing the way we make decisions on a
global scale so how does that get
tangible we saw the rise of social
network decision-making oh wow the first
real instance of that in the political
sphere was when we had the Arab Spring
earlier than that and warfare we saw it
in Iraq we saw open-source warfare it
was a networking it was a network
decision-making that allowed 70
different groups in Iraq to join
together to fight the Americans
effectively and then innovate them I
mean they went through in a year and a
half to two years what it took the Irish
Republican Army as a singular unit 20
years to develop so in terms of
sophistication so we saw it in the Arab
Spring with the the rise of the of open
source protests in Tunisia and they
swept into Egypt and went on from there
toppling governments changing
governments and most recently we saw an
open-source protest take out like the
the Governor of Puerto Rico where lots
of different interests came together and
they created a movement that was focused
on a single goal a single plausible
promise a simple goal and changed the
political structure it's grown more
sophisticated system in it emerged this
network decision-making emerged in the
US political system back in 2015 and 16
we saw the rise of an open-source
political insurgency that picked Trump
as its weapon and took over the
Republican Party it basically rolled it
over ran it destroyed it it's a
completely different organization now
than it was four years ago and they put
Trump into the White House and that
political organization is now being
mirrored on the on the national scale
it's it's evolving its operating at a
stride also the the political spectrum
that we were used to we used to say that
there was left and right and left was
more about you know getting the
government to do more and the right was
more about individual freedoms and the
government doing less and that's not the
case anymore I mean the left and right
or the one wing or the other in in
current political structure is is the
consensus and the dissent and the sent
party is anyone who disagrees with the
consensus up until recently that
consensus was the establishment is okay
it's doing a good job it's evolved since
then to be in this pandemic is in
support of a lockdown in support of
aggressive social distancing and the
dissent is all the reasons why we
shouldn't be doing disagreeing with you
know the treatments disagreeing with the
severity of the social distancing etc
etc the dissent changes they both
operate differently the dissent is based
on a kind of a maneuver warfare it is
constantly shifting through fast
transients moving from one topic to
another never lasting you know never
focusing in on one one Avenue attack it
keeps on shifting until it finds a
productive Avenue of attack it's focused
on disrupting the coherent
decision-making of the at the
psychological level of the of the
opposition the consensus operates more
on a moral warfare framework they're
about finding things in common and
building on those and then disconnecting
people who disagree and growing the
center of gravity growing the
gravitational attraction of that
approach
typically though I found that consensus
is not you know the kind of big tent
approach that you see in traditional
kind of literary old-world politics it's
focused on a specific issue that is
outside of what we see on the left and
right of the political spectrum I'm in
this in this case it's like eradicate
the pandemic very very simple very very
plausible and that it agrees with every
step forward in terms of shutting this
down
driving it to conclusion so leadership
of a consensus isn't about trying to
redirect it to whatever political you
know goal that you have it's about
trying to present it with the next step
towards that goal that common goal the
thing that holds it together solving
tangible problems in a protest that's
how do we get rid of Mubarak what's the
next steps to doing that we've marched
down this street you know we take over
this square we do this or that in in the
pandemic it to be we wear masks because
masks aren't just about reducing the the
viral transmission between individuals
it's also about its multiplicative its
exponential in that it has it it reduces
the effect across the entire population
and across the affects your viral loads
and that's a tangible thing that people
can get their heads around and implement
um the optimum weight above lettuce in
this last two months would have been to
set up say maybe a counter programming
to Trump and and running a kind of a
non-political kind of approach towards
setting up open-source solutions to
solving problems getting more PPE out
getting helping out people who are
isolated that needed extra support and
then presenting that to people in it's
maybe a YouTube live broadcast and
script it and set out the problem get
people to come in
work on the problem and then following
up on those those solutions that they
were being implemented that's the way to
lead it and that could have created an
incredible political force when it can
you know comes to elections it's not
about it attacking the opposition so
this is kind of the early days of how
this kind of back-and-forth dynamic
works
if you look at it if you step back from
the kind of feelings you have about it
right now it's important that we have
both ends of this we have both the
consensus and the dissent in the sense
that the consensus if it gets very very
strong you can lock itself in it can
become so self reinforcing as a network
that it won't change direction even
though it should or won't dissolve even
though it should so for instance say
that pandemic is mostly gone and and the
consensus still locks us in we're not
getting out of the lockdown the siege
mentality that we could continue to have
that kind of siege mentality endure for
years maybe even a decade in some
respects the dissent helps us break out
of that
so I'm trying to censor the dissent is
actually the wrong approach by trying to
counter it using some of these new
techniques people are using these old
congregate areas and techniques that
never really worked about trying to you
know do just in time
counter dissent information trying to
get rid of what they call it this info
and stuff like that yeah that's not the
way to do it the way to do it is to
increase the gravitational attraction of
the consensus by solving the problem by
moving it forward so in general we're
going to refine these mechanisms refine
this method of network decision making
and make it better over time and and and
and tame it like we did with bureaucracy
and tame it like we did markets and tame
it like we did tribalism from the kind
of old blood tribalism of the past that
was incredibly bloody and then in the
early stage nationalism that was
incredibly bloody to the kind of soft
nationalism we have today but we had
just recently um I think we can do it
[Music]
it's it's it's gonna be an interesting
process
I could probably dive off into a
thousand different subsections talk
about AI or whatever
believe me one last thought is that the
big problem that we're facing in the in
the 21st century the kind of challenge
we have collectively and what networked
decision-making is going to help us do
is is is how do we maintain cohesion
that complex world
and there's three big systems competing
for that there is what we're doing in
the US is this consensus dissent this
kind of dynamic method I think it's a
lot more creative it has a lot of
potential to become very dynamic and
allows us the maximum freedom of
innovation and and movement going
forward if we can figure it out before
it wrecks us the other way is to lock it
all down and use network means to
centralize their decision-making very
much like a control system on an
aircraft where you have a single pilot
and that's China's method with the their
approach to
to gamifying you know network
decision-making and then there's the you
know a couple other approaches on in
Europe is pretty much ignoring it and
they're destroying network information
and lot of fiying you know the kind of a
Luddite approach where they're they're
hiding from it you know behind a veil of
privacy destroying that information
trying to you know keep the world back
in the 20th century the way it was
that's not effective and then the
Russian approach which is the government
spreads the diffident fellow spreads the
disruption makes everyone a dissident
and that it maintains cohesion through
kind of a mafia style back you know
backdoor ownership of the major
corporations and you know that's why
Putin is the wealthiest man in the world
at least until the oil prices not maybe
not maybe recently because the oil
prices are down
but that cross-ownership allows a kind
of cohesive core to exist um I think
that's a you know unproductive long term
I think the Chinese system has is has
the potential to become they probably
the the most oppressive governance
solution that we've seen ever because it
can actually censor and control you at
an individual level to a degree that
we'd never ever seen before I mean even
in the most oppressive countries of the
past there was at least a little bit of
leeway inside your own house or inside
your own head and this is this is
something that you get get into that so
um yeah it's it's it's refining the
system that we're we're in right now
it's dynamic its connection chaotic it's
but it's the one we have and and and so
the extra decision-making support we
need in order to handle the problems
that we have I mean for instance the
network decision-making system in the
u.s. provided 90 percent of the response
to mitigating the the pandemic it
instituted the social distancing on its
own without government support weeks
before the government actually joined on
board and it for demand destruction and
through coercion got corporations to
change the behavior you know close their
doors or or go to online working so it
did the heavy lifting on this
I mean the government restrictions were
just basically codifying or formalizing
what had already happened with this the
social decision makers with a consensus
decision making and it already occurred
so um anyway anyone any questions or is
that a good coverage I've missed
something or or is that a lot of fire
host you a little bit sorry about that
yeah I have about two years of reports
and you know actually about three years
reports that are writing on this you
know report a month in this last couple
months I've been doing a kind of a
steady stream of analysis
and what I call a pandemic working paper
so every day I kind of update it and
then and try to get you know a couple
months out ahead of where it's going
either debunking stuff or pointing in
the right direction as to how things are
going in it that seems to work with I
run it all under a patreon it works
pretty nicely right
yeah the global guerrillas report it's
like you know John rabe on patreon it's
a pretty straightforward good group of
people they add to the you know the
value of the experience so if you want
more in-depth that's where to go it's
just sometimes I can there's a lot of
information to process absolutely so if
people want to start throwing their
questions in the chat and then I can
call on you and you can meet yourself
and ask your questions in the meantime
John I was wondering so as an individual
how do you know that you're part of some
sort of network effect and then how do
you kind of Milan eight those
connections and make them stronger how
would we be able to connect to networks
and what are some tools that we could
use to make those network connections
stronger well my general premise is they
in this current environment you're only
as smart as your network all right
because there's no way that you could
you could verify all the information
that's being thrown at you
no way you could put it into you know
the proper context no way you can
process it no way you can make sense of
this environment in any meaningful way
without having a group of people that
you're connected to helping you do that
helping you pattern manage happening it
makes sense helping you a structure that
decision making so um it's it's a tough
process to actually put it together put
together the right kind of network it's
one of those things you have to do bit
by bit
you have to curate it you have to you
know prune it if you've done gardening
this is the same kind of thing it's you
got your
a lot of the same techniques you use in
in in maintaining a good garden apply
here don't be afraid to prune sometimes
block people a lot of people are
disjointed a lot of people become kind
of unmoored by the kind of speed and
duplex city of what we're facing here
they just can't handle it and they they
go off the rails and they attack you so
you just have to act quickly try to get
a diversity of sources cheese I mean
it's like in the last election before
the the kind of political networks
really became visible you know I looked
at the my network and it was across the
board I mean they were voting for
everybody so so I saw uh you know all
these different perspectives all at once
what I found in in in general and he
said when it comes to anything having to
do with politics is that you won't see
what the other side is seeing in unless
you're inside that silo right so if
there's some event and it will get
amplified in in one silo and you'll see
it go up and then if it gets to bunk'd
you'll only see them in the other silo
right you know and that's really
important to be able to see both sides
so you know it helps balance your your
your perspective on things and you start
to understand that it's really not there
isn't really as much of a tribal right
and wrong here it's just there's there's
a dynamic process underway um but you
know rely on your network listen to what
they have to say if you find something
that you don't know if it's correct or
not put it up to your network and let
them help you don't figure it out
somebody in your network if it's big
enough and is you've taken time to grow
it I will say hey that sucks look over
here look at this alright think in
public Twitter do you do you think of
Twitter as being a good well you know in
general I mean I've been blogging since
2001
and because I did to one of those early
blogging companies we did use the land
we did RSS we did the whole kind of
publish/subscribe network in connection
kind of thing pretty early on and so I'm
and I put my name on it right away I
called it John Rob's weblog so that was
my first blog and and so rather trying
to hide behind yes everyone early on oh
my god I gotta hide myself and so I
started to think hey you got to think in
public you you know that's the best way
you you throw out your ideas you process
information you share it and that
feedback you get makes it makes your
ideas better and it's a process that if
you can learn it it helps you it helps
you stabilize yourself over the long
term and that's good it improves our
quality we're thinking so yeah and your
network network because the great thing
about the Internet is is that you can
attract people that are interested in
the things that you're interested in so
by covering a topic and sharing
expertise other people who similar
expertise flow or aggregate around and
that's good thing that's gross it keeps
you it keeps you honest too because if
you get too far out on a limb people
call you got right and you do that for
other people too yeah great dance your
question or do you want no that's
perfect yeah yeah and just take the risk
a little bit you know
okay Scott would you like to unmute
yourself and ask your question sure well
hi John I've reached out to you on
Facebook the other day
hey yeah it's great to listen in thank
you my my question was about how many
networks I I'm working in space right
now where I have to pull in all that
information from different different
tribes and different networks and try to
make sense of it all and
I'm I'm pretty overwhelmed by the fire
hose of information so how many networks
are are you a part of wave how do you
know when you can't keep tracking them
anymore okay well Wow you know I tend to
follow the things that I'm interested in
so and that's usually been my guide
so if there's too much information on a
given Network it's it's too crowded it's
too verbose I may just step out of it
just this isn't for me I'll print it if
it's a it goes off in tangents things
I'm not interested it I tend to focus on
you know on the networks and join the
networks that I they consistently give
me good information good signal and
avoid the ones that have high levels of
noise because that noise can drown out
your your thinking so find the ones that
are good and keep those and then add
very slowly you know try it out if it
doesn't work if it's not adding a lot of
signal prune it yeah the mistake would
be to try to take all of it in all at
once you're joining a bunch at once
make a list slowly work through the list
one of the ones that are good find the
people on those networks that are good
and try to tighten those connections we
had a thing when we were doing that when
I was doing it reports at Forester as an
analyst it's like in any given topic
there's always one person that's really
amazing they really get it they see it
better than everybody else and you find
that person and you pick their brain and
you connect with them and you keep them
in your circle and you do that often
enough you'll end up with a pretty
amazing network over time
to help at all
okay he's not it does great John I was
wondering if you had about 10 minutes to
stay a little bit after the hour mark to
answer additional questions if not
that's okay but sure yeah okay and if
everybody else can stay we'll have ten
minutes after the hour where we can
continue to ask John some questions
thank you for that appreciate it and
okay let's move to the next one
no yeah and do you want to unmute
yourself and ask your question hey Don
I've been operating drink Ovid with a
couple different organizations that are
sort of emergent and decentralized and
network mapping has being a really key
feature of helping these organizations
to actually see and understand what's
going on in the networks I'm finding
that some people are like really all
over understanding the networks and some
people are just kind of like well what
do I do with this I'm really curious
about your thoughts on just the
importance of a network to actually look
at itself like to be able to be
self-aware and what role that has to
play great you're talking more looking
at it more from an organizational
framework or perspective where you're
looking at how your network is operating
and trying to improve it for time oh wow
that's why I remember the there early
early approaches to this even back in
the 90s where they were doing kind of
like the informal networks in any
organization and the end the formal
hierarchies and trying to you know see
the differences in how to leverage that
informal hierarchy or that formal set of
connections to what we're having what
we're seeing today we have the outside
inside in terms of self-awareness
I'm not sure there are any
straightforward rules to doing that yet
but I at least I've seen I can I don't
have him off the top of my head is that
been something I've been focusing on I
mean I've been focusing more on the
macro dynamics in terms of the way I've
been approaching my research so I
probably don't have as much you know
high-quality thinking to provide you on
that as I'd like
sorry about the cold no where it's just
thought I'd see ya oh yeah I know I mean
you know if I thought about it for a
while maybe I come up with something
then I'll send it to you but I mean is
it rather than just spew on about it
brother what
excellent great Peter I'm a little
nervous asking this question maybe like
15% no queuing on so let me let me think
about how I should phrase this so yeah
McLuhan you know he talked about the
global village and then you can switch
that to talk about the global theater
and that the culture war it feels like a
theatrics at times there's like you know
with cue and on there's like a mythology
there's like this comic-book aesthetics
but I'm curious like when it comes to
like pair of political or Peter Dale
Scott calls pair political machinations
or you know the the criminal overworld
which the cumin on people are gesturing
towards how do you sense make into that
if there's so much noise and if there is
some signal there alright yeah there's a
problem with pattern matching right is
that you can get locked into a pattern
that that's wrong from the get-go and
you keep you can you can keep on
matching new information towards to that
pattern long past this ex predate and
long past that when it was when it was
actually viable and that can lead to a
lot of excess and it can also develop
this into this kind of us versus em you
know this is our pattern and these
people and here's all the reasons why
they're there persecuting us and why
they're doing wrong you know extreme
pattern matching at that at the very at
the very extreme end would be is very we
could lead to violence as we seen with
in many of the attacks we've had over
the last couple years where people have
seen all of these reasons why these
other people are are attacking us I mean
talk about full village I look at the
you push through that its global
villagers right global villagers
extremely interested in everyone else's
problems extremely noisy and
occasionally extremely bloody minded you
know it's us you know this is our
standard and these people are violating
that standard yeah in terms of figuring
out what works and what does it is watch
I mean be careful that the the pattern
that you're that you're working on it
doesn't become the kind of this
sprawling pattern that you know
everyone's force hitting all these
different sub patterns and it becomes
this quilt of insanity right
and everyone's adding to it and
everyone's spending their days you know
sifting through all of the bits and
pieces of information as it flows
through I mean the way weights change
our thinking is that we don't read
something in its entirety a cohesive
thought and then it's you know spend
some time thinking about it and
formulating opinion on it and in
structuring it we immerse ourselves in
the flow and it because the volume of
information is and the diversity of
information is so high that we just let
it flow over us and we fit take out bits
and pieces that we then match to a
pattern right and then we do it with
other folks and if it's in this kind of
crazy patchwork it can get really nutty
which is you see often some of that in
the in the queue and on stuff too
yeah so my follow-up question is like
Ken Wilber quotes coming to mind you
know no one's smart enough to be hundred
percent wrong and so when you look at
these sort of memetic tribes or what
Jordan Hall calls a self organizing
collective intelligences it's like how
do you find the signal there through all
the noise especially if they're talking
about things like the inner machinations
of the deep state even though maybe like
98% of it could be
crap like how do you find the signal
there well okay so um any you know large
scale or comprehensive answer I'd be
pretty skeptical of right I'm I find
signal mostly in point to set you know
it is set over a specific topic or a
specific issue and somebody is looking
at it in a different way
they present it it's been hit at or
pushed back from a righty different
sources and it's withstood those
assaults and then it's high-quality
information then I can trust that if
somebody has an answer for everything it
is something you have to kind of look at
with skepticism the world is you know
way too complex for that there isn't any
one answer any you know comprehensive
answer and signal comes in in bits and
pieces and it's conditional is it it's
temporary often it may not be this it
may not be signal a week from now so you
know look at it try to find the bits and
pieces of information or signal at the
you know you find finding find useful
that's withstood the counter pressure it
makes sense and then go with that that
makes sense it's a good answer Thanks
great let's hear from wrong hey John I
may have just missed this but when you
were talking about the different
approaches to maintaining cohesion in
the current crisis I got what she said
about China Europe Russia etc but I
think I heard you say you thought the US
approach was kind of working and I
wondered it was there a quickie way you
characterized what with that approaches
okay well it's consensus descent it's a
dynamic process okay and it's not
necessarily working on all cylinders now
it's gonna take a long time to kind of
formalize this and put it in a structure
actually provides us consistent results
just like a market just like a
bureaucracy just like tribalism you got
a package it and you got to scrape off
all the cruft
and turn it into something that that
produces higher quality results over the
long term and then what we're seeing
with with the network decision making
right now but I like the dynamism I mean
it's very similar to what happened in
the Cold War is like you had one system
that was there were two systems that
were competing and the one that was more
dynamic was more innovative over time a
lot more diversity of views and and
development and it innovated the other
and I think that's going to be the case
here's is the one that's right on the
edge of chaos and he can keep a society
cohesive while riding that edge while
we're riding that you know that bleeding
edge of potential so we have the
consensus really emerged and was very
effective at it early in early response
to code to the pandemic sifted through
the information and people found it and
I mean I wrote my January report
entitled it pandemic right so I was like
one of those pieces of information that
was contributing and people formulated
ideas as to how to respond to it social
distancing floated to the top and people
implemented and people asked companies
to work you know that they would set up
work back home and start restricting and
they started changing their demand
behavior and you know airline traffic
started dropping number of passengers
buh buh buh buh buh buh and even now we
don't have you know formal restrictions
or governor searches on flying
yeah it's ninety-six percent below what
it was a year ago so um that was
effective it made decision earlier than
the formal bureaucratic decision-making
systems did in the US and in Europe
there was also a dynamic response to
testing I mean the bureaucratic
decision-making system that we've been
planning for pandemics forever but we
expected them to go slower we didn't
expect it you know to move as quickly as
they did in this to this complex
environment so the FDA gave the CDC sole
or monopoly control over the production
of a test in order to emphasize quality
over quantity and they were more worried
about the downside effects of the lower
quality test and so that they gave that
monopoly I to the CDC the CDC obviously
flubbed it so by the end of February we
figured out that they did flub it and
then they'd opened it up they said okay
well anyone any public lab or public
health lab that has certification and
complex testing go ahead have at it and
then all of a sudden the tests went from
300 tests a day in March first to three
weeks later we're pressing through 60 or
70,000 so it's like amazing the kind of
all hands kind of network response that
can happen you know if if it's properly
kind of put to use
you know the bureaucratic response it's
been really slow and cumbersome I don't
know if any country actually has gotten
it right you know some have reduced this
but they've destroyed their economy in
the process some are increasing deaths
and yet they're keeping their economy
bubbling along they're not being
effective the ones that probably are the
most of did the best were the ones that
closed off the borders early like Taiwan
and Greece and Japan I mean they
externalize the quarantine because they
knew that there were so many different
ways in which they could travel and it
could travel very very quickly they
stumbled into the right approach
so uh yeah we're gonna get better at
using networks and and and and network
responses you know one thing that really
struck me is when you you look at the
epidemiological models and you talk
listen to how they talk about their
assumptions what goes into those is that
none of them expected any more than say
10 percent or 15 percent of voluntary
support for social distance it was it's
like when you get 60 to 70 percent and
it's all voluntary that was just blew
their minds it wasn't possible and that
they you know that kind of thing is like
happening on its own is like it's not
something that they had baked in so we
have a new system of getting things done
that if we could really get our arms
around it and make it effective we can
get things done really really quickly of
course it to the downside of that is
that it if it can lock yourself in and
and get things done it's hard to turn it
off once you get it going so that's why
the decision can't you know you don't
want to start to shut down that dissent
function through through internet
censorship and lockdowns and anyone who
says anything that's like a little
outside the norm you know you don't want
to block those folks out because it's
you're you're wiping out potential
signal wiping out potential innovation
wiping out a reason why you don't want
that consensus to lock in as as tightly
as it has it's better to keep it there
as annoying as it is right it's better
to have it there than not so we're
learning these lessons I mean look it's
tough it's it's dislocating it feels
horrible at times watching what's going
on and listening to the conversations
but you know we're learning how to do
this and the rest of the world isn't
and if we can figure this out if we can
figure out how to package this consensus
into set and network decision-making and
learn how to utilize it and learn how to
leverage it and make it work for us it's
a gift for everybody it's like it's a
way out of this kind of mess but on the
other you know if we don't it's a you
know will rip ourselves apart and
Makluan think didn't think that we could
figure this out until we actually
created a technological artifact a
social technological artifact you know
we figured out the technology that
actually helped us move this and I think
a eye on the subject what the social
networks are are capable of doing with
AI support make this easier over time
once we figure out how to do it right
now it's mostly focused on censorship
and add promotion but those ideas may be
critical to our future to getting the
turning this into a high-performance
decision-making system and you know kind
of taking a little bit of the Croft off
a little bit of the more dangerous stuff
out without damaging his performance um
you know maybe I'm how do you put it
maybe if I use this metaphor it's like
okay my background at least did when I
was an astronaut a plunger and was
thinking about okay control systems that
was my subspecialty so I think in terms
of control systems dealing with complex
environments and if you want like for
instance an aircraft to be
high-performance you add instability
into the design right you make it
unstable and you use a control system to
compensate for that so if you want it to
be able to turn faster and and and
perform better you have instability that
you build into it and you build a better
control system to handle that
instability we're facing instability
both in the environment that we're in as
well as internally because we see our
politics and the way we make decisions
internally has been changed
so we've got instability into the into
the aircraft as well as the external
environment and now we have to build a
control system necessary to be able to
allow us to navigate successfully or to
to do things now we can lock it down
where the you know single pilot making
all the decisions like China's doing in
Russia to a certain extent in a
different way is doing or we can make
the plane smarter
make the overall system smarter so we
can respond to the external environment
quicker and it can make better decisions
overall and I think that's what this
consensus descent is starting us in the
direction or we're starting in that
direction yeah if you if you once you
start seeing things in this consensus
descent framework it it can relax you a
little bit because you don't you don't
see it as this us versus them anymore or
that this that were you know going off
in it in the totally wrong direction
yeah so I mean as I answer your question
they get you get it towards where you
wonder you yeah absolutely thank you
Thanks and then Keith raised his hand
because he had something specific he
wanted to respond to from what you were
saying so Keith if you want to bring
that in and then maybe if we have time
we'll get to Rose's question after that
yeah yeah so I wanted to ask a question
about alternative networks and which
sorts of networks are the highest signal
that we can be relating with and I found
a number of networks like and recently
since coated interesting a lot of it has
come out of Taiwan I've been really
inspired by the V Taiwan system and the
g0v networks that are going on out there
that they have had such an effective
pandemic response with in instituting
contact tracing resource supply networks
all in a
decentralized fashion but locally out
here in and I've been doing some
research trying to map out where some of
these things are happening all over the
world and some of the network questions
that I have or how to connect up
different networks that are you know
where people are having these
innovations that you don't see because
you're not speaking the same language
and you're not in the same network so
how do you bridge the gap between
networks but also it seems to me that we
need to be there's so much like with
Tristan Harris's work there's just so
many issues coming in with you know
extreme algorithmic filters and filter
bubbles and I'm sure that's mostly par
for the course most people understand
what I'm talking about there but the
extreme filtering of information towards
sensationalism and moral outrage right
and so it seems to me that that's like
an inherent outgrowth of the ad model
and so that if you want to not be
subject to those types of filters and
different you can go towards new
networks like shtetl but I think has
like some peer-to-peer that's where the
server is decentralized and so the it
seems to me I'm wondering what networks
you found to be like what alternative
networks you found that are most
effective at failure cases of the
networks that are most popular today and
how we can engage with those networks
and how we can bridge the gap between
networks that are growing globally yeah
well I spend most my time on the big
networks you know I've been on Twitter
since what 2007 and and Facebook and and
through my own blog
most of my stuff now is back Jim so the
people I've collected over the years so
I have you know large chat groups that
I'm running in the background and their
sound folks and I appreciate their input
and they appreciate mine and we keep
ourselves grounded
way you know what I do when I look at
new networks is more I'm looking at the
technology so I used to be a tech
analyst oh look at those stuff and
figure out what's good about how they're
actually sifting and sorting it's that
because I don't necessarily find the
high quality thinkers there you know I
find the high quality tech and solutions
there see what I mean I'm filing more
chase after the people the nodes that
are really producing high quality
content over time that's war you know
what what I'm chasing after and and and
when I look at a new network it's really
just more on the tech side that help it
up or no that's probably not it's not
you want you want some secret outward
yeah yeah yeah yeah it feel like I'm
also orienting a lot towards individuals
but frequently those individuals end up
orienting me to new networks like the
stoah is actually an interesting network
and of itself so I'm wondering are there
specific individuals or specific kind of
networks that those individuals are
running that you find particularly
really high quality that you might might
not be in this particular space the snow
isn't well um and I have prep you know
old friends that people have I've been
talking to forever like Jordan green
Hall and Jim rotten Dan Suarez and folks
like that I have a and they have
networks that they're part of military
folks that I and the deep government
folks because I have all the CIA NSA DoD
side they're not on public networks as a
rule so almost everything is done on the
backs Channel and those tend to be
innovative people which they don't want
to actually flag that and said their
organizations either so anything those
guys those those public guys are
associated with I'm usually associated
with