[Music]
hello and welcome to the portals first
episode today I'll be sitting down with
Peter teal now if you've been following
me on Twitter or perhaps as a podcast
guest on other podcasts you may know
that I work for teal capital but one of
the things that people ask me most
frequently is given that you are so
different than your boss and friend
Peter teal how is it the two of you get
along what is it that you talk about
where do you agree in disagree now oddly
Peter and I both do a fair amount of
public speaking but I don't believe that
we've ever appeared in public together
and very few people have heard our
conversations what's more he almost
never mentions me and I almost never
mentioned him in our public lives
so hopefully this podcast will give some
indication of what a conversation is
like is somebody who I find one of the
most interesting and influential
teachers of our time somebody who has
influenced all sorts of people in
Silicon Valley involved with technology
and inventing tomorrow and who is often
not seen accurately in my opinion by the
commentariat and the regular people who
a pine as pundits in the world of
science and technology I hope you'll
find Peter as fascinating as I do
without further ado this is the first
episode of the portal thanks for joining
hello and welcome you found the portal
I'm your host Eric Weinstein and I think
this is our first interview show to
debut and I'm here with my good friend
and employer mr. Peter Tila Peter
welcome to the portal well Eric thanks
for having me on your program know this
is a great honor one of the things I
think is kind of odd is is that lots of
people know that I work for you and many
people know that we're friends but even
though we both do a fair amount of
public speaking I don't think we've ever
appeared anyplace in public together is
that your recollection as well I I can't
think of a single occasion so this
proves were not the same person we're
not the same person you were not my
alter ego but you know on that front I
think it is kind of an odd thing for me
I mean we met each other I think when I
was in my late 40s and if you'd ever
told me that the person who would be
most likely to complete my thoughts
accurately would be you I never would
have believed it never having met you we
have somewhat opposite politics we have
very different life histories how do you
think it is that we've come to share
such a lot of thinking I mean I have to
say that a lot of my ideas are cross
pollinated with yours so you occur in a
lot of my my standard riffs how do you
think that is that we came to different
conclusions but share so much of a body
of thought it's um
I'm always hard-pressed to answer that
since the conclusions all seem correct
to me so you know it's uh
and it's always mysterious why why we
right it feels like we're the outliers
and we're the only or among the very few
people that reach some of these
conclusions about sort of the relative
stagnation and science and technology
the ways in which this is arranging our
culture our politics our society and
then how we need to try to find some
some bold ways out some bold ways to
find a new portal to different a
different world and and I think there's
sort of different ways the two of us
came at this I feel like you got you got
to some of these um perspectives at a
very early point sort of the mid-1980s
that something was incredibly off I
probably got there in the early mid 90s
when I was from this tract law firm job
in New York City and somehow everything
felt like it was more like a Ponzi
scheme it wasn't really going towards
the future everyone had promised you and
in the sort of elite you know
undergraduate in law school education I
had gone through and so yes I think I
think we're sort of point we we got to
these insights but it's it's still
striking how um you know how how out of
sync they feel with with so much of our
society even even in 2019 yeah I mean
it's a very striking thing for me and
it's also something that's frustrated me
sometimes when I look forward to you
being interviewed is that it often feels
to me that so much time is spent on the
initial question like are we somewhat
stagnating in science and technology
that rather than assuming that as a
conclusion which I think we can
make a pretty convincing argument that
there has been a lot of stagnation it
seems to me that a lot of these
conversations hang at an earlier level
and so one of the things that I was
hoping to do in this which is I think
your second long-form podcast you did
Dave Rubin show some time ago is to sort
of presuppose some of the basics that
people will be familiar with who've been
following either one of us or both of us
and to get to the part of the
conversation that I think never gets
explained and discussed because people
are always so hung up at the initial
frame issue so with your indulgence
let's talk a little bit about what you
and I see and any differences that we
might have about this period of time
that we find ourselves in in 2019 what
would you say is the dominant narrative
before we get to what might be our
shared kind of counter narrative
well um you know the dominant narrative
is probably fraying and it's been
fraying for some time but it it is
something like you know we're in a world
of generally fast scientific and
technological progress things are
getting better all the time
there's some imbalances that maybe need
to be smoothed out there's some corner
case problems maybe there's some
dystopian risks because the technology
so fast and so scary it might be
destructive but it's a it's a generally
acceleration ax story and then there's
some sort of micro adjustments within
that that that one would have to would
have to make it is there's you know
there's sort of are all sorts of ways
that I think it's fraying you know I
think 2008 was a big watershed moment
but but that's still what's what's
largely largely been holding together
and then you know there's sort of
different institutions when you look at
you can look at the universities where
you know sort of this attract thing it's
costing more every year but it's still
worth it it's still an investment in the
future and and this was probably already
questionable in the 1980s nineteen
in college debt in the United States in
2000 was three hundred billion dollars
now it's around you know 1.6 1.7
trillion and so there's a way in which
the story was shaky 20 years ago and
today is is much Shaker it's still sort
of holding together somehow so in this
story in essence the great dream is that
your children will become educated they
will receive a college education they
will find careers and then in this
bright and dynamic society they can look
forward to a future that is brighter
than the future that previous
generations look forward to yes I think
now again I think I think people are
hesitant to actually articulated quite
that way because that already sounds not
quite true to well there's a year to
your point they've been adding epicycles
for some time so so it's maybe it's a
bright future but it's really different
from the parents we can't quite know and
they've you know they have all these uh
these new devices they have an iPhone
and they can text really fast in the
iPhone we can't even understand what the
younger generation is doing so there's
so maybe it's better on it but better
has sort of an objective scale maybe
it's just different and unmeasurable but
but better in sort of an unmeasurable
way so they're sort of our ways it's
gotten modified but but that would still
be you know very powerfully intact
narrative and then and then that there
are sort of straightforward things we
can be doing the system's basically
working and it's basically gonna
continue to work and there's sort of a
global version of this there's a US
version there's a upper-middle-class US
version there are a lot of different
variations on this so it always strikes
me that one of the things that you do
very well is that you're willing and you
know you're famously a chess player
you're willing to make certain
sacrifices in order to advance a point
and in this case I think you and I would
both agree that there are certain areas
that have continued to follow the growth
story more than the general economy and
that you have to kind of give those
stories their due before you get to see
this new picture where do you think the
future has been relatively more bright
in recent years well again I you know I
I sort
date the this era of stagnate relative
stagnation and slowed progress all the
way back to the 1970 so I think it's
been close to half a century that we've
been in this in this era of seriously
slowed slowed progress obviously a very
big exception this has been the world of
bits computers internet mobile internet
software and so Silicon Valley has
somehow been this up in this dramatic
exception you know it and where's the
world of atoms it has been has been much
slower for for something like 50 years
and you know when I was an undergraduate
at Stanford in the late 1980s almost all
engineering disciplines in retrospect
were really bad feels to go into people
already knew at the time you shouldn't
go into nuclear engineering aero-astro
was a bad idea but you know Chemical
Engineering mechanical engineering all
these things were were bad fields
computer science was that would have
been a very good field to go into and
and that's been sort of a an area where
there's been tremendous growth so I
thought that's that's a that's sort of
the the signature one that I would I
would uh I would cite there questions
about you know how healthy it is at this
point even within that field so so you
know there's the iPhone is now looking
the same as it did seven eight years ago
so that's the iconic invention not quite
so sure and so there's been sort of a
definitely a change in the tone even
within Silicon Valley
in the last five six years on on this
but that that had been that had been one
that was very very decoupled on the
decoupling itself had had some odd
effects where where if you have sort of
a narrow cone of progress around this
world of vets then the people who are in
the those parts of the economy have more
to do with atoms will feel like they're
being left behind so there was something
there was something about the tech
narrative that had this very um didn't
necessarily feel inclusive didn't feel
like like everybody was getting ahead in
one of the ways I've described it is
that we live in a world where I'm you
know we've been working on the Star Trek
computer in Silicon Valley but we don't
have anything else from Star Trek we
don't have the warp drive we don't have
the transporter can't you know
re-engineer
in sort of this cornucopia world where
there's no scarcity and and then you
know how good is a society where you
have a well-functioning Star Trek
computer but nothing else from Star Trek
yeah that's incredibly juicy I mean one
of the ways that I attempted to encode
something which in part I got from you
was to say of course your iPhone is
amazing it's all that's left of your
once limitless future because it's the
collision of the communications and the
semiconductor revolutions that did seem
to continue and I I date the the sort of
break in the economy to something like
1972 73 74 it's really quite sharp in my
mind is it that way in yours yes it's it
was probably like I'd say 1968 people
still you know the the narrative
progress seemed intact on 73 it was
somehow over so somewhere in that in
that five year period you know one I
mean I've sort of had you know the 1969
version was we landed on the moon in
July of 1969 and you know Woodstock
starts three weeks later and maybe
that's that's one way you could describe
the cultural shift you can describe it
in terms of the oil shocks of 1973 at
the at the back end there probably you
know with with the benefit of hindsight
the were things are already framed by
the late 1960s so the environment was
getting dramatically worse you have the
right the Graduate movies you should go
into plastics I think it was 1968 or 69
and that would have you know that would
have um so there were sort of things
were where the story was fraying but but
I think was still broadly intact in 1968
and somehow seemed very off by 73 now
something that actually I'm scanning my
memory and I don't know that we've had
this conversation so I'm curious to hear
your answer one of the things that I
found surprising is that I think I can
tell a reasonably decent story about how
this is a result of a scientific problem
rather than the mismanagement of our
future do you believe that if we assume
that there was this early 1970s
structural change in the economy that it
was largely a
sort of man-made problem which is what
we seemingly implicitly always assumed
or might it be a scientific one and let
me give you the one exotic example that
really kind of drives it home for me
I think quarks were discovered in 1968
and to find out that the proton and
neutron are comprised of up and down
quarks is an incredible change in our
picture of the world yet it has no
seeming implications for industry and I
I started thinking about this question
are we somehow fenced out of whatever
technologies are to come that we sort of
exhausted one orchard of low-hanging
fruit and haven't gotten to the next yes
um yes so there's always I think one one
one way to parse this question of
scientific technological stagnation is
sort of nature versus culture um didn't
ate the ideas in nature run out or at
least the useful ideas maybe we find
make some more discoveries but they're
not useful or the easily useful easily
useful it's the sort of nature so it's a
problem with nature and then the the
cultural problem is that there was
actually a lot to be discovered or a lot
that could be made useful but somehow
the culture had gotten gotten deranged
and I sort of go back and forth on those
two explanations I think it's it's it's
it's very complicated obviously we had
um I think in physics you'd say even
though you know I mean probably even the
fundamental discovery stopped after the
mid-1970s but but certainly the
translation didn't happen quarks don't
matter for chemistry and chemistry's
what matters on a you know on a human
level I would I would say there was a
lot that happened in biochemistry so
sort of the you know not chemistry down
to sort of chemistry up the interface
between chemistry and biology and that's
where I would be inclined to say there's
a lot more that could happen and has not
quite happened because maybe the
problems are hard maybe but maybe also
the cultural institutions for
researching them are a restrictive it's
too heavily regulated in certain ways
and and it's been just somewhat slower
than one would have expected in the
1970s so maybe it's really just a
constant dialogue between nature and
culture yes
obviously because obviously if nature
has stopped then the culture is going to
do range so there's a way in which
culture is linked to nature and then you
know the culture deranged is it also
will look like nature stops so so I
think these things are theirs they're
probably elements of both but I am I am
always um optimistic in the sense that I
think we could have done better I think
we could do better
I think there are you know it's not
necessarily the case that we can advance
on all fronts in every direction but I
think there there's more space on the
frontier than just in this world of bits
so I think there are various dimensions
on atoms where we could and we could be
advancing and we just we just have
chosen not to why do you think it's so
hard to convince people that because
both of us have had this experience
where we sit down let's say to an
interview and somebody talks about the
dizzying pace of change and both you and
I see almost I mean it's almost
objectively true I have this test which
is going to a room and subtract off all
of the screens yes how do you know
you're not in 1973 but for issues of
design there aren't that many clues yes
there are well let's you know all sorts
of things one can one can point to I
mean you know I always point to the
productivity data and economics which
aren't great and then you get into
debates
you know how accurately are those being
measured you um you have the sort of
intergenerational thing where you know
our generation Gen X is at a tougher
time than the boomers the Millennials
seem to be having a much tougher time
then you know either us or the boomers
had so there seems to be this
generational thing so there are some of
these sort of macroeconomic variables
that seem that seem pretty off the UM
the direct scientific questions I think
are very hard to get a handle on and the
reason for this is that in late
modernity which we're living it on
there's simply too much knowledge for
any individual human to understand all
of it and so you know and so the the and
so in this world of extreme hyper
specialization where it's narrower
narrower subsets of experts policing
themselves and talking about how great
they are this
theorist talking about how great string
theory is the cancer researchers talking
about how they're just about to cure
cancer the quantum computer researchers
are just about to build you know quantum
computer there will be a massive
breakthrough and then if you're to say
that all these fields not much is
happening people just don't have the
authority for this and this is somehow a
very different feel for science or
knowledge than you would have had in
1800 or even in 1900 in or 1800 Goethe
could still understand just about
everything
where 1900 Hilbert could still
understand just about all of mathematics
and and so the sort of um the sort of
specialization I think has made it a
much harder question to get a handle on
the political cut I have on the
specialization is always that that if
you analyze the politics of science the
specialization should make you
suspicious it should because it's gotten
harder to evaluate what's going on then
it's presumably gotten easier for people
to lie and to exaggerate and then one
should be a little bit suspicious and
that's that's a sort of my starting my
starting bias well in mind mine as well
and I think perhaps sort of the craziest
idea to come out of all of this and
again you met your version of this in a
law firm which is predicated upon the
idea that a partner would hire
associates and the associates would hope
to become partners who could then hire
associates and so that has that
pyramidal structure and in the
university system every professor is
trying to Train graduate students to
become research professors to Train
graduate students and I think that you
know the universities were probably the
most aggressive of these sort of things
I've called embedded growth obligations
but the implication of this idea that we
structured almost everything on an
expectation of growth and then this
growth that was expected ran out it
wasn't as high and as stable and as
technologically led as before has a
pretty surprising implication which is I
mean let's not dance around it it feels
like almost universally all of our
institutions are now pathological or
sociopathic or whatever you want to call
them yes yes I suppose there's sort of
two two ways one could imagine going
you know you had these expectations of
great growth great expectations he's the
Charles Dickens novel from the 19th
century when I had great expectations
and then you can try to UM be honest and
say the expectations are dialed down or
you can continue to say everything's
great and it just happens not to be
working out for you but it's working out
for people in general and and somehow
it's been very hard to have the sort of
honest reset and and and the incentives
have been for the institutions to drange
until I so there's a pop there's
probably a way the universities could
function if they did not grow you know
you'd be honest most people in PhD
programs don't become professors maybe
you'd make the PhD programs much shorter
maybe it'd be much more selective you
let fewer people and there would be some
way you could sort of adjust it and the
institutions could still be much
healthier than they are today but that's
that's not the path that that's seeming
that was taken and and you know
something like this could have been done
in the law firm context or maybe maybe
um you uh you still at the same
percentage of people become partner but
the partners don't get don't make quite
as much money as before or something
like that so that there would have been
ways when one could have gone but those
were generally not the choices that were
made yeah I wonder if that's even
possible because if you had a law firm
that was honest or a university that was
fairly honest and you had one that was
dishonest it seems to me that the
dishonest one could attempt to use its
prestige to out-compete the honest one
and so that would become a
self-extinguishing strategy unless you
somehow had like a truth in advertising
program yeah I I I don't know you know I
I do think the truth you know when it
breaks through you're better off having
told it than not not having and so it's
always it as long as everybody was
dishonest it could work
well this and that's but ya know it's
look it's it's it's it's mysterious to
me how long it worked we had you know we
had these crazy bubble economies in the
you know we had the the tech bubble in
the 90s the housing bubble in the 2000s
you know what I think is a government
debt bubble you know this last decade
and so if you've had this sort of you
know up down bubble that's um that's
that's sort of harder to see than if
things were just flat so if the growth
in 1970 things just flatlined in the end
you had 40 years of no growth that would
have been problematic and you might have
noticed that very quickly right but you
know in a sense simplifying a lot you
could say we had you know the 70s were
down the 80s were up the 90s were up the
2000s were down so two down two up net
flat but it didn't feel that way he's
like internally there's a lot of
excitement a lot of stuff happened and
so yeah there's in California was like a
even more extreme version of this you
know the last you know the last three
recessions in California were much more
severe than in the country as a whole
the recoveries were steeper and so
California's felt incredibly volatile
the volatility gets interpreted as
dynamism and then and then people and
then before you know it 30 or 40 years
have passed one thing that I I'm very
curious about is how this discipline
seems to have arisen where almost
everyone representing the institutions
who tell some version of this universal
story which I'll be honest to my way of
thinking can be instantly invalidated by
anyone who chooses to do so it's just
that the cost of invalidating it is
quite high
you know Paul Krugman wrote this column
called a protectionist moment mmm-hmm
where he said let's be honest the
financial elites case forever freer
trade has always been something of a
scam and so you had people who were
participating in this who seemed to have
known all along that there's no way of
justifying this on paper but yet were
willing and able to participate with
seemingly very few consequences to their
careers like it didn't give
opportunities to people who were
heterodox and saying hey aside from a
few bright spots more or less we've
actually entered a period of relative
stagnation how did this how did this
happen I how is it that this he feels so
well
the individual incentives were very
different from the collective inside the
collective incentive we should have not
honest conversation and right level set
things and get get back to a better
place I think the individual incentives
were often you pretend that it's working
great for you it's like if you're you
know the twenty thousand people here who
moved to Los Angeles to become movie
stars about twenty of them make it and
so you could say well it's been really
hard nobody wants to hire me this is a
terrible city or you could say you know
this has been wonderful that all the
doors are being opened to me and that's
the second one is more fictional but
that's that's the that's sort of the
thing you're supposed to say if you're
if you're succeeding and there's I think
there's a way this is how we've been
talking about globalization where it's
sort of a glib globalization it's
working great for me and and I'd like to
have more people um more talented people
come to the US I'm not scared of
competing with them and an on and on so
this sort of is is this um yeah this or
academia if you're you know if you're a
professor in academia so the tenure
system is great it's just picking the
most talented people I don't think it's
that hard at all it's it's completely
meritocratic and if you don't say those
things well we know you're not the
person to get tenure yeah it's so I
think so I think there is sort of this
individual incentive where um you're
supposed if you if you pretend the
system's working you're simultaneously
signalling that you're one of the few
people who should succeed in it so one
image that I have in a you know you and
I have talked I use the word kayfabe for
the system of nonsense that undergirds
professional wrestling and you you've
taken to using LARPing a live-action
role-playing it strikes me that we have
two separate parallel systems now this
podcasting experiment that you and I are
now part of provides for a very
unscripted out-of-control narrative and
then there's this parallel institutional
narrative that seems to exist in a gated
form where the institutions keep talking
to each other and ignore this thing
that's happening that has reached more
and more people so that you effectively
have multiple narratives one of which
I think almost no one needs to believe
it's just that the institutions need to
trade kind of lies and deceptions back
and forth amongst themselves how is it
that these two things can be kept
separate it's like a real wrestling
league and a professional wrestling
league side by side where somehow they
just don't come into contact with each
other well I um well I think if they
came into contact something they could
then they wouldn't both be able to exist
so I think that's not surprising that
they can't cut contact I I don't think
it's a terribly you know I don't think
it's alt ultimately stable so I think
ultimately you know our account is going
to prevail on the institutional account
is so incorrect that it will ultimately
fail I've probably been more hopeful
about how quickly truth prevails then it
has but in forever I would still I would
still be very hopeful that that that our
account is really gonna break through
and you know in the next few years I've
been talking about the this the the tech
stagnation problem for for you know the
better part of a decade and I think when
I was talking about this in 2008 2009
2010 this was still you know a frenzied
view it was very fringy within Silicon
Valley and I think even within Silicon
Valley there's sort of a lot of people
who've come around to it who have
partially come around to it there's a
sense the tech has a bad conscience it
feels like it's not in delivering the
promises you know Google had this
propaganda about the future and it's now
seen as you know the self-driving cars
are further away than people expected
and so I think I think there is sort of
a sense that things have shifted a lot
over the last decade but even like five
years ago I mean if it feels to me I I
moved out to work with you in 2013 I'd
never seen a boom before I mean this was
one of the things that was really
important to me is that being in
academics the Academy had been in a
depression since this change around 1970
to 73 and seeing a boom and seeing
people with like flowers and dollar
signs in their eyes you know talking
about a world of abundance and
how everything was gonna be great it
seemed like everybody was the CEO or CTO
of some tiny company and then very very
quickly it all started to change it I
felt like a lot of people moved back
into the behemoths from their little
startup having failed a lot of the
ideology felt poisonous like don't be
evil was not even something you could
utter without somebody snickering behind
your back there's like a self-hating
component where the engineers have been
recruited ideologically and are like not
actually there to do business how did
this happen so quickly well that's
always its am I wrong about that no it's
it's striking how fast it's happened
it's striking how much it's happened in
the context of a bull market so if you
describe this in terms of psychology
you'd think that people people be as
angry in Silicon Valley as they are
today the stock market must be down 40
or 50 percent it's like you know people
in New York City were angry in 2009 they
were angry at the bank's they hated
themselves but you know the stock market
was down 50 60 percent the banks had
gotten obliterated and that sort of
makes sense psychologically and and the
strange thing is that on a in terms of
the serve law the macroeconomic
indicators the stock markets the
valuations of the larger companies it's
it's like way beyond the dot-com peaks
of 2000 and in all sorts of ways but the
mood is not like late 99 early 2000 it
has this very different mood and and the
way I would would explain this is that
for the people involved it is sort of a
look ahead function so it is you know um
yes this is where where things are but
are they gonna be worth a lot more in
five years ten years and that's gotten
that's gotten a lot harder to tell and
so there's been growth but people are
unhappy and frustrated because they
don't see that much growth going forward
even within tech even within this world
of of bets which had been you know very
very decoupled for for such a long time
now one of the things that's interesting
to me is is that when we talk like this
a lot of people are gonna say wow that's
a lot of gloom and doom so much is
changing so much is
and yet what I sense is is that both you
and I have an idea that we've lived our
entire life in some sort of intellectual
Truman Show where everything is kind of
fake and something super exciting is
about to happen
do you share it my is that a fair
telling that well I think that I think
there's been the potential to get back
to the future for a long time and you're
there
there have been breaks in this Truman
Show at various points there was a big
break with 9/11 there was a big break
with the 2080 browsers um you know you
could say there's some sort of break
with Trebek Siddhant Trump and in the
last few years it's still like a little
bit undecided with it what that all
means but I think I think there were a
lot of reasons to to question this and
reassess this for some time the three
assessments never quite happened but but
I would say I think we're now at the
point where where this is is really
gonna happen in the next you know um you
know two years to five years to two
decade I don't think The Truman Show can
keep going keep going that much longer
you know when I was you know and again
I've been wrong about this me too no no
I mean I've been very wrong I've called
it we had a bit an off site when I was
running PayPal in spring of 2001
you know the Nasdaq had gone from 2,000
to 5,000 back to 2000 um comm bubble was
over and I was explaining you know we're
just battening down the hatches at least
one little company has survived we're
gonna survive and but the ins sort of
insanity that we saw in the dot-com
years will never come back in the
lifetimes of the people here because you
know it's psychologically you can't go
that crazy again while you're still
alive right the 1920s didn't come back
till the less maybe the 1980s or
something long generationally yeah was
over and yet already in 2001 we had the
incipient housing bubble and and somehow
some other shows kept going for for it
for 20 years with the narrative like the
whole narrative behind the Great
Moderation
I mean I remember just like clutching my
head how can you tell a story that we
banished volatility
yes it's always I always think of the
1990s narrative was the new economy and
you lied about growth and then the 2000s
narrative was the Great Moderation
and you lied about volatility and and
maybe you know there's sort of the the
2010s one is a secular stagnation where
you lie about the the real interest
rates because the other two don't work
anymore and sort of a complicated way
these things connect but but yes new
economy sounded very bullish in the 90s
Great Moderation
was still a reason belong stocks but it
sounds less bullish and then secular
stagnation in the Larry Summers forms to
be specific what we're talking about
means again that you should be long the
stock market the stock market's going to
keep going up because things are so
stagnant the real rates will stay low
forever so so they are equally bullish
narratives although they sound less
bullish over time so that effectively we
needed what happened with the roaring
20s followed by the depression was that
there was a general skepticism and here
the septa sysm seems to be specific to
something different in each incarnation
that view it you keep having bubbles
with some lie you have yet to tell yes
but I think and of course I think the
the crazy cut on the 20s and 30s was
that we didn't need to have as big of a
crash you could you could have probably
done all sorts of intervention because
the 1930s was still a period that was
very healthy in terms of background
scientific technological innovation if
we just rattle off what was discovered
in the 1930s that had real-world
practical things was the aviation
industry got off the ground the talkies
the movies got a got going you had you
had the plastics industry you had the
you know you had secondary oil recovery
you had household appliances got
developed and an ziyan by 1939 there
were three times as many people who had
cars in the US as in 1929 and so it was
there was this crazy tailwind of
scientific and technological progress
that then somehow got you know badly
mismanaged financially by you
whoever you blame the crash on huh and
so I think that's that's what actually
happened in the 30s and then and then we
tried to sort of manage all these
financial indicators much more precisely
in recent decades even though the
tailwind wasn't there at all so let me
focus you on two subjects that are
important for trying to figure out the
economy going forward I'm very fond of
perhaps over claiming but making a
strong claim for physics that physics
gave us atomic devices in a nuclear
power an ended World War two to fit
definitively it gave us the
semiconductor the world wide web
theoretical physicists invented
molecular biology the communications
revolution all of these things came out
of physics and you could make the
argument that physics has been really
underrated as powering the world economy
on the other hand it's very strange to
me that we had the three-dimensional
structure of DNA and 53 we had the
genetic code 10 years later and we've
had very little in the way of let's say
gene therapy to show for all of our
newfound knowledge now I have no doubt
that we are learning all sorts of new
things to your point about
specialization in biology but the
translation hasn't been anything like
what I would have imagined for physics
so it feels like somehow we're in a new
orchard and we're spending a lot of time
exploring it but we haven't found the
low-hanging fruit in biology and we've
kind of exhausted the physics orchard
because what we found is so exotic that
it you know whether it's two black holes
colliding or you know a third generation
of matter or quark substructure we
haven't been able to use these things
are we somehow between revolutions well
I think I would say the question of
what's going on and but I'm I wouldn't
bet I wouldn't I'd be pessimistic on
physics generally so that's sort of B
he's my bias on that one biology I
continue to think we could be doing a
lot more we
be making a lot more progress and you
know the pessimistic version is that no
biology is just semis much harder than
physics and therefore therefore it's
been slower going the the more
optimistic one is that though the the
culture is just broken we have we've had
very talented people go into physics you
go into biology if you're if you're less
talented you know it's sort of like that
you can sort of think of it as Darwinian
terms you you can think of biology as a
selection for people with bad math genes
and if you're good at math you go into
physics go to math or physics or at
least chemistry and and biology we sort
of selected for um you know all of these
people who were somewhat somewhat less
talented so that might be there might be
a cultural explanation for for why it's
been been slower progress but I mean we
had people from physics we had like
teller and Fineman and Crick there's no
shortage of I mean you know to my
earlier point molecular biology anyway
was really founded by physicists more
than it more than any other thing I
think why is it that in an era where
physics is stagnating we don't see these
kind of minds like I'm a little
skeptical that that theory
well III I'm not I'm not so sure like if
you you know if you're a string theory
person or even sort of an applied
experimental physicist I don't think you
can that easily reboot into biology I
mean these the you know these
disciplines have gotten sort of more um
more rigid it's it's it's pretty hard to
to transfer from one area to another i
had you know i when i was an
undergraduate you still had some you
know older professors who were polymaths
who knew a lot about a lot of different
things Rises this is I think the way one
should really think of you know Watson
and Crick or fine men or you know or
tell her they they you know they they
were certainly world class and in in
their field but also like incredible in
the water fairly aggressive and and and
you know the the cultural or
institutional rule is no polymaths
allowed you know you could you can be
you can be narrowly specialized yeah and
if you're interested in other things you
better keep it to yourself and not tell
people because if you say that you're in
you're interested in computer science
and also music or studying the hebrew
bible wow that's uh that's that's just
uh that must mean you're just not very
serious about computer science well so i
totally want to riff on on this point
because i think you've hit the nail on
the head to my way of thinking the key
problem is if you go back to our
original contention which is is that
there is something universally
pathological about the stories that
every institution predicated on growth
has to tell about itself when things are
not growing the biggest danger is that
somebody smart
inside of the institution will start
questioning things and speaking openly
and it seems like the blue mouse would
be the people who could connect the dots
and say you know there's not that much
going on in my department there's not
much going on this department over here
not that much going on in this
department over there and those people
are very very dangerous you know one of
my one of my friends uh studied physics
at stanford in the late 90s um his
advisor was this professor at stanford
bob Laughlin who in the late 90s
brilliant physics guy
late nineties he gets the Nobel Prize in
Physics and he suffers from the supreme
delusion that now that he has a Nobel
Prize he has total academic freedom and
he can do anything he wants to and he
decided to direct it at you know I mean
they're all these areas you should
probably shouldn't go into each position
question climate science they're all
these things when one should be careful
about but he went into an area far more
dangerous than all of those he was
convinced that there were all these
people in the university who were doing
fake science for wasting government
money on fake research that was was not
really going anywhere and he started by
in investigating other departments start
with the biology department at Stanford
University and you can imagine this
ended catastrophic Lee for a professor
Laughlin you know his graduate students
couldn't get PhDs he no longer got
funding Nobel a Peace Prize a certain
Nobel Prize in Physics
no protection whatsoever a Julian
Schwinger
fell out of favor with the physics
community
despite being held in its highest regard
and having a Nobel Prize and he used the
epigram in a book where he wanted to
redo quantum field theory around
something he called source theory he
said if you can't join him beat him and
I think it comes as a shock to all of
these people that there is no level you
can rise to in the field that allows you
to question the assumptions of that
field right it's it's like you know
you're sort of proving yourself you're
you know you're getting your PhD or
getting your tenured position and and
and then at some point you think you
would think that you've proven yourself
and you can you can talk about the whole
and not just the parts but you're never
allowed to talk about more than the
parts you know like the UM the person in
the university context the core the
class of people who are supposed to talk
about the whole right I would say our
university presidents because they are
presiding over the whole of the
university and they should be able to
speak to what the nature of the hole is
what sort of progress the hole is making
is the what is the health of the
progress of the hole and and you know we
we don't you know we certainly do not
pick university presidents who think
critically about these these questions
at all well I remember discussing with a
president of a very highly regarded
University he came to me said can you
explain how your friend Peter Thiel
thinks because I just had a conversation
with him and I could not convince him
that the universities were doing
fantastically in this university in
particular like how does he come to this
conclusion and I said well look Peter
doesn't come you know with a PhD but let
me speak to you in your own language I
started going department by department
talking about the problems of stagnation
it was very clear that there was no
previous experience with any kind of
informed person making such an argument
I mean this was a zero day effort but
it's all yeah but it's but you know in
some sense if you're a president of a
university
you know you you should you probably
don't want to talk to people that
dangerous you want to avoid them and you
don't want to have such disruptive
thoughts because you have to you know
convince the government or alumni or
whoever to keep donating money that
everything's everything's wonderful and
and great and and you know I think one
has to go back quite a long time to UM
to even identify any university
presidents in the United States who said
things that were distinctive or
interesting or or powerful well you know
there was you know there was Larry
Summers at Harvard you know a decade and
a half ago and tried to do like the most
miniscule critiques imaginable and got
you know crucified but you know I don't
think of you know I don't think of
summers as a particularly revolutionary
thinker well he he was possessed of an
idea that the intellectual elite in
which he undoubtedly saw himself a part
of had the right to transgress
boundaries and and I think what's
stunning about this is the extent to
which this breed of outspoken disruptive
intellectual has no place left inside of
this system from which to speak but it's
you know but there's it's not that
surprising like in a healthy system you
could have wild descent and it's not
threatening because everyone knows the
system is healthy in an unhealthy system
the descent becomes much more dangerous
so so you know this is and I think
that's it's it's it's not that
surprising that there's always a one-one
riff I have on this is always you know
if you think of a left-wing person as
someone who's critical of the structures
of our society right there's a sense in
which we have almost no left-wing
professors right in this key still is
still there as sort of a last remnant of
some clade yes we're no longer doing in
the sense of let's say just being
critical of the institutions they're
part of right and there may be some that
are you know much older so if you're
maybe in your 80s we can you know we can
pretend to ignore you or you know it's
just what happens to people in their 80s
sure and but but I don't I don't see
you know younger professors in there say
40s who are deeply critical of the of
the university structure I think it's
just it's just not you know you can't
have that it's like again if you come
back to something as um as reductionist
as the ever-escalating student debt
right you know the bigger the debt gets
you can sort of think what is the 1.6
trillion
what does it pay for and in a sense it
pays for 1.6 trillion dollars worth of
lies about how great the system is and
so the more of the debt goes the crazier
the system gets but also the more you
have to tell the lies and these things
sort of go together no it's it's not a
stable sequence at some rate this breaks
you know again I would I would bet on
you know a decade not a century well
that this is the fascinating thing you
of course famously started the teal
fellowship as a program which correct me
if I'm wrong on this 2005 is when
student debt became non dischargeable in
bankruptcy 43 bankruptcy revision right
now that yes is so if you if you don't
pay off your student loans on when
you're 65 the government will garnish
your social security wages to to pay off
your student debt right this is this is
amazing that this existed in a modern
society and of course well so let me ask
am i right that you were attacking what
was necessary to keep the college
mythology going and you were afraid and
that College might be enervating some of
our sort of most dynamic minds um well I
think I think there's a lot of different
critiques when you want your half of the
universities I think the debt one is a
is a very simple very simple one it's on
its it's always dangerous to be burdened
with too much debt it's for does limit
your your freedom of action and it seems
especially pernicious to do this super
early in your career and so if you if
out of the gate you owe $100,000 and you
know it's never clear you can get out of
that hole that's um that's going to
either demotivate you or it's going to
push you into into maybe you know
slightly higher paying
very uncreated professions of the sort
that are probably you know less good at
moving our whole society forwards and so
I I think yes I think I think the whole
thing is is is extraordinarily
pernicious so and it's it's it's it is
it was one of these things where I'm you
know and I started talking about this
back in um back in 2010 at mm mm um it
was already it was already like it it
was controversial but it was not like
you know younger people all agreed with
me the younger people younger they you
know and and and it's a decade later
it's a lot crazier it hasn't you know we
haven't yet completely won but but I
think there are more and more people who
agree with us I think I think at this
point on the Gen X parents of college
students tend to agree whereas I would
say the baby boomer parents you know 15
years ago would not have agreed the 2008
crisis was a big watershed in this to
were Aang where um you could say the
tracking debt you know roughly made
sense as long as everything all the
track careers worked in 2008 really blew
up you know consulting banking and sort
of a number of the more track
professions got got blown up and so that
was kind of a watershed now something
that is I mean this is incredibly
dangerous but also therefore quite
interesting if you imagine that the baby
boomers have in some sense in order to
keep the structure of the university
going have loaded it up with
administrators have hiked the tuition
much faster than even medical inflation
let alone general inflation this becomes
a crushing debt problem for people who
are entering the system I saw a recent
article that said that the company that
I think is called seeking arrangements
which it introduces older men and women
with money to younger men and women with
a need for money for some sort of
ambiguous hybridised dating
companionship financial transfer and the
claim was that lots of students were
using
this supposed sugar daddy Inge and sugar
mommy I don't know what the terminology
is in order to alleviate their debt
burden it's almost as if the baby
boomers in so creating a system are
subjecting their own children to things
that are pushing them towards a gray
area a few clicks before you get to
honest prostitution I know I okay I
don't I don't want to impute too much
intention ality know how this happened
you know I think it's what emerged a lot
of these it was mostly emergent mostly
uh mostly these things people you know
yeah that we had sort of somewhat
cancerous we don't distinguish real
growth from cancerous growth and then
you know once the cancers for
metastasizes at a certain size you know
you have you sort of somehow try to keep
the whole thing going and it doesn't
make that much that much sense um but
but yes I look I think I think one of
the reasons are one of the challenges
and right on our side this is people
more self-critical here on on on this is
that the question we always are
confirmed with well what is the
alternative how do you actually do
something and um and it is you know it's
not obvious what the individual
alternatives are on an individual level
if you get into a elite university it
probably still makes sense to go you
know probably isn't make sense to go to
number 100 or something like that that's
I think but but so there is sort of a
way can still work individually even if
it does not work you know for our
country as a whole
um and and and so there are sort of all
these all these challenges in in in in
an in you know coming up with alternate
tracks like I think I think in software
there's some degree to which people are
be hired if they're just good at coding
and it's not quite as critical if they
have a computer science degree ok can we
do this in other other careers other
fields on I would ten thing one could
it's been it's been slow to happen well
so you and I have been excited about a
great number of things that have been
taking place outside of the
institutional system
but one of the things that I I'm
continuing continue to be mystified by
is that we are somewhat politically
divided where you are well known as a
conservative and I really come from a
fairly radical progressive streak so we
have this common view of a lot of the
problems but sometimes we come to very
different ideas about how those problems
shouldn't be saw do you want to maybe
just try riffing or figuring out like
assume that we somehow found ourselves a
position of some some degree of power
with an ability to direct a little bit
more than we have currently what would
you do to create the preconditions so
not necessarily picking particular
projects but what would you try to do to
create the preconditions where people
are really dreaming about futures both
at a technological level family
formation making our civil society
healthier what where would you where
would you start to work first well yeah
there there's a lot of things that so I
always I'm always a little bit
uncomfortable this sort of question
because you can talk about me too
because um you know I feel like uh you
know we're not going to be dictators of
the United States and then you know all
sorts of things you could do for your
dictators if um but but certainly on
look I would I would I would I would
look at the college debt thing very
seriously I would say that you know it's
dischargeable in bankruptcy and if and
if and if if if people um go bankrupt
and part of the debt has to be paid for
by the university that that did it there
has to be some sort of local
accountability so this would love that
that would be sort of a more right-wing
answer the left-wing answers we should
know socialize the debt in some ways and
the universities should never pay for
that which would be more the you know
Sanders warrant approach but but it's
but there'll be one version I think you
know I think there is I
I think there is you know I think one of
the main ways inequality has manifested
in our society last twenty thirty years
I think things more stagnation than
inequality right but just on the
inequality side it's it's the runaway
housing costs and there's a baby boomer
version we have super strict zoning laws
so that the house prices go up and the
house is your nest egg it's not a place
to live it's your nest egg for
retirement and I would I would try to
figure out some ways to dile dile that
stuff back back massively and and that's
probably intergenerational transfer
where it's bad for the acid prices of
baby boomer homeowners but better for
younger people to get started in in sort
of family formation or I was starting
house households what do you think about
the idea of a CED a college equivalency
degree where you can prove that you have
a level of knowledge that would be
equivalent let's say to a graduating
Harvard chemistry major right or a
fraction thereof where you have the
ability to prove that through some sort
of online delivery mechanism
you create an I love it yeah I think
it's very hard to implement again I
think I think these things are hard to
do well again about great idea there's a
possibility of we have all these people
who have something like Stockholm
Syndrome where they they you know if you
if you if you've got a Harvard chemistry
degree right and if you suspect that you
know actually the knowledge could be had
by a lot of people and if it's just a
set of tests you have to pass um that
your degree would be a lot less special
you will resist this very very hard you
know if you're if you're in an um in an
HR department or in a company hiring
people you will want to hire people who
went to a good college because you went
to a good college and if we broaden the
hiring and so we're gonna hire all sorts
of people maybe maybe that's
self-defeating four out for your own
positions I think I think there are you
know I think one should not
underestimate how many people you know
have have a form of Stockholm Syndrome
here so some other
ideas at some point when we were talking
about and I should have said earlier
that the teal fellowship for those who
don't know is a program that has
historically at least began paying very
young people who'd been admitted to
colleges to drop out of those colleges
so they got to keep the idea that they'd
been admitted to some fairly prestigious
place but then they were given money to
actually live their dreams and not put
them on yes it was it was it has been an
extremely successful and effective
program it's not scalable right so so we
had a hack the um we had a hack the
prestige status thing where it was as
hard or harder to get a teal fellowship
than to get into a top university Randa
and so that's that's part that's that's
very hard to scale well so when I was
looking at that program for you one of
the things that I floated was the idea
that if you look at every advanced
degree like a a JD or an MD PhD none of
them seem to carry the requirement of
having a BA which is quite mysterious
and if you fail to get a PhD let's say
there's usually an embedded master's
degree that you get is a going-away
present and therefore if you could get
people to skip college if you give them
perhaps four years of their lives back
and you could use the first year of
graduate school which is very often kind
of a rapid recapitulation of what
undergraduate was everybody's a level
playing field and then it worse comes to
worse people would leave as a mass with
a masters they would in general get a
stipend because a lot of the tuition is
remitted to them in graduate programs is
that a viable program to get some group
of people who are highly motivated to
avoid the BA entirely is sort of the
administrators degree rather than the
professor's degree um let me see I yes I
mean all these different subtle
critiques I can have our disagreements
but yeah I think look I think I think
the BA is not as valuable as it looks
I also think the PhD is not as valuable
as it looks I sort of feel it's it's
it's it's it's it's a it's a problem
across the board it strikes me that what
you're proposing is a bit of an uphill
struggle because um at the top
universities the BA is the far more
prestigious degree than a PhD at this
point so if you're at Stanford or
Harvard you know it's it's it's pretty
hard to get in to the undergraduate and
then you have you have more PhD students
then you have undergraduates there all
these people who are on you know a very
questionable track they've made a
questionable choices it's not clear you
know you know and so if you sort of and
and and and they're probably probably
are gonna have some sort of
psychological breakdown in their future
you know the dating prospects aren't
good there all these things that are a
little bit off so yet in theory if you
had a super tightly controlled ph.d
program right that might work
but but you have to at least make those
those two changes you know as it is the
people in in graduate school it's like
it's like tribbles and Star Trek and you
know it's it's it there's you know we
have you know just so many and they all
feel expendable and unneeded and it's
it's sort of it's just that's that's not
a good that's not a good place to be you
know and and where's I think the
undergraduate conceit is still that it's
more you know k-selected instead of our
selector that it's more on that
everybody is special and valuable you
know that's often not true either
so I'd be critical of both right and and
I think but yeah if we if we could if we
could have a real PhD that was required
you know there was was much harder and
that actually led to sort of an academic
position or some other comparable
position that would be that'd be good
you know one of the questions I always
come back to and this is what is the
teleology these programs where do they
where do they go and and what I think
has gone you know um and one of the
analogies I've come up with is you know
I think undergraduate elite
undergraduate
is like junior highschool football you
know if you always go foot budget I'll
see that coming it's it's it's playing
football and junior high schools
probably not damaging for you but it's
not going anywhere I see because if you
keep playing football in high school and
college and then professionally that's
just bad and the better you are the more
successful you are the the let the less
well it works and and then the question
is what's the motivational structure you
know when I was an undergraduate in the
1980s there was still a part of it where
you thought the professors were cool it
you know might be something you'd like
to be at some point in the future you
know um and and they were role models
just like in you know junior high school
football and an NFL player you know
would have been a role model but there's
great damage in both side now now I
think it's it's it's you're just yeah
you're just doing lots of brain damage
and and it's it's a track that doesn't
work and therefore the teleology sort of
was broken down so undergraduate part of
the teleology was that it was preparing
you for graduate school and that part
doesn't work and that's what's that's
what's gotten deranged who then graduate
school well it's preparing you to be a
postdoc and then well that's the postdoc
apocalypse where we want to call it
postdoc ellipse postdoc ellipse postdoc
you heard it here folks
host ups and and so but just at every
step I think the teleology the system is
is in really bad shape it's of course
this is true of all these institutions
with fake growth that are sociopathic or
pathological but at the universities
it's it's it's striking is it's very bad
and I think this was already true in
important ways in a back in the 80s
early 90s when I was going through the
system and when I think when I think
back on it um I think I was most
intensely motivated academically in high
school because the teleology was really
clear you were trying to get into a good
college and then by the time I was at
Stanford it was a little bit less clear
by the time I was a law school really
unclear what that was going and and I
was by the time I was you know 25 I was
far less motivated than then at age 18
so and I think I think these dynamics
just in a more extreme than ever today
what I find so dispiriting about your
your diagnosis is first of all that I
agree with second of all if we don't
train people in these fields like if we
don't get people to go into molecular
biology or bioinformatics or something
like that we're never going to be able
to find the low-hanging fruit in that
orchard so it seems to me that we have
to find some way that it makes sense for
a life to explore these questions one of
the things that I don't understand and I
don't know if you have any insight go
ahead and you know go ahead keep going
well I was gonna say is that um it feels
to me that almost all of our
institutions are carbon copies of each
other at different levels of quality and
that there are only a tiny number of
actually innovative institutions it used
to be that you know Reed College was sex
drugs and Goethe and you had you know
st. John's with the great books
curriculum that didn't look like
anything else or Deep Springs and the
University of Chicago was crazy about
young people but the diversity of
institutions is unbelievably low is that
wrong I think that's that's fair but I I
would say yeah beyond the bigger problem
with a lot of these fields it's yeah I
think we have to keep training people I
think we need to keep training people in
physics or even these fields that seem
completely dead I'm not you know super
important but I think the question is um
we have to always ask is how many people
should we be training and you know my
intuition is you want even if you want
the gates to be very tight one of my
friends is a is in the professor in the
Stanford Economics Department and the
way he describes it to me is they have
about 30 graduate students starting PhDs
in economics at Stanford every year it's
you know six to eight years to get a PhD
at the end of the first year the faculty
has an implicit ranking of the students
where they sort of agreed who the top
three or four are the top that the
ranking never changes the top three or
four have a are able to get a good
position in academia the others not so
much
and
and you know this is it we're pretending
to be kind to people and we're actually
being cruel incredibly cruel um and and
and so I think that that if there are
going to be you know it's a supply
demand of labor if they're gonna be good
um good positions in academia where you
can you know have a reasonable life it's
not a monastic vow of poverty that
you're taking to be an academic if we're
gonna have that you want you don't want
the sort of Malthusian struggle if you
have ten graduate students in a
chemistry lab and you have to have a
fistfight for a Bunsen burner or a
beaker and you know if somebody says one
politically incorrect thing you can
happily throw everyone them off out of
the overcrowded bus but the bus is still
overcrowded with nine people on it
that's that's what's unhealthy and so
yes it's it's it would be a mistake to
say we should dial this down and have
you know zero people right at least
feels that this is what's scary that's
it that's not that's that's not what I'm
advocating or what what's what's being
advocated here but but but there is a
there's a point where if you just add
more and more people in in a in a
starvation Malthusian context that's not
healthy well this gets to another topic
which i think is really important and
it's a dangerous one to discuss which is
it it seems to me that power laws those
distributions with very thick tails
where you have a small number of
outliers that often dominate all other
activity are ubiquitous and that
particularly with respect to talent
whether we like them or not they seem to
be present where a small number of
people do a fantastic amount of all of
all of the innovation what do we do if
power laws are common to make people
more comfortable with the fact that
there is a kind of endowment inequality
that seems to be part of species makeup
I don't even think it's just limited to
humans well I I'm not convinced
these sort of power laws are equally
true in all all fields of activity so I
think there are you know when the United
States was a frontier country in the
19th century right and you know most
people were farmers and presumably some
people were better farmers than others
but you know everyone started within 140
acres of land and and there was this
wide-open frontier even if you had some
parts of the society that had more of a
power-law dynamic there was a large part
that didn't and that was that was what
what I think gave it a certain certain
amount of health and yeah the challenges
if we've geared our society saying that
all that matters is education and and
PhDs and academic research and that this
has this crazy power law dynamic then
then you're just going to have a society
in which there are you know lots of
people playing video games and basements
or something like that so that's uh
that's uh that's that's that's the way I
would I would frame it but yeah I think
I think there are there's definitely are
some areas where this is the case and
and then you know we just need you know
we need we need more growth for the
whole society if you have growth you'll
have a rising tide that lifts all boats
and so it's always you know it's the
stagnation is the problem well you know
I I've joked about this as we are not
even communistic in our progressivism
because the old
formulation of communism was from each
according to his abilities to each
according to his needs and the inability
to recognize different levels of ability
I mean like almost every mathematician
or physicists who encountered John VII
Normans just said he the guy is smarter
than I am it's not necessarily the
deepest or he did all of the great work
but you know when you're dealing with
somebody who is able to employ skills
that you simply don't have I mean I know
I'm not a concert pianist and right okay
I I don't I don't know how you solve the
social problem right if everybody has to
be a mathematician or a concert pianist
that that that like well I want a
society in which we have great
mathematicians and great
answered pianists that that seems that
that would be very healthy society right
it's very unhealthy if every parent
thinks their child has to be a
mathematician or initiative pianist and
and that's that's that's the kind of
society we we unfortunately have well
this is why
so this is where why I try to sell you
sometimes on a more progressive view of
the world which is I want deregulated
capitalism I want the people who have
the rare skill sets to be able to
integrate across many different areas
and to be honest you know this is the
thing that that I wish more people
understood about what you bring which is
that you're able to think in fifteen
different idioms that most people only
have one or two of and so whatever it is
that you're doing to integrate these
things as an investor into direct
research and direct work is is really
something that you know I've watched
firsthand for six years
[Music]
the problem that I have is we are going
to have to take care of the median
individual and I less think that the
median individual is going to be
reachable by the market over time as
some of these things that are working in
Silicon in terms of machine learning
like but then then you're being you're
being more optimistic on on progress and
in tech than is because look I think I
think yes look if we had if we have
runaway automation right and you know if
we're building robots that are smarter
than humans and can do everything humans
can do then we probably have to have a
serious conversation about a universal
basic income err or something like that
and you're gonna end up with you know a
very very weird society I don't I don't
see the automation happening at all and
I think the question of automation in my
mind is identical to this question of
productivity growth um there is you know
we've been automating for 200 250 years
since the Industrial Revolution
agriculture and industry factoring and
the sort of society we have in the early
21st century is one in which most jobs
our non-tradable service sector jobs
that are not easily automatable so it's
like a waiter and restaurant it's a yoga
instructor it's nurse it's a
kindergarten teacher
and that's what that's what most jobs in
our society are and because they're so
they've been so resistant to automation
that this may be one of the reasons why
um
the productivity numbers are are slowing
down
even if we're still innovating as fast
and manufacturing and even if we're
still improving agriculture
they're smaller and smaller part of the
economy and so even 5% of your
productivity growth in manufacturing
that means a lot more than manufacturing
60% of the economy than it does when
it's a 20% of the economy and so that's
that's roughly uh that's roughly what I
what I think I think would happen and
you know if you just if you just look at
the you know the current the current
dynamic in the u.s. is we have you know
unemployment like 3.6 3.7 percent right
it's super low it's um and still there
doesn't seem to be that much wage
pressure that there doesn't seem to be
that much growth the productivity
numbers still aren't great you think
there'd be enormous and quite
conservative me yeah um but I think
again Mike Mike my read on it is just
the the automation story has been
oversold like I agree the automation
story's been over it's like it's
possible it's going to happen the
hospitals just around the corner and
it's about about to happen well that's
what we've been told in a lot of these
areas over the last you know 40 50 years
so I have a couple questions about this
one is sort of if I think about how
common retail occupations are is there
something about retail that is resistant
to Amazon ofin if you will where people
actually want to go shop in a physical
place and are willing to pay a premium
that we haven't understood but to have
human contact maybe there's some
information exchanged maybe there's a
recreational aspect that's bundled
that's one of my two questions the other
one surrounds the idea that we've always
focused on like when is a GI coming and
the robots that will do everything and
part of the lesson for me about machine
learning is how many things humans were
doing that don't require anything like
artificial general intelligence just
some specialized neural net
seems to be good enough to do the job so
those would be two questions in my mind
as to how yes yes but I think all these
things you know you have to you have to
concretize right and yes i i think
retail is is a sector that's under you
know quite a bit of pressure is going to
stay under quite a bit of pressure that
that's maybe the top that's the the top
one I would it's pretty looks like
vulnerable to me but that's the and you
know and that's sort of that's like
Amazon is the is the most threatening of
the big tech companies and that it's you
know threatening a lot of other
companies elsewhere in the industry and
disrupting them and you know making
things more efficient but you know
probably with with a lot of sheer forces
at work in that process so um so I agree
that that's a candidate for you know
automation or productivity improvements
or things like that I'm still not
convinced that it's in the aggregate
shifting things that much you know and
then go through and go through all sorts
of individual job descriptions where you
know uh people used to have secretaries
because typing was a skill and you know
the word processor you don't quite need
this you can do short emails you don't
quite need a secretary people still have
executive assistants that sort of
somehow do slightly different set of
responsibilities but it's it's not
clearly a fewer executive assistants
that we used to have secretaries and so
when one actually concretize is it it's
uh it's it's not quite clear how much
you know how disruptive the automation
that's happening you know it really is
it's a it's always straight is he and
this is it's a version of the text AG
nation thing right it's always last 4050
years things have been slow we're always
told it's about to accelerate like crazy
that may be true in some ways I hope
that's true
um but if one was simply extrapolating
from the last 40 to 50 years
perhaps the the default is that we
should be more worried about the lack of
automation than excess automation that's
really interesting and and so yes if and
again I think if we had the sort of
runaway automation
I mean you could get to like 3/4 percent
GDP growth and at 3 to 4 percent GDP
growth we can solve these problems
socially you would be willing to have
like you know this thing that I've been
talking to Andrew yang about has been
the idea of hyper capitalism which is a
deregulated hyper kappa hyper capitalism
where you can do more experimenting or
playing copper couple to some kind of
hyper socialism where you recognize that
the median individual might not be able
in the future to easily defend a
position needed for family formation
well let me rephrase this a little bit
you're not gonna get a conversion
experience on your first podcast here to
make me wait for the next and maybe a
little longer than that too but I would
say um if we can get the GDP growth back
to 3 percent a year on a sustainable
basis without fudging without fudging
without lying about productivity numbers
etc then on there will be a lot more
room for for various social programs I
wouldn't want them to be misdirected in
all sorts of ways but there would be a
lot of things that we we could we could
do I should say and I'm and um I I would
be very uncomfortable starting with the
social programs without the growth and
and that's that's the that's the sort of
conversation that I often see happening
in Silicon Valley where where it's we
start with ubi right because we're lying
about automation if automation of
automation is happening then we'll see
in the productivity numbers and then
eventually maybe we need something like
ubi if automation is not happening and
you do ubi then you just you know blow
up the economy right I should say and
you know you've caused a question you
know it's you've come somewhat toward
coming them doing them in parallel yeah
I'm ok with that
no no I'm not not ok with starting with
the socialism well so I appreciate you
even a Marxist wouldn't believe this
even a Marxist thinks to the you have to
first get the capitals to do things
before you can redistribute stuff right
I know and you can't start with a
redistribution before we've done the
automation I'm not even a Marxist Peter
but the thing that I was going to say is
is that as you talk about the fact that
we can solve some of these problems
socially I want
talk about from the progressive side I'm
not interested in using social programs
where markets continue to function I
mean the idea of making people
personally accountable for their own
happiness and their own success and path
through the world is incredibly
liberating and I view markets as
providing most of the progress that we
now enjoy so there is something that's
very weird and punitive about the desire
for redistribution I mean that there's a
almost a desire to tag the wealthy that
has nothing to do with taking care of
the unfortunate and what I really am
talking about here is how do we get a
conversation between left and right
which isn't cryptic which isn't you know
of course I have a much more cynical
view of this where I think the
redistribution rhetoric it's mainly not
even targeted at the wealthy
oh it's targeted at the lower middle
class at the deplorable z-- or whatever
you want to call them and it's a way to
tell them that they will never get ahead
nothing will happen in their life and
and that's that's actually why you know
a lot of people who are lower middle
class or middle class are viscerally
quite strongly opposed to welfare
because it's always an insult to them
and he's always heard as an insult and
and I'm not sure they're wrong to feel
that well and I feel that a lot of the
talk about redistribution is actually
families of hi 8 through 11 figures
trying to figure out how to target
families of six figure through low eight
figure wealth as the targets of the
redistribution that the very wealthy
will be able to shelter assets and
protect themselves or maybe even you
know switch switch Nations whereas
people who are dentists and
orthodontists and accountants are going
to be the ones viewed as the rich who
are going to be incapable of getting
themselves out of the way so I think
that partially what what good-faith
conversation between left and right
opens up is is that we have a shared
interest in uncovering all of the
schemes of the people who enjoy pushing
around pieces of paper and giving
speeches in order to engineer society
for their own reason so that's one way I
would I would restate what you just said
sure would be that um you know
redistribution from the powerful to the
powerless from the rich to the poor is
like from the powerful to the powerless
and so you're using power to go after
those with power and that's almost
oxymoronic it's almost self
contradictory and so on there may be
some way to do that I think most the
time you end up with with some fake
redistribution some sort of complicated
shell game of one sort or another right
and you know the the very end I know the
the causation stuff is much much
trickier but if we if we look at
societies that are you know somehow
further to the left on some scale right
um the inequality you have to go really
far to the left before and maybe just
destroy the whole society before you
really start solving you know the
inequality program problem California
when I first moved here as a kid in 1977
would have been sort of a centrist state
in the u.s. politically and it was
broadly middle-class today California is
the second most democratic states a
d-plus 30 state it's a super unequal and
and at least on a correlated basis and
not causation but at least on a
correlated basis on the further to the
left it's gone the more unequal it's
become and there is something pretty
weird about that there is you know
something that
to fits in here is that in part I've
learned from you and you can tell me
whether you recognize that this
formulation or not is start with any
appealing social idea that's step one
step two ask what is the absolute
minimum level of violence and coercion
that would be necessary to accomplish
that idea now add that to the original
idea do you still find your original
idea attractive mm-hm and that this
flips many of these propositions into
territory where I suddenly realized that
something that people see is being very
attractive actually can only be
accomplished with so much misery right
even if it's done maximally efficiently
that it's no longer a good idea and I
think that this influence I mean this
has been very influential in my thinking
and what I've yeah that look the the the
visceral problem with communism is not
is not its redistributed tendencies it's
the extreme violence that you have to
kill tons of people you know there's
always there's always a one of the
professor's I studied under at Stanford
Rene Girard was from great philosophical
sociological anthropological thinker and
uh you know he had this observation that
he thought communism among Western
intellectuals became unfashionable you
could dated to the year 1953 the Year
Stalin died and the reason was they were
they were not communists in spite of the
millions of people being killed they
were communists because of the millions
of people that were being killed as long
as you were willing to kill millions of
people
that was a tell a sign that you were you
were building the utopia you were
building a great new society and when
you stopped you know it was gonna be
like lethargy of the Brezhnev ear or
something like that and that that was
not inspiring I mean people shift from
Stalin to Mao or Castro or but but the
the violence was charismatic ice being
very charismatic and then not but then
also you know if you think about it's
very undesirable I think that there it's
so fascinating that we actually finally
get to something like this I think that
that is a correct description of part of
the communist movement
but not all of the communist movement
there were a lot of people I think in
that you just my own family was
certainly involved in far-left politics
and some of it probably dipped into
communism what my sense of it was is
that there was a period in the 30s where
people realized that there had to be
coordinated social action and that there
were people who were too vulnerable and
that that somehow got wrapped up in all
of the things that Stalin was talking
about that sounded positive if you
didn't know the reality so for example
Paul robes and you know a hero of the of
the of the left you know was extolling
starla Stalin's virtues openly my guess
is is that he didn't fully understand
what had happened that he'd gotten
involved in an earlier era and that as
things became known and progressed there
was a point which many people suddenly
open their eyes and said I've been
making excuses for the Soviet Union
because at least it had the hope I mean
you know there were American blacks for
example who moved to Moscow because of
the the the hope that it was going to be
a racially more equal society my own
family you know I would say was talking
about you know interracial marriage and
homosexual opened the support of
homosexuality female access to birth
control those things were associated
with the Communist Party and a lot of
those ideas are now commonplace but we
forget that you know once upon a time
only the Communists were willing to
dance with these things yes I look I
what I don't wanna make this to ad
hominem but I want to say that people
like your family yeah we're likely very
intelligent people but we're somehow
still always the useful idiots and and
there was no country where the
Communists actually came to power were
people like those in your family
actually got to make the decisions no I
think so and somehow somehow like maybe
yeah it maybe there were indirect ways
that it was helpful or beneficial in
countries that did not become communist
but in countries that actually became
communist you know it
it didn't actually ever seem to work out
for those people I definitely think that
there was some sense that they were
fooled and duped in this situation but
by the same token not wanting to make
this to ad hominem you know as a gay man
I think that a lot of your rights would
have been seen much earlier by the
communists who were earlier to that
party I think that to an extent some of
the things that we just take for granted
as part of living in a tolerant society
we're really not found outside and so if
you were trying to dine a la carte maybe
you could take something from the comedy
buffet you could take something from the
anti-communist buffet and you could
steal a little from you know regular
party politics of course the Dixiecrats
were not exactly the most racially
progressive group in the world things
were very different and there was no
clear place to turn yes always it's
always easy for us to judge people in
the past - too harshly so I think I
think that's a that's a that's a good
generalization I I would I would say
that the you know that there's something
about the the revolution at the extreme
revolutionary movements that always um
seem to be from my point view the
violence was always too much and I wind
and you know it's a it's a it's a
package it's a package deal but I don't
like the violence part of the package
that's that's that's the that's the part
that at the end of the day makes me
think the package would not have been
worth it so what I would like to do is
to take a quick break and I would like
to come back on exactly this point
because it's the point where I feel that
perhaps you are least understood by the
outside world with in terms of what
we've been talking about both growth and
progress on the one hand and violence on
the other so when we come back we'll
pick it up with Peter Thiel thank you
thanks welcome back to the portal I'm
here with my friend and employer Peter
Thiel for this our inaugural interview
episode and we just gotten to a point
which I think I hope people who have
been tracking your career your books
your thought process
are gonna find interesting because I
think it's the thing that if I had to
guess would be the thing that people at
least understand about you or maybe they
have wrong the most ever since I've
known you your focus has weirdly been
reduction of violence across a great
number of different topics at a level
that I don't think has leaked out into
the public's understanding of you and
what causes you to make the choices you
make how do you see growth as attached
to reduction of violence well I think
that it's um it's very hard to see how
anything like the kinds of societies we
have in Western Europe the United States
could function without without growth I
think you know I think the way sort of a
parliamentary Republican democracy works
is you have a group of people sitting
around the table they craft complicated
legislation and there's a lot of horse
trading and as long as the pie is
growing you can give something to
everybody when the pie stops growing it
becomes a zero-sum dynamic and the
legislative process does not work and
and so the sort of democratic types of
parliamentary systems we've had for the
last 200 250 years have mapped on to
this period of of rapid growth we had
sort of a very bad experiment in the
1930s where the growth stopped at least
sort of Nathan economic sense and the
system you know systems became fascist
or communist it didn't it doesn't
actually work
and so I I suspect that if we're in for
a period of long growth
I don't think um I don't think our our
kind of government can work I think
there is a prospect of all sorts of
forms of violence more violence by the
state against the citizens there may be
more zero-sum Wars globally or there may
be other ways things are super deformed
to pacify people so maybe you know maybe
everyone just smokes marijuana all day
but that's that
also kind of deformed but I think I
think a world without growth is either
going to be a much more violent or a
much more deformed world and and again
it's you know it's not the case that
growth simply solves all problems so you
can have very rapid growth and it can
still you can still have the problem of
violence you can still you can still
have bad things that can happen but
that's our only chance without growth I
think I think it's very hard to see how
you have a good future now in some sense
whenever I hear you interpreted in the
private means look you or you have to
know that there is a version of a view
that exists in the minds of pundits and
you know the commentariat that just
loves to paint you as if you were a
cartoon villain and I always think that
for those people who are actually
confused about you as opposed to those
who wish to be confused about you it
says if you're looking through a window
and they're looking at the reflection in
the window not understanding what it is
that you're focused on why do you think
it is that almost nobody sees your
preoccupation with violence reduction
well it's um I I think um I think is
always hard for me to come with a good
answer these sort of sociological
questions I think that I think people
generally don't think of the problem of
violence as quite as central as I I
think I think it is I think it is a I
think it's you know I'm a very deep
problem you know on a human level if you
think of sort of this mimetic element to
human nature where we copy one another
we want the things other people want and
there's sort of there's a there's a lot
of room for conflict and that you know
if it's not channeled very carefully a
violent conflict in human relationships
and in human societies between human
societies and this this is sort of I
think a very very deep problem and it's
it's not you know sort of there's
Christian anthropology but you also have
the same in Machiavelli or you know
there are serve a lot of different
traditions where you know human beings
are if not evil they're at least
dangerous and and I think I think the
sort of softer anthropological biases
that that a lot of people have in you
know sort of late modernity or in the
Enlightenment world are that you know
humans are by nature good they're by
nature peaceful um and that's not the
norm so there's you know that might be
sort of a general bias people have is
that people can't be this vile it's not
it's not the stipa problem it's a
problem other people have there's some
bad people who are violent but it's not
a general problem you know one of the
things that I think has been fascinating
to me in you know I mean effectively I
didn't know you when I was young and
this feels like a lifelong friendship
that got started way late in my life and
one of the things that that kind of was
surprising to me is that my coming from
a Jewish background you're coming from a
German background I think both of us
were sent this sensitized by the horrors
of World War two which I mean obviously
the problem for the Jews is very clear
but the fact that Germany never really
recovered its proud intellectual
traditions that had gotten bound up in a
level of mechanized and planned violence
you know the decimation of a great
intellectual tradition and one of the
things we've talked about in the past is
whether the twilight of living memory of
the Holocaust should be used for some
more profound German Jewish
reconciliation that these are two
communities that have held somewhat
similar thought processes from the
perspective of memetic competition maybe
you know there was a there were there
was a problem that they were doomed to
run into each other but that in some
sense there are two wounds that need to
be healed now that all of the original
participants are either quite elderly or
gone do you think that that is in for
our conversation well I think I think
there's certainly um an element of that
between between the two of us I I think
that there's there's probably a degree
to which on the history was so traumatic
that that people still understate the
this aspect there was there was
something about you know late 19th
century early 20th century Germany where
the Judaism was better integrated into
the society than in many other places
and there was something very synergistic
very very generative about that and and
and and then you know getting at all
these ways that at the the it was lost
are very very hard to do you know it's
uh it's a you know sort of a a the sort
of social democratic response to the
Hitler era and the Holocaust was sort of
radically egalitarian and it's
everybody's equal you shouldn't kill
people everybody is equally valuable and
yet in some ways what was Hitler killed
the best people and so there's a way in
which the the social democratic response
to to what happened
doesn't even come up to the terrible
thing that happened so inegalitarian
society will we don't miss quite as many
people were all equal nothing's really
changed but but well maybe you have no
Jewish people left in Germany and
there's a lot less dynamism in the
society as a result and that's something
that people still can't say in Germany
because that's that right you feel like
it's uh you know like if I say it people
won't they won't they won't contradicted
or anything but but it's uh it's you
know it's it's sort of profoundly
profoundly uncomfortable so I think I
think there is a sense yeah that that
you know it's there's from all these
strange ways that Germany still under
the shadow of Hitler even even you know
the ways that people are trying to you
know exercise Hitler
you know in some ways have deformed the
society where you can't you can't go
back to the things that worked
incredibly well in you know pre-world
War one Germany there was probably a lot
there was unhealthy and wrong with it
too but but but
yeah there's a sense that something um
you know something something very big
has been lost there's that probably are
a Jewish version of this that one could
one could articulate as well but but
yeah I think there's something about the
synergy that's uh that's that's very
powerful and that's quite missing so you
know from from my side of the fence I
was just listening on NPR to a
description of Fiddler on the Roof being
put on by Joel Grey in Yiddish and the
sound of you know Jewish Middle High
German there's something about it that
is shocking in today's era
and so there's been a Jewish loss you
know I felt this a couple of times I
avoided to be honest going to Germany
because I didn't want to run into old
people and wonder where they had been
but eventually at Soros invitation found
myself at a conference in Berlin and
when I checked into the hotel I heard my
last name pronounced in you know
impeccable German and it was both a
horrible feeling and a wonderful feeling
like somehow weirdly something was home
or I went to a restaurant near
checkpoint charlie with my wife and I
was missing a fork even like the person
spoke no English and I remembered from a
some old story of my father and I asked
for a Gopal which I guess is the Yiddish
for fork and it was close enough and
somebody brought me a fork and by
uttering a word that I got gobble gobble
gobble okay Sherman yes by by going
through that exercise I found that when
this fork was brought to me I realized
that there was some part of my
experience in fact that was missing that
this uncomfortable relationship which
you know my grandfather when we when we
went through Israel driving north to
south was singing leader I mean he was
German was the language of of the
culture it was the language of the
intellectual and that never left him and
so I think that weirdly this is the
first time because I think it'll be too
late if we wait for in 20 more years
because there will be no one to remember
but that there is some opportunity to
recognize a dual wound yeah no I um I
think I think the I think the challenge
on the on the Germany side is that it's
it's it's it's sort of I had I'd
somewhat of a you know idiosyncratic
background here where we I was born in
Germany but we emigrated when I was
about a year old and uh and and you know
he spoke German at home and lived in
Africa and Namibia where it went to
German speaking school
but it was it was very different I think
from the from from the general
post-world war ii german experience and
and i and so there are gather all these
things that i can see from the outside
looking in to germany that i think are
you know it's still like i still have a
connection to it and this of all these
ways you know you visited it as a child
many times and this is something that i
connect with and it's it's obviously
like like super different you know and
and the the sort of you know the
contrast of germany in california always
like to give is that california's
optimistic but desperate and germany's
pessimistic but comfortable but the from
a Californian perspective the past the
the incredibly deep pessimism is is is
is is is really really striking and and
even on that one dimension i think you
know jewish culture is is super
different well and I feel like Jewish
culture is in part starting to attenuate
that we don't feel I mean this is this
is crazy talk but we never thought that
there was anything positive about
anti-semitism and obviously it's not a
positive thing but there were positive
externalities and that it allowed us to
push ourselves very very hard because we
always knew that we weren't going to get
a fair shake and that at any moment you
might need to flee to someplace that was
less dangerous and I feel that as we
become comfortable we've lost some of
the dynamism which is a hard thing to
admit but I do think that that is in
part true just as I see you know and I
see this in Germany Germany's
intellectual contribution was so
profound that nothing post-world war ii
seems to suggest the same nation and I
think that that loss is a profound loss
not to Germany but to the entire world
yes it's uh it's you know and of course
one of the challenges is you know we can
you sort of describe these things we can
speculate on you know you know some of
the causal things it's uh I think it's a
it's somehow we don't want to go back we
can't go back and don't want to I agree
and uh and so yeah there is there's a
history and you know I I think
something's been lost in both Germany
and in Jewish culture and how when how
in reconstitutes this is is is even we
can convince people of you know the
causes and the losses what you actually
do about it is is super hard to say and
that's uh that's sort of always the the
strange dynamic in this something I'd be
open to us working on at some future
point if we can find the time but let me
switch gears slightly and come back a
little bit to the violence point but one
of the things that I think has become
kind of interesting in our relationship
is that a a certain class of theories
that are not popular in the general
population are traded back and forth
between us
partially around the idea of how do we
restart growth how do we avoid violence
and I wanted to sort of alert people who
are interested in the portal concept to
this idea of orphaned or unpopular
theories that are traded among a few but
maybe not among the many so if we could
go through a few of these one of them
has to do with how you and I both were
much more I think we believed that Trump
was much more likely to get elected than
the general population did and this has
to do with the theory of preference
falsification that people will broadly
lie about what their true preferences
are so they'll keep one set of public
preferences but a hidden set of private
preferences and then in our culture that
gets revealed every four years where you
might have have a schrödinger's you had
experiment you find out where the
actually is yes I ya know I felt this
was a dynamic that was going on in all
these strange ways in in 2016 there was
a dinner I had in San Francisco about a
week before the election with a group of
center-right people one
very prominent angel investor in Silicon
Valley and he said you know I'm voting
for Trump in a week but because I'm in
Silicon Valley I have to lie and so he
was unusually honest about lying and and
and the way the way I lie is that I tell
people I'm voting for Gary Johnson's I
couldn't say that he was gonna vote for
Hillary Clinton like the facial muscles
wouldn't work or something would go
wrong but Gary Johnston was sort of the
lie that you could could tell and and
then if you actually look at what
happened in the month before the
election the gary johnson support you
know collapsed from - um like six to two
percent or whatever and as far as i can
tell all of that went to to trump and
and the question one has to ask is were
these people you know lying all along
were they lying to themselves did they
sincerely change their mind in the last
month or some some combination of that
but but yeah one one sort of vehicle for
this preference falsification was that
you had got a third party Canada was
sort of a gateway to the transitions
this would happen with Ross Perot where
the people when you know eventually went
to Clinton in 92 or John Anderson in
1980 so that's been that's been a sort
of repeated pattern and that's I think
that was one element of what was going
on but then I think there were also um
all these all these aspects of of the
Trump candidacy that people were super
uncomfortable about polite society and
and so one would you know that the
preference falsification was somehow
perhaps much greater than in in many
other other past contexts and so you
know even even the day of the election
the exit polls suggested that Trump was
going to lose and so there was still a
two to three percent effect like this
literally the day of the voting well I
look I voted for Bernie in the primaries
and I felt that both you and I had
realized that the Clinton neoliberal
story was a slow-motion one-way ticket
to disaster if it kept going on election
after election so that both of us
recognized that we had to get off that
true of course of course one of the
complicated questions all this is um you
know did people actually already
this and were they lying about this so
like everybody was saying all the way
throughout 2016 most of the people are
saying there's no chance that you know
Trump's gonna win this is absolutely
impossible and I didn't really connect
this before the election but with 20/20
hindsight I wonder was the fact that
everyone was clicking on the Nate Silver
a 538 statistical polling model cite a
few times a day to reassure themselves
that Hillary Clinton was still ahead and
was gonna win was that some sort of
acknowledgment that on some maybe
subconscious or barely conscious level
people sense that it wasn't really as
done a deal as they they were they were
constantly saying so so there's there's
even a version of that question that I I
wonder about yeah I'm you know because
there was something about the polling
that took on this unusually iconic role
in 2016 it was so important and there
was no truth outside the polls I
remember there's you know one of the
Democrat Talking Heads saying something
like you know publicans don't believe in
you know climate change they also don't
believe in polls that's why they're
going to lose and generally polls are
right but there was something about how
how all-important they were in 2016 that
that might have been a tell that
something something was a little bit of
us I think people knew and for my from
to my way of thinking I think people
knew that there was something very
bizarre about this election I think that
the Bernie scare that if the Democratic
Party hadn't been so skillfully and
skillful in sidelining Bernie and we're
the party regulars were you know clearly
backing Clinton my sense is that it
could well have been Bernie versus Trump
and that would have been enough to say
the neoliberal story is over so I think
there was that fear that this was coming
to an end my sense of it was that the
major reaction to Trump was sort of a
class reaction that it was you're
rejecting the entire concept of a an
educated group that knows the right
things to say and you know you're
clearly sort of not the kind of person
who should be in the Oval Office much
more than
the issue of whether or not Trump was
going to be a war monger turned the u.s.
into a police state which of course
doesn't seem to have happened as of this
moment in 2019 yes yes but I guess what
my sense of it was is that people really
were shocked I was because I live in a
left-of-center universe the day after
they certainly pretended to be shocked
no there's no IIIi look I'll concede
your point they were they were pretty
shocked they were shocked but you know
if but I still have my question why were
they clicking on the national interest a
few times a day one version of it was
let's say even if Hillary trounced Trump
but it wasn't enough that would be a
scary thing given what Trump had been
built up to which is a you know orange
Hitler you know if you imagine that your
country is supporting somebody who
thinks all Mexicans are rapists and is
going to take the country back to you
know to the Middle Ages it would be very
disconcerting if such a person could get
20% of the vote so I think that the poll
had his own significance however you
know I I think that one of the things
about preference falsification is is
that when you start to believe that this
is a robust phenomenon that all of the
economic models that assume that your
private preferences and public
preferences are the same you start to
see the world very differently and so
this is one of the portals into an
alternate way of seeing the universe so
as not to get surprised by revolutions
well it's always um you know it's always
this question on in my mind this
question of preference falsification the
two McCrone theories tightly coupled to
this question of you know how intense is
the problem of political correctness
where how how much pressure is there on
people to say things they don't actually
believe and and and I you know I I
always come back to thinking that the
problem of political correctness in some
sense is our biggest political problem
that that you know we live in a world
where people are super uncomfortable say
what they think that it's it's sort of
dangerous to use you use the Silicon
Valley context um it's a problem that
Silicon Valley has become a one-party
state but there are two different senses
in which you can be a one-party state
one sense is that everybody just happens
to believe this one thing which you know
um you know is one thing and then the
other one is in which 85% of people
believe one thing and the other 15%
pretend to and you know it's for like a
it's a dynamic with super majorities
where you know we is in a democracy we
think fifty-one percent of people
believe something they're probably right
if 70 to 80 percent believe something
it's almost more certainly right but if
you have ninety-nine point nine nine
percent of the people believe something
at some point you shifted from
democratic truth to North Korean and
sanity and and so there is there's a
subtle tipping point where the wisdom of
crowds shifts into into something that's
sort of softly totalitarian or something
like that so in my mind it maps you know
very much on to this this question of
you know the problem of political
correctness it's always hard to measure
how how big it is you know politically
correct society of course you know we're
just saying what we think we all love
stalling we all of chairman mao and and
maybe you know we're just singing these
songs because we're all enthusiastic
about it and and i think my read on it
is that that's that problem has gotten
more acute in a lot of parts of our
society over the last few decades yeah I
think that's gotten well as you know I
started this whole intellectual darkweb
concept in part to create kind of a
broad-based and bipartisan coalition of
people who are willing to speak out in
public and take some risk speaking for a
large number of people I would never
have understood how many people feel
terrified to speak out if I hadn't done
that because people come up to me all
the time and say thank you for saying
what I can't say at work and then when I
asked them well what is it that you
can't say it work it's absolutely
shocking mm-hmm
completely commonplace things and things
that are not at all dangerous not not
Saverio frightening
one of the things I believe and I don't
know whether you're gonna you're gonna
agree with this is that you start to
understand that a lot of the people who
are enforcing the political correctness
suspect that they are covering up
dangerous truths so for example if you
believe that IQ equals intelligence
which I do not I mean let's just be
honest about it
you're going to fear anything that shows
a variation in IQ between groups if you
don't believe IQ equals intelligence if
you believe that intelligence is a much
richer story and that no group is that
far out of the running you're not
terribly frightened of the data because
you have lots of different ways of
understanding what's happening and also
you generally find that the truth is the
best way of lifting people out of their
situation so I secretly suspect to be
blunt about and this is kind of horrible
that a lot of Silicon Valley is
extremely bigoted and misogynistic and
it can't actually make eye contact with
the fact that it secretly thinks women
aren't as good programmers where I
happen to think you know fish Aryan
equivalents suggests that males and
females one protein apart sry protein
are not likely to be I mean they might
have different forms of intelligence in
different forms of cognitive strengths
but if you don't actually worry too much
about an intellectual difference you'd
be willing to have an intellectual
conversation that was quite open about
it so maybe I can turn that around is it
yeah I let me see there's sort of a lot
of different things I want to react to
there I um yeah I suspect that it's it's
a distraction of sorts you know I think
I mean I'm this very superficial layer
and we want to have we want to have
debates when I've debates in a lot of
areas a lot of you know hard questions
and their questions in science and
technology and philosophy religion
they're all these questions I think it
would be healthy to debate and there's a
way in which political debates are sort
of a low form of these questions and
there's one sense in which I think of
these political questions as less
important or less elevated and some of
these others
but there's also a sense in which these
questions about politics are ones that
that everyone can have access to and so
if you can't even have a debate about
politics you can't say you know I like
the man with a strange orange hairdo or
I like the mean grandmother yeah um if
you can't even say that then then we've
sort of frozen out discussion on a lot
of other areas and that's that's always
one of the reasons I think the that that
political correctness starts with
correctness about politics and the
that's it this time when you that when
you aren't allowed to talk about that
area you implicitly frozen out a lot of
others that are maybe more important and
you know and we're you know we're
certainly not gonna have a debate about
string theory if we can't even have a
common sense debate about politics or
something like that um you know it's
it's I'm I'm very sympathetic to the
sort of distraction theory that that you
know a lot of these sort of that what's
going on our society is like a
psychosocial magic hypnotic magic trick
where you know we're being distracted
from from something something very
important and political correctness
identity politics in maybe American
exceptionalism sort of these these
various ideological systems on you know
are distracting us from things the the
you know the thing I keep thinking is
the main thing is distracting us from is
the stagnation and is that you know that
there are these problems that that we
don't want to talk about in our society
it's possible it's also a way to
distract us from bad thoughts that we
have about people or the sword use you
said but the one I would go back to
first is just that it's distracting us
from dealing with dealing with problems
you know the reason the reason we have a
new speak the sort of Orwellian Newspeak
and politics with these zombie
politicians and you know you know
Hillary Clinton or Jeb Bush or whoever
it might might be is that we're not
supposed to talk about the real issues
and maybe they have a bad conscience and
I think they're bad people but it's just
I think the primary thing is just too
dangerous to talk about what's actually
going on they don't know what to do
about it and better not talk about that
yeah I think there's another take on it
which
you know if I'm honest about it it
probably originates from my side of the
aisle which is that I have a sense that
if you believe that productivity and
growth is over you don't want to
emphasize issues of Merit because you
don't really think that the merit is
gonna translate and so therefore all you
can focus on like you know a board of a
company is just a bunch of slots at a
trough and so you have to make sure that
every group has its slots at the trough
right because it doesn't actually matter
the board isn't doing anything to begin
with and so it's only a question of
receiving the wealth that is already
there and so I worry that that is you
know I guess where I break with a lot of
progressives is that I believe that most
progress comes from progress rights
technologically led and informational II
led that the more we know and the more
we can do the more we can take care of
people yes I I mean again this is always
maybe naive hope on my part or or um or
something like this but I always think
that when we can't talk about things
yeah I can't solve them and and that
this is exactly and so that maybe these
are maybe these are the calculations you
make and this is you know this is the
way we Pat people on the head even
though they're never gonna get ahead or
something like that but you know it's
never going to work it's people aren't
that stupid and they will eventually
figure it out and so that's that's
that's sort of why I'm under motivated
to play that game yeah and I have to say
that one of the things that I've learned
from you is that it's one thing to hold
it have a contrarian position it's
another thing to hold it when the whole
world starts hating on you for example I
watched the world go from viewing
removing Gawker as removing a nuisance
or worse that was threatening people
selectively to a concern you know about
like First Amendment rights and
silencing you know free speech and you
know III do have the strong sense that
people are willfully misinterpreting
these actions that are necessary to sort
of self correct in our society and are
not being terribly honest there's a lot
of bad faith acting and in our system at
the moment yeah but you know again I'm
always I'm always like this again where
I'm I'm always quite hopeful that people
realize there's a lot of bad faith
acting and they they you know they just
can't like go out of it accordingly and
I you know um you know I I don't know
how many of the people disagree with me
on the the support for Trump you know
we'll be more open to it in five years
or ten years and we'll see on the Gawker
matter I'm you know I'm gonna win that
one and and I think that you know I
think people understand that when it
gets criticized by people in the media
who have themselves are up against super
challenged business models right they
have to act in sociopathic ways to get
clicks by their readers right that this
is just the game they have to play I
think people I agree than you think and
uh and therefore you know it's it's uh
it's not quite what it what it looks
well but but there's also a way in which
boat in both of these cases there's
nothing I think I was I was extremely
disturbed by Gawker a decade decade and
a half ago because I think it was a
really powerful thing at the time where
it worked because people didn't
understand how it worked it was this
hate factory the scapegoating machine
but people didn't see it as such um and
because of that it was it was super
powerful once you you know once you see
how it works once you understand it it
is it is less powerful so you know even
you know had I not succeeded in in
litigation again against Gawker I think
it would be a weaker version of that
today because and you know there are of
course equally nasty things on the
internet but they're not as powerful
because a little well-organized people
people can sort of us the
there's more transparency into them into
the bad motives and people get it and
the hate factory only works when it's
not perceived as such well I think that
there is a way in which some of this
stuff is slowing down because people are
getting tired of the constant state of
beheading figuratively of people via
their reputation that we've moved from
honest physical violence into
reputational and economic violence
against people that are considered
undesirable but I think that like
there's a story with both Gawker and
Trump which the rest of the world will
never see and I wouldn't have seen it if
I hadn't been working with you in the
case of Gawker I don't think anybody
even knows the story about how much you
sweated the ethics internally of how do
I do this right how do I make sure that
I don't hurt anybody that I shouldn't be
hurting how do I make sure that this
represents something narrow and not
something broad which is the story so
far as I know that hasn't been told and
then there's the story with Trump where
I few remember this when Trump won you
had a gathering at your house and you
did not invite me and I was so pissed at
you that even though I was tooth and
nail against Trump and I remain really
pretty close to a never Trump er I knew
why you did what you did I knew that you
felt that it was a reduction in violence
and I think that you had theories that
nobody believed at the time if I look
out at this world F through these
windows Trump has not changed mostly day
to day life except for the phenomenon of
Trump but it's it's no there's the gate
you know a policeman on every street
corner with a an automatic rifle we're
not in some sort of siege from the White
House and you said I think much less is
going to happen than people imagine and
I think we're going to be in a much less
interventionist mode then we were
previously and whether or not you were
right or you're wrong so far I think
you've been borne out to be right on
both of those points I knew that you had
an idea that we had to shake things up
or we were going to be in some very
dangerous situation there was
I mean I had two speeches in 2016 one
was at the Republican convention one was
at the Washington Press Club about a
month before the election and in in both
speeches I you know I underscored the
ways in which I think Trump would
represent a break from the
interventionist neoconservative
neoliberal foreign policies of you know
on that you know Bush 43 that Obama
still continued and that Hillary was was
likely to can been likely to continue on
and and I still think that that's
roughly what's happened it's not been
it's not been as far away from
interventionism as I would like but it's
directionally directionally that's
happened and I think and I think that
you know I do think we're not going to
go back to that on the Republican side
which is like a very important thing
we're not going to go back to the Bush
foreign policy ever yeah that's that's
in him that's that that was an important
thing you know it was it was when when
in the in the primaries when you know
publican primaries when when Trump spoke
out against the Iraq war right that was
you know that was a very important
moment for my point of view yeah and I
think you know I think you know we
always think of the you know I think the
way one way to think of the president
United States is that you're sort of the
mayor of this country and but you're the
dictator of the world because in the
u.s. your power is very limited outside
the US you can do a you know a great
number of things and that's why I think
these these foreign policy questions are
actually are very important ones in
assessing a president well may I guess
my my take on the great danger of Trump
was that there were certain sorts of
standards and agreed-upon cultural
aspects which I've likened to the oral
torah of the United States where the
Constitution is our written Torah and my
concern is that Trump has had an effect
on degrading certain expectations where
it does matter how one comports oneself
the president maybe not as much as some
of my friends would like to think and I
do think that we needed some dynamism
but my concern is is that it's gonna be
very difficult to recover from the kind
of damage to our sense of what can and
cannot be said and done not that I did
think I did think that we needed to
break out of our Overton Window if you
will on many topics I was just the way
that Trump touched those whereas not
comfortable for me yes look I don't look
yeah I agree there are certain ways in
which President Trump does not act
presidential in the way in which the
previous presidents inarguable things
that need it and then maybe said but
then maybe there's some point where it
was too much acting and the acting was
counterproductive and that's that's you
know it's it's it's III I think there is
something extraordinary about how it was
possible for someone like Donald Trump
to get elected and and probably a useful
question for people on both the left and
the right would be to to try to think
about you know what the underlying
problems were with some of the solutions
to that are and and you know it's you
know I think I think I think the the
left or the Democrats you know they
could think it they can win they can win
in 2020 but they have to have more of an
agenda than just telling the Republicans
to hurry up and die well this has to be
more than that this is the thing that
convinced me that I didn't get the Trump
thing which was I was convinced that
Trump was gonna be such a wake up call
that the Democratic Party was gonna you
know go behind a closed door and say we
cannot let this happen again we have to
look honestly at how we got beaten what
this represents what it means and what
we're gonna do next time
and the idea that we were going to
double or triple down on some of the
stuff that didn't work never even
occurred to me I had no idea that that
party was so far gone that it couldn't
actually you know if you imagine that
he's orange Hitler you would think
orange Hitler would be the occasion to
think deeply in question hypotheses and
I really had been shocked at the extent
to which that didn't happen so maybe I
got my own party wrong on that front I
didn't know that we were this far gone
but ya know it's it's I think this feels
a lot of time to to do that and I keep
thinking that you know we are at some
point where where the distractions
aren't going to work as well and I think
the the the big distraction on on the
left over the last 40 50 years have come
in forms of identity politics where you
know we we don't look at the country as
a whole we look at parts of it and and
sort of it on it and it's sort of been a
way of you know um I think obscuring
these questions of stagnation Pharaoh
had a right I would say the right the
right wing distraction technique has
been a would say something like American
exceptionalism which is interesting
which is you know this doctrine that the
u.s. is this singular exceptional
country it's so so terrific so wonderful
it does everything so incredibly well
that you shouldn't ask any any difficult
questions any questions at all and you
know it's if you want the it's it's I
think it in theological or
epistemological terms you can compare it
to the radical monotheism of the God of
the Old Testament where um it means that
God is so radically unique that you
can't know anything about him you can't
talk about God's attributes you can't
you know say anything about him
whatsoever and if the United States is
radically exceptional then in a similar
way you can say nothing about it
whatsoever and there may be all these
things on the ground that seem crazy
we're you know we you know we have
people who are exceptionally overweight
we have we have subway systems that are
exceptionally expensive to build we have
universities they're exceptionally
sociopathic I mean you know of the
student debt problem any other country
on you know we have a trade regime
that's exceptionally bad for our country
like no other country is
self-destructive this they're all these
things that we somehow don't ask us I
think exceptionalism
somehow led to this country that was
exceptionally
and strange and that's uh that's um and
so you know there's you know greatness
is adjacent to exceptionalism but it's
actually still quite different because
many countries can be great and great is
more it's more a scale and there's some
something you measure it against multi
an area it's where as exceptional it's
just completely and commensurate with
anything else and and and I think that's
that's gotten us into have very very bad
cool to sack night I think that there's
a way in which that sort of
exceptionalism has ended on the right
and there's been we've moved beyond that
and I'm hopeful that in a similar way
the left will move beyond identity
politics even though you know right now
it feels like the monster is flopping
about more violently than ever and even
though I think it might be its death
throes but maybe not yeah it could be
that it's gotten very strong or it could
be on its last legs and it might as well
go for broke yes so let me return back
to the the line of inquiry I mean I'm
sorry I just enjoying so much hearing
what you have to say some of its new to
me the the theories that might be
portals into a different way of looking
at the world one of them that you
brought into my I've never heard it
before was Gerard's various theories and
I wonder if you might say you've often
credited your success in business to how
you understood and you applied your army
obviously he didn't have this kind of
level of business success so can you
talk a little bit about your personal
relationship to Renee Gerard's theories
as a portal into a different way of
seeing the world well it's a little bit
about the theory so it's a it was sort
of this um theory of human psychology as
deeply mimetic where you sort of um you
copy other people so just for the folks
at home mimetic as in mime rather than
me medic is in meme yes can closely
relate
you imitate people but you imitate
that's how you learn to speak as a child
you copy your parents language that's
how then you also imitate desire and
then there are sort of all sorts of
aspects of mimesis
can lead to sort of mass violence mass
insanity so it has it's it's both what
enables human culture to function but it
also it also is is quite quite dangerous
and you know when I came across the sort
of constellation of ideas as an
undergraduate at Stanford my my biases
were sort of libertarian classic liberal
you know only individuals exist
individuals who radically autonomous can
can think for themselves and so this was
a it was both you know it was sort of a
powerful corrective to that
intellectually but then it also worked
on an existential level where you sort
of realized while there all these ways
that I've been hyper mimetic I've been
hyper tracked why my Stanford what does
this matter so much why you know why am
i doing all the things I'm doing and and
and that's it's a prism through which
one one looks at a lot of things that's
uh that I found to be you know quite
helpful over over over recent decades I
think the preference falsification you
can think of in mimetic terms where you
know everybody goes along with what
everybody else thinks and then you can
get these sort of chaotic points where
all of a sudden things can shift much
faster than you would think possible
because they're all these dynamics that
are not you know not simply rational
it's not quite correct to to model
people as these sort of classical atoms
or something like that it's more
entangled do you what would be a good
way for people listening at home to
start to get into Gerard's philosophy if
they were interested well there are you
know it's there's for the number of
different books that Gerard wrote I
think the the Magisterial one is
probably things hidden since the
foundation of the world so it's this
truth of mimesis and violence and the
waste so it's sort of part psychology
part anthropology part part history you
know all portal I should point out
because it's the draw hit it's you know
it's a portal onto the past onto human
origins it's a it's a and our history
it's a portal onto the present onto the
interpersonal dynamics of psychology
it's uh it's um you know it's a portal
onto the future in terms of you know you
know are we going to let these mimetic
desires run amok and head towards
apocalyptic violence for you know um
even the entire planet to come no longer
absorb the violence that we can unleash
or are we gonna learn from this and and
transcend this and in a way where we we
get to some some very different place
and so it has it has a sense that you
know both danger and and hope for the
future as well so it's a it is sort of
this you know panoramic theory on a lot
of ways super powerful and and just
extraordinarily different from from what
when one would normally hear there was
you know there was there's sort of like
almost a cult-like element where you had
you know these people who are followers
of Gerard and it was sort of a sense
that you know we had we had figured out
the truth about the world in a way that
nobody else did and that you know that
that was generative and very powerful so
you know it was always this parts of it
that are unhealthy but but it was um you
know it was it has sort of an incredible
dynamism and then just you are aware
that you know maybe things are so
different from how how they appear to be
that you know it's you know there may be
a portal out there there may be you know
what was shocking to me I mean the first
time I heard about it you invited me to
a conference that you were keeping quiet
and I was in the news and there was a
quite a lot of anger and furor that I
had done something wrong and you waited
a few days to give a talk and you talked
about scapegoating and the mechanism by
which violence that might be visited
upon the many is visited upon the one
and then you also started talking about
the King as if he is sort of scapegoat
in Waiting so that the king is not
necessarily something that one would
want to be and I found it absolutely
fascinating because it turned so many
ideas on their heads that I got angry at
you why hadn't you told me this earlier
when I'd been through three sleep
sleepless nights before I'd heard the
theory so I found it instantly
applicable particularly if you're the
sort
a person who's likely to get scapegoated
by not taking refuge in the herd do you
think it has more relevance to people
who are struggling to like break out as
individuals because of the possibility
of being picked off you know I I think
um well I think it has Universal
thinking I think it is you know oddly
true yeah has some sort of Universal
relevance I think the problems of
violence and scapegoating are are
universal problems it is um it's
probably the case there are certain
types of people who are more likely to
become scapegoats but but it's not an
absolute thing yeah and so there is you
know there's always um you could say
there's an arbitrariness about
scapegoating because the scapegoat is
supposed to represent to stand in for
for everybody and so the scapegoat has
to be perceived as someone who's
radically other but then also has to
somehow emerge from from within the
group and so there are there are times
when the scapegoat is the sort of
outlier you know extreme insight or
extreme outsider you know King slash
criminal or you know whatever
personality and that's that's probably a
dangerous sort of thing it's like
Abraham Lincoln the the incredible
orator who's also grows up in a log
cabin so you know these sort of extreme
contrasts are often often um you know
people who who are at risk of this maybe
more than others and then at the same
time you know because these are sort of
mob-like dynamics there is sort of a way
in which you know it's not like anyone's
really safe from the violence right ever
no one no one's completely safe I think
that's quite quite true but yes it's a
it's it's it's it's a yes but there's
sort is a thought that one of the sort
of history ideas that Gerard had that is
is that is that there's a dynamic to
this process where scapegoating it only
works when people don't understand it
and so there's
sort of as you understand it better it
works less well or it has to get
displaced into other other dimensions
and so on you know if you have a you
know if you have a witch-hunt say you
know we need to find a witch to bring
back peace to the community that's sort
of a psychosocial understanding of what
you're doing is actually
counterproductive the witch hunt itself
you know the witch hunt is supposed to
be supposed to be a theological epiphany
right you know that God's telling you
who the witches if you think of it as
some sort of psychosocial control
mechanism then they won't work anymore
and so so that you know the metaphor
that Gerard uses is that you know um the
sacred is like phlogiston and violence
is like oxygen and so you know but but
it only works in a world where it's
misunderstood and so if you understand
scapegoating you end up in a world where
it works less and less well and the kind
of political and cultural institutions
that are that are linked to it will will
tend to unravel you know I think one of
the one of the sort of on ways in which
this this has happened a great deal and
you know in modernity is that we we
scapegoat the scapegoat or sort of go up
one level that's actually and and that
sort of always it makes it a little bit
more complicated and so if we go after
the people who were the historical
oppressors the historical victimizers
that's uh that's often you know that's
often a super powerful way and since
it's like slightly too complicated there
was a there's a Bill Clinton formulation
of this you know we must unite against
those who seek to divide us and which is
on some level itself contradictory yeah
but then it's just a little bit too hard
for people to fully disentangle and
that's that's that's sort of one way
that that I think it's still still um
sort of works even though um you know
it's it's again when everyone sees these
moves when everyone understands them it
just doesn't work that well anymore so
it's like it's like it's like saying
well like would you like me to prescribe
you a placebo
in other words that probably does not
work very well it doesn't work very well
it probably does not work very well and
but then the other part of it that I
find terrifying which is but also
interesting is that implicit in this
framework is that there is a minimal
level of violence needed to accomplish
an end and that the scapegoating
mechanism well entirely unjust has the
virtue of being minimal and yes that the
horror is visited upon the individual
yes yes or the theological terminology
Gerard would use would be the
scapegoating is satanic and that archaic
cultures were a little bit satanic but
not very and they were sort of satanic
in an innocent way because the violence
was actually you know a way to limit
violence that that you know we violated
by Allah knew I've out violence and this
is this is how this is how our societies
how our societies work and then it's
it's it's not quite clear how things
will will continue to work so there's
yeah so you could always say that
there's a sense in which and this is
super broad brushstroke type argument
there's a way in which you can say that
um the left is more focused on unjust on
the unjustified nature of violence and
the right is more focused on how a
certain amount of violence is needed for
society and and there and there are ways
in which um they're both right and then
there ways in which they're they're both
deconstructing each other I suppose you
could say the nation-state
a nation-state contains violence in both
senses of the word contain because
that's good it contains it as it limits
it a channels it in certain ways well
then it's also part of part of its very
being and and you got into yeah all
these questions when you know when it's
appropriate when it's when it's not and
that's why you know I I don't like
violence I think you know it's a very
serious problem but to also recognize
hands instrumental major
she said we're gonna get rid of all
violence tomorrow it's gonna stop you'd
be talking about nothing or I think I
think so he's no way in which that can
well that that might require tremendous
amount of violence to enact or on or if
we're gonna have no more violence at all
you'll you know maybe you'll have just
total chaos and a lot of violence well
in that form so it's it's a it's a it's
an interesting problem to ant yeah
they're sort of all these interesting
descriptors but then how to practically
translate into action very very tricky
yeah I think that one of the things on
the left that people don't get right I
don't know whether you'll agree with me
or not is that I think we on the left
are somewhat divided between two camps
one camp is quite open about wanting to
end depression and the other camp is
cryptic about wanting to reverse it in
other words you've oppressed for long
enough it is your turn to be oppressed
by us and we are actually envious of
oppression and there is something of a
civil war I mean I would say this is the
way in which the IDW is left wing or
left flank is misunderstood which is
that almost none of the left wing
members of the IDW are interested in
oppressing anybody so there's no give me
no payback period that that sounds like
fun to us and one of the things I hadn't
understood until it was said to me quite
starkly if progress is messy you got to
break a few eggs to make an omelet there
is this just tolerance bordering on
excitement about the opportunity to
stick it to those who have stuck it to
you from your perspective that this is
an aspect of justice whereas the
cessation of oppression is interesting
to another part of that group yes much
less yellow the disturbing thing is that
it's of course much less exciting and
much less energizing so I often think if
you if you listen to political speech
right the applause lines are always the
ones we are going to go after the other
side yeah we're we're gonna go after the
bad people we're gonna stop them and if
you try to construct a political speech
in
um it was we're gonna unite people we're
gonna get everybody onto the skull and
there were no bad people um it would be
it's almost impossible to have a speech
that has any energy at all
well I and and and so I you know it's
it's uh let me take issue with that
slightly my excitement was it a
political speech exactly what you said
so I don't think I miss can I'm going to
mischaracterize it I think that the
problem is the reason I pour energy into
trying to stop the political correctness
and and the rules about what can be said
mostly has to do with the fact that I'm
incredibly excited
except I'm excited about something
non-political like if what I'm excited
about is pursuing technological progress
scientific progress more people being
able to form families etc that's where
the excitement is it's not coming from
the politics it's coming from what the
politics facilitates and so I think that
the problem with these speeches is if
you don't believe that there's something
that we're keeping the space clean for
mm-hmm we might as well riot or
something because at least that's
exciting and that's got some energy
behind it and then it's my team versus
your team but I think that would both
you and I have been focus um level
anybody is focused on technology as you
are is a progressive in the sense of
caring about what is actually progress
and I think that that the danger comes
from when politics becomes your
entertainment and you know you read very
correctly I learned this from you that
when you look at a bunch of candidates
debating on a crowd at a stage look at
where the energy is and the energy is
something that is not in my opinion a
good indicator it's not a good proximate
for the ultimate that I care about yes
look I I'd like it to be just the way
you described I I just one of the right
Joey
it often is not and and so yes
scientific technological progress right
in a way can hope as it can lead towards
a more cornucopia in which
there's um less Malthusian struggle less
less violence um and then at the same at
the very same time you know an honest
account of the history these things is
that you know a lot of it was used to
develop or advanced weapons it was in
the pursuit of violence and one sort of
account of the tech stagnation the
scientific tech stagnation is that you
know the the breakthrough thing was the
atom bomb and then you know we and then
you built the rockets to deliver the
bombs more quickly and by 1970 we had
enough bombs and rockets destroy the
world ten or twenty times over or
whatever and the whole thing made no
more sense and and so if one of the big
drivers of scientific and technological
progress was um was actually just this
sort of military dimension when that
became absurd you know did the whole
thing slow down to the Space Age and you
know not in 1972 when Apollo left the
moon but it was it was the key moment
1975 when you had the Apollo Soyuz
docking and like if we're just gonna be
friends with the Russians are we does it
really make sense for people working 80
hours a hundred hours a week around the
clock and again I don't think it's all
that but but I think one of the one of
the challenges that and we should not
understate how big it is in resetting
Science and Technology in the 21st
century is you know how do we tell a
story that motivates sacrifice
incredibly hard work deferred
gratification for the future
that's uh that's not intrinsically
violent yeah and and and it was it was
combined with that in in all these
powerful ways well you know you so when
I think about the way in which the
nation let's say came around is it
because I think this is this is like
this is one of the reasons you know if
you sort of take people you know the a
lot of people deny that there's a tech
science stagnation going on sure but
then you know one of the other things
one hears as well you know maybe it's
not progressing as
but do we really want it to progress
this fast and isn't it dangerous and
isn't it you know we're just gonna build
the AI that's gonna kill everybody or
it'll be you know biological weapons or
it's going to be you know runaway
nanotechnology or you know and and and
III don't think we should you know
dismiss those fears you know completely
they're not completely oh the fear is
that it's going to make these things
cheap and easy whereas right now you you
still need a state to do a lot of this
work I mean you know you let the Elan
musk is one of the first private
individuals with a space program you
know that's a version of it but I think
in general it's just that that somehow
you will lose control over over the
violence you think you can control it
maybe maybe it's a large state maybe
it's you know maybe it's autonomous AI
weapons which in theory are controlled
by state but in practice not quite so
it's yeah there's sort of all these all
these scenarios where the stuff can
conspire a lot of control you know I I
I'm more scared of the one where nothing
happens right so I'm I'm more scared of
like the stagnation world I feel
ultimately goes this is straight to
apocalypse this is the way my much more
scared of that but we have to understand
why people are scared of the non
stagnant world well it's a very straight
I mean point they're a couple of threads
here that are super important one of
which is that one thing that I sense
that both of us get frustrated with is
that if you think about growth as
necessary to contain certain violence
and you think about growth is largely
also being how much fossil fuels you're
able to burn climate is not paired with
kind of a reduction in opulence it's
paired on the other side with with war
and if you over focus on climate and you
result in a situation in which growth is
slowed to a halt now growth doesn't need
to be the amount of fossil fuel you burn
but it has largely been that up until
the present you actually see that the
trade-off that your face
is very different than the one that's
usually portrayed by either side and
somehow we never get around to that
conversation which would be if we were
very serious about climate would we be
plunged into war yeah obviously you
can't have an economy without an
environment but it may also be the case
that you can't have into our environment
without an economy right and and and
then if both of those statements are
true maybe maybe you know the set of
solutions the set of best solutions
looks really different than if you just
focus on one and not the other so yeah
it is why it's so important for me to
have environments in which people who
don't agree on things would agree on
what constitutes a conversation can sit
down with an idea that nobody's going to
leave the table so but the reputation in
tatters to the extent that they can't
find a job on Monday to support
themselves is that you have to actually
weigh both of these things
simultaneously and the great danger is
people trying to solve either problem in
isolation well you know um you know if
one goes with a general climate change
narrative that you know it's it's
anthropogenic it's um it's the co2
levels are rising in in a way that's
dangerous and has you know serious risk
of some kind of big big runaway process
um you know I think always the the
political question my mind is on you
know what do you do about China and what
do you do about India because these are
the countries that are you know trying
to catch up to the developed world they
have an enormous way to go to catch up
and and you know it's a helical
consequence I think Western Europe
you're I think Europe has something like
8% of the carbon emissions in the world
and and then and then we have to have
more than just the sort of magical
political thinking where it's something
like you know we're gonna have a carbon
tax in California and this will be so
charismatic and so inspiring that people
in China and India will copy us and
follow suit and people aren't they're
not willing to actually say that
literally because it sounds so crazy um
but if you say that that's not the way
things actually
work then then somehow you need you know
you need to do some really different
things we need to find energy sources
that are not carbon dioxide intensive
maybe we need to figure out ways to
engineer carbon sinks you know the is
all the sort of crazy geoengineering
stuff that maybe should be on the table
maybe we should be more open to to
nuclear power either sort of like a
range of very different debates it
pushes you towards let me take a
slightly different tack the two
statements that I found later in life
unfortunately but have both been
meaningful to me
one is vapors definition that a
government is a monopoly on violence and
and the other one it's a guy I can never
remember who said I think as a French
political philosopher said a nation is a
group of people who have agreed to
forget something in common and if you
put these things together if you imagine
that somehow we've now gone in for the
belief the transparency is almost always
a good thing and then what we need is
greater transparency to control the
badness in our society we probably won't
be able to forget anything in common
therefore we may not be able to have a
nation and therefore the nation may not
be able to monopolize violence which is
a very disturbing but interesting causal
chain can we explore the idea of
transparency given that people seem to
now associate certain words with
positivity even though normally we would
have thought about privacy transparency
trade-offs let's say yes why I always do
think there's a privacy transparency
trade-off and and and there's it's
always you know it's always a one thing
is always confusing about transparency
it means there's transparency in theory
which is like this panopticon like thing
where the entire planet gets illuminated
brightly and equally everywhere all at
once and and so that's in theory but
then in practice it is often it sounds
more like a weapon that will be directed
against certain people we're on you know
it's a question of who gets to render
who
it's transparent and who gets and maybe
it's even a secret path dependent
sequencing question where if you do it
first for strike first strike
transparency is very powerful and so you
think about like you know um mr. Snowden
against the NSA and then the NSA trying
to expose mr. Snowden's Swedish a sex
cult or whatever you want to describe it
as and and I think a lot of it ends up
having having that kind of an having
sizes
it's very Assange sorry two something
yeah Assange yeah Assange is swedish sex
called
someone's you can see NSA NSA against
Assange is swedish sex culture so bright
like that and that's yeah and and and so
i I think um if I think in practice um
full transparency it assumes people can
pay attention to everything at once or
equally and that seems that seems
politically incorrect then even if you
had this much greater transparency in
all these ways through all these ways
that that would seem creepy totalitarian
if we if we you know if you stated in
terms of the problem of violence right
you can think of the trade-off between
transparency and privacy as you know
transparency is you know we're looking
at everybody and therefore they can't be
that violent but the state may be very
violent and forcing all this
transparency and privacy is you know um
you get to have a gun and you get to do
various dangerous things in the dark and
no one knows what they are and so
there's probably more violence on the
individual level but then less control
on the state and it's again this
question of you know are you more scared
of the violence of individuals or more
scared of centralized violence and you
probably one should not be too
categorical or too absolute about this
but you know it can it can show up in
both places and that's why it's a
wickedly hard problem wickedly hard it
does seem to be and I have to say I've
just I've started to hate the
transparency discussion because if
you'll notice there's a vote in twenty
19:4 simply saying well I believe that
sunlight is the best disinfectant as if
that constituted an argument now first
of all one thing that people don't
understand is that there are infections
like Brucella that are actually
accelerated by someone so it's comical
it's not even true bleach is probably a
better disinfectant but the idea that
that constitutes an argument in our time
to me speaks to the fact that we're
living in a very strange moment where if
you if you go back to Ecclesiastes and
the inspiration for turn turn turn there
was an idea that there was a purpose to
everything and inclusion or exclusion
were both needed a time to kill a time
to die time to refrain from killing
there does seem to be sort of an
absolutist mania in which it would be
hard to imagine writing a song about a
time to kill in the modern era you know
and likewise I'm not positive that
people recognize how imperative it is
for a well-functioning government to
have places where it doesn't have to
constantly account for it yeah
everything you know if you sort of have
no backroom deals
maybe that's less corrupt but maybe
nothing that's functional you know it's
the US Supreme Court still doesn't
televise its hearings and I suspect
that's that's the right call even though
you know that it's there's always ends
if there is something very strict and I
think part of it is that you know if you
know that everything is going to be
transparent you will censor yourself and
you won't say things so it's not like
the same thing happens in a transparent
way maybe just stops happening
altogether if you're if you're you know
if you're a politician or aspiring
politician on and you you want to you
know you're not going to engage in bold
ideas you're not going to experiment
with different different ways about
thinking about things you're going to be
super conventional super curated and and
so it's it's not like we get you know
all the benefits of transparency with
none of the costs they come with you
know they come with a very very high
cost on and and I I do
you know I I do wonder if you know one
of the strange dynamics with the younger
generations in the u.s. is that there's
a sense that you're just constantly
watch there's this you know great eye of
Sauron to use the Tolkien metaphor
that's looking at you at all times and
you know that yeah it would be good if
you could act the same way and you know
something bad happened we could take
care of you but if you're always being
watched
um I suspect it really changes your
behavior you know it's interesting in a
moment where I wanted to make sure that
my son didn't misbehave I toured him
around our neighborhood and pointed out
all of the cameras that would track
anybody on on the street where we live
and you know you I'd never noticed them
before but sure enough there they were
in in in every nook and cranny that we
don't realize that if it has to be
stitched together there's an incredible
web of surveillance tools that are
surrounding us at all time let me ask
you about one more theory before we
break for this session we can have you
on at another point it's been great
talking are you familiar with the theory
of Jennifer Freud's called institutional
betrayal uh I know you've mentioned to
me but I don't know all the details so
tell me a little bit about it well I
don't know all the details either but I
think what she isolated was that people
who have been betrayed by institutions
that have a responsibility of care like
a hospital for example or if you trust a
sense-making organ like your newspaper
and then you find that you've been
betrayed by that institution that had
something of a like a principal agent
problem where you had to trust your
agent in order to take care of you that
the the quality of trauma is in fact
different and that it leads to a
universal fear of the infrastructure of
your society that's sort of what I
picked up what I was going to ask you
about is given our
central belief that there was something
about growth that led to universal
betrayal by institutions which is
compromised experts in the minds of most
people do you think there's a preferred
way of waking up as a society out of a
kind of universal institutional betrayal
if we're excited about the next chapter
what I'd love to talk to you about in a
future episode is what we're excited
about about what comes next is there a
way of waking up from this most
gracefully
don't know don't know about that it it
strikes me that there are ways we don't
want to wake up and we don't want to
wake up in a way where it D energizes us
and demotivates and so you know so I
think I think one of the one of the ways
I think these institutions worked was
you know they they took care of people
but it was also you know motivational
and you study you get good grades you'll
succeed in our system right and and so
one way you know when you sort of
deconstruct these institutions you know
there's sort of one one direction that I
think is always very dangerous that it
just shifts people into sort of a much
more nihilistic very low-energy mode
where it's just well there's no point
nothing can be done and and that's the
way I that's that's the that's the way
that I definitively do not want to wake
people up so I think it has to always be
coupled a little bit to you know um yeah
that these paths that aren't really
going anywhere and you shouldn't go down
these paths but then there's some other
paths here that you take there's a
portal here that you need to you need to
look at and if you uh if we are just
saying all the paths are blocked you
know I think probably the risk is people
just sit down where they are and stop
moving altogether and that's that that
feels like the very wrong way to wake
people up that's
that sounds very wise let me just ask
since you have been attached to some of
the highest energy ideas whether it's
you know crazy sounding stuff like
seasteading or radical longevity or some
other ideas from your background in
venture capital and as as a technologist
yourself what are the things that you're
most excited if we could move them back
into the institutions where they
probably belong to all this time what
are what are the first sort of subjects
and people that you would move back into
institutional support to re-energize our
society um people or programs well I do
I do think there is something about
basic science that has you know doesn't
all have this sort of for-profit
character someone has this nonprofit
character we're building up this
knowledge base for all of humanity and
and and so and so I don't yet know how
we do basic science without some kind of
institutional context and so that's one
that's that would seem you know
absolutely critical you know I I'm super
interested in the you know problem of
longevity radical life extension and you
know my my sort of disappointment in the
nonprofit institutions in nonprofit
world has directed me more and more over
the years to just invest in biotech
companies and try to find these sort of
on better functioning corporate
solutions and then I always have this
worry in the back of my my head that
maybe there are these basic research
problems that they're being sidestepped
because they're four to hard so I I
think I think basic science is is one
that that you you'd have to do and but
you have to somehow also reform the
institutions so you don't have this
Gresham's law where the you know the
politicians replace the scientists that
sounds like a great wedding I was very
surprised to see that your friend Aubrey
de Grey who you funded to sort of get
the radical on everything was in the
news for having solved a hard math
problem in his spare time that nobody
even knew he was working on and so it
seems like even though people would
treat him as crazy he certainly has a
lot on the ball and probably is the
exactly the kind of a person who might
energize a department even if you might
infuriate if you can get him back in you
would if you were able to get him back
and I think you'd be able to solve a lot
of problems well Peter it's been
absolutely fantastic having you thank
you for a very generous gift of your
time and I hope that you will consider
coming back on the portal to talk about
some of the specifics about the things
that you and I are most excited about
doing next we'll do thank you so much
all right Peter you've been watching the
portal with Peter Thiel and I'm your
host
Eric Weinstein thanks for tuning in and
please subscribe to the podcast and let
us know your thoughts in the comment
section below on YouTube
[Music]
[Music]