[Music]
the last time I talked to Zach he quoted
his I think it was Rastafarians friend
who said that school makes you stupid
the money makes you poor and the
medicine makes you sick so so Zach
Zach's been probably I would say Zach is
more of an activist than you are John
but you're both working on different
levels maybe of trying to figure things
out so can can you both can you both
sort of give a short view of let's say
education in the meaning crisis and and
your philosophies on education in
general okay Zach do you want to go
first or sure please totally thank you
John it's actually great to be here and
Andrew thank you as well it's thank you
Kevin honor and so I you know I think
about the meaning crisis in terms of a
broader meta-crisis that has these four
factors the meeting crisis is one and
isn't perhaps the one that is the most
dire and painful in a sense and so aside
aside from it though the other three you
also have what I'm calling a capability
crisis all right so this isn't
necessarily about meaning-making it's
about people can't do the work that
needs to be done is too complex or
because of the meaning crisis they never
gave a about it I've never built
the skills ability screams right right
they so they can interact as what you're
saying yeah and that's and that's a big
deal the capability crisis because if
you can't do the stuff it needs to be
done I don't like a logistical level
like maintaining infrastructure and that
kind of stuff fighting disease you just
don't know how to do it could you bility
crisis and then there's also what I'm
calling a sense May
crisis or what Jonathan are also called
after me something like an
intelligibility crisis mm-hmm who does
again distinct from the meeting crisis
but related and has to do with this
sense that outside of the meaning making
there's also just intelligibility we
can't
everything is illegible we can't read it
too hyper objects are kind of like
looming over us and the descends making
crisis so that just like in terms of
what's the case objectively with the
world that's up for grabs in the sense
to the post truth and that cascades into
the meaning and then it also counts
gates and capability because if you
can't think straight rather we'll began
operating on it and then the fourth one
is what I'm calling the legitimation
crisis yeah which i think is really
important for the jetta mation crisis is
in the aspect of the political it has to
do with basically who gets to wield
authority and why and so and again
they're all related but this one's
distinct insofar as it makes it so that
we can't even decide who should be in
charge and how the leadership should
function and we don't believe in the
forms of political justification that
have been given misogyny so things like
the breakdown in the belief of democracy
in America is an example of legitimation
presses that'll turn me on so you said
that political but you also oh sorry you
broke up I was saying that that term
comes specifically from hotter boss
legitimation Christmas you know yeah
Zach just a clarification question so
you said it's largely political but you
think that the disenfranchisement is
also in cultural institutions as well
like established religions things like
that is correct yeah precisely and it
links in with my notion of teacherly
Authority right right very much a crisis
and the authority structure of the
Society of the whole it's most acute
often in politics but in the university
is a huge issue
yeah yeah our our expertise to be
respected or not
so I wanted to ask you one question
about that as you mentioned this before
and I thought this was a well this way I
sort of perked up when you said there's
not the other ideas aren't good but I
realized last time you spoke to me about
this I it's made me think quite a bit
about it I was wondering if I'm part of
this so this is an open question
I'm not framing a cryptic position here
it is the idea that it's not only that
we're getting disenfranchisement is we
don't know how to adjudicate between
various institutions when they come into
competition with each other um is that
also part of what you mean by legit like
so there isn't an overarching shared
normativity that allows us to adjudicate
you know when because harbor mas seem to
think that right you know you have these
can he you know these autonomous spheres
and there's nothing that transcends them
that decides how conflicts between them
are supposed to be resolved is that also
part of what you're thinking as well
yeah
in essence yeah that's what I was seeing
it was a as a complete fracturing yeah
he was writing that I think is like 72
legitimation crisis and so it was just
that when post-modernism most beginning
which is what in a sense this is all
about really it's not all about but it's
a big factor with the breakdown in
hierarchical structures and breakdowns
and things like teacherly Authority and
political authority normative Authority
parental authority all kinds of
Authority and power are become question
power itself becomes problematic as from
any sense have good connotations becomes
hard to even think about and so under
those conditions when you have that
fourfold venner crisis meaning crisis is
in there then you it's encapsulated also
in this notion of intergenerational
transmission being profoundly disrupted
and that's what the matter is this is an
educational crisis at its foundation
only Worm those follow from a certain
kind of failure in the dynamics of
intergenerational transmission mmm-hmm
at least that's part of it and why
there's that failure why the generation
gap becomes the way it is that's
interesting question but it's hard for
me not to see these as at their
foundation being part of an educational
meta-crisis so that's my that's my and
your view on medic on education I think
is larger than just schools right mm-hmm
I think that's very important like how
you talk in turn how you talk about
magic education and so maybe we can
think about education what what how is
education operating today in terms of
schools and then education outside of
schools like education that's happening
let's say right now and our conversation
and education that's happening in
subcultures and everywhere else so so so
John what does how does how does that
ring that that fourfold kind of current
crisis how does that match with your way
of looking at things well I've always
said that I didn't think the meeting
crisis was exclusive
I thought the crisis was interacting
with the orphans idea of the meta-crisis
and so I think Zac and I are already on
convergence on that point as I just
mentioned I think Zacks idea that he's
taken over from Habermas and he's he's
connecting it I think in really
important ways of the legitimation
crisis i yeah i think that that makes
total sense to me I haven't said
anything about it just just because I
haven't had it's not an area that I've
devoted time to work do I so my neglect
indicates nothing of value
it's what I'm saying about that and so
that's why it's a pleasure to talk to
Zack Bowden on the sense-making and the
intelligibility issue that I think that
might I'm not sure so this is maybe an
open for discussion and it might overlap
with an aspect something that I often
pair with the meaning crisis although
they're not the same and it would also
relate to education so I often I also
talk about the wisdom famine in our
culture
and it seems to me when we're talking
about sense making if we're moving
beyond just sort of the accumulation of
information that's been sort of
institutionally vetted I think we're
talking about you know the ability to
make judgments the abilities of
discernment the ability to properly
self-regulate in the face of information
and problems and I think therefore there
might be deep connections between wisdom
or the Wiz what I call the wisdom famine
which also has to do with some things
I've just mentioned the loss of
intergenerational because part of what I
say is we we've lost our wisdom it
traditions or wisdom institutions and
the connection to education is there's a
way in which I think you could
understand wisdom as you know the
project of educating sense-making to
reduce self deception and manipulation
by others and so there might I think
that Jack and I might be talking about
related in similar things there mm-hmm
I excuse me the trip I also want to tie
into Zacks notion of Education and
relate that to religion in a way and so
you mentioned wisdom and so so you add
John has a notion of religio right which
is a bit distinct from religion proper
and and I've heard that speak about the
importance of let's say or we've we've
talked Zack a little bit about how a
kind of there's a gonna be a kind of
religious Renaissance going on so so I
found that that John speaks about how
we're not able to take religion
seriously anymore and and and Zack has
been saying that religion is becoming is
it's coming back kind of in spades or
this is religio or religion or whatever
you want to call it seems to be coming
back and that that has to be somehow
fused with with education does that ring
true I think that's I think that's a
very opportune connection you just made
for having us the three together three
together I'd like that framing that you
just gave
I I guess what yeah I think when I'm
using the term wisdom although I
mentioned discernment and you know
judgment wisdom also has it within an
aspiration and self transcendence as as
integral to the notion and that that
brings with it immediately
I think together these two notions of
Education broadly construed Plato set up
the first school the first Academy
literally right and it was for the
cultivation of wisdom and it was spoke
it was a place where you were supposed
to be able to receive the affordance and
the guidance for the Socratic the
project of aspiring to Socratic wisdom
and I think that's very clear but that
also brings in something that was also
too pointed to by Plato which is that
that self transcendence makes very
little sense if people do not have a
reverence for an order that transcends
their ego centrism
if they do not have a sense of where I
mean by reverence a sense of being
connected to something that is in some
it it has a it is greater than them from
which they can view their previous
perspectives in a self corrective self
transformative manner so I think if
you're talking about wisdom wisdom we're
talking about not just discernment and
judgment we're talking about aspiration
we're talking about aspirations to self
transcendence and that links us
simultaneously on one hand to education
and on the other hand to getting back
that sense of connectedness to what we
consider sacred that which puts us into
connection with you know a greater
reality the inexhaustible nature of
reality and so I do I think that those
things are all tightly bound together
tunneling I couldn't agree more and you
know the I mean there's many many things
to say I mean the the first schools or
wisdom schools really yes you know
and it was only much later that we got
this thing that we know of as a school
before that most of the
intergenerational transmission was
religious family based etc but the first
things that were built like in these
places between worlds like outside in
the wilderness between civilizations
like on the road when there wasn't code
and there wasn't norms you had this
mystery school and yeah it's interesting
it's a very very important concept
education and of course it's easy to
misconstrue it I alive I really
appreciated the way you construed it but
much of the wisdom research I find kind
of disappointing you know and you know
there's it's interesting to that that
sense making is tied into the wisdom and
that you can almost think about the
different each of the different of those
four crises as having some resolution
and certain learning them in the realm
of sense making it seems to be wisdom
and it may be that wisdom operates on
all of them in a helpful way but besides
making in particular because right right
now when the problems is that we're
facing situations where it's not
something that needs to be fixed in fact
that the sense making needs to us to
confront something that can't be
understood perfectly in an objective way
and so therefore we have to take the
forms of discernment and self
transcendence in decision-making in the
realm of objectivity in causality right
and this is born this point without the
hyper object embarrasses the cognitive
function and we're we're left to be in
community with one another facing
problems that are actually intractable
from a purely causal we have to think
about choice and the basis of choice and
the weight choice works then you're in
the realm of wisdom and as I said last
night with your Andrew yeah you don't
get an education without real living
religion that's what I called it
yeah I actually met religio not like
Catholicism that's working or but isn't
it's working but this actual
transmission of wisdom yeah but we don't
teacher-student that's the only way it
happens and right now that's what holds
the education system together
despite the education so I get a sense
that you have you have more maybe I'm
trying to think of the right word that
you have more affinity for for actual
religion than John does or something
like that or for the let's say the the
myth or poetic aspect of religion or the
the wilder aspects of of religiosity
that's the word I'm looking for
I'm not sure if that's true I don't know
John well enough to know that but I it
may be I mean I I really think that the
religions are quite a remarkable
cultural resource and so in that respect
would never take the view that you find
among the New Atheists and people of
that nature who think religion was a
huge mistake I think it was not
I'm not saying john thinks it is you
think no no no yeah yeah totally and so
but the question of how you bring it in
to contemporary contexts is super loaded
because it's very difficult in some
rooms and in some cities and cultural
niches to use religion in a constructive
way in fact it can only be perceived in
a usually like a in a destructive way
and so so I'm sensitive to those
dynamics but but I do think that there's
a there's something that's like there
are typically loaded they're like are in
terms of their over determined they like
there's so much saturated with meaning
and so I think they're going to be
continued to be useful to humanity for
an extremely long time and we need to
come to terms with that well we'll never
forget Jesus will ever forget but our
Socrates for as long as what we know of
as civilization continues in any kind of
way and for as long as we think that we
can some have overcome it entirely and
create this conflict between let's say
science and religion that seems to me to
be really weird like why are we doing
that like for ratings or something you
know like it doesn't make actual
estimate
that there's a conflict between science
and religion so yeah so I you know I'm
not suggesting again prayer in schools
but I am suggesting that part of being
educated is grappling with the key
symbols and practices of the great
traditions with the kind of world
spirituality that's Daphne and Oprah
called it or a new perennialism as a way
to think about this which is some of the
work I'm doing at the Center for
integral wisdom Wow new perennialism
yeah yeah so this is Gaffney's term that
we've been building out as part of cosmo
erotic humanism and the perennial list
was an amazing movement and it was like
all of a sudden taboo you know ken
wilber was a Mentalist um there were
many of them of course Huxley and so org
and T liard I mean the list goes on and
on but looking for those under key
underlying dimensions and is part of the
reconfiguring of Education that's
necessary it's one of the key themes in
my book it's like we need to deal with
this a new form of relaunch
excuse me religiosity and spirituality
need to characterize the educational
institutions of the future yeah
especially for one piece and meaning and
other things so do you agree with that
John did I did I misconstrue something
that you said or let me try and say what
I don't know if you do I did Andrew
first of all I liked what exact just had
to say although I want to I want to talk
a bit of a perennialism in a bit I want
to I want to know what's new I want to
know what's new and Neil perennialism
differs it from I like Huxley and
perennialism for example so we can come
back to that I have a set of conference
that I was just talking about you know
that I was giving a argument that you
cannot go through self transfer you
cannot you you cannot use inferential
computational procedures to go through
self transcendence that there's some
very deep arguments for that and so I
think I clearly articulated this ghost
mythopoetic point injured that i think
two things are really important for
aspiration and self-transcendence
serious play and us symbolism where
symbolism doesn't mean a culture a
cognitive ornamentation symbolism is a
particularly of relating to the imaginal
that allows us to move between John with
this identity in this frame to that John
with a new identity in that frame which
is what taught what we need to be
talking about John is talking about he's
aspiring to how to be and to write and
to be in a world because it's always
existential that he's not in now when he
talks about things like wisdom I mean or
rationality I'm aspiring I'm aspiring to
an identity I don't have and a way of
seeing and understanding things that I
don't have now I'm aspiring to a more
comprehensive frame and I need something
that's Jane is faced in that liminal
place between so that I can keep I can
write it can reach me in this frame but
it can lift me towards the next frame so
I think symbolic activity is really
important I think serious play is really
important and my prototypical example of
serious play is ritual serious play is
how we go into and play with that space
between identities and worlds so that we
can get a taste of what it would be like
to what it would be like to be in that
world and have that identity without
fully committing to it then I was in my
toe in the talk I just gave I was
pointing out about all these emerging
forms of serious play and ritual like
Jeep forming in Scandinavia where people
are doing live-action role-playing and
what they're doing is they're trying to
create a situation where they're you're
not doing Dungeons & Dragons what
they're doing is enacting a real-life
situations and and the dungeon master is
actually like a director that will get
them to cut scenes and switch roles and
give them various props and the
phenomena
they're seeking is the phenomenon called
bleed and what they're after and bleed
is that the distinction between what
they're doing in their pretence of game
and their real life that boundary bleeds
so they're getting a taste on what this
could be like in their real life well
that it took for me is deeply deeply
analogous although it's taking place
formally with in a secular discourse and
people who consider them suck that is so
similar to what people do when they went
into church right that kind of serious
play that kind of ritual I mean you're
going in like the you know you're
playing with identities you're playing
with alternative frameworks other than
your your your your own and you're doing
this all within active symbolism think
about baptism for example within the
Christian complex so I think what's the
difference then sorry to interrupt like
what's what's the difference here
between well you know is who was it who
said everything is religion in a sense
like well well then Dimity I don't want
to do that useless category right I
don't think everything is the difference
is and this comes up and I want to
address that point you know the new
atheist assumed that most of the people
that are the nuns the N o NES are
basically they've been convinced of the
falsity of religion and they're all
atheists
but that is overwhelmingly not the case
only about 10% of those people
self-identify as atheist many of them
you know have you know really crazy
worldviews and they have you know
hodgepodge of spiritual practices the
hunger for self transcendence the hunger
for serious play the hunger for ritual
all right and the hunger to get outside
of the the prison of the ego these these
I'll use sucks terms these are perennial
these these don't go away but what's
different between the nuns right and
people who would identify as religious
has to do with commitments right to
particular institutions and particulars
of propositions I think I think we
should pay very careful attention
to the religions in terms of how they
can be valuable sources for ecology keys
of practice that we should pay very
careful attention to when we're trying
to cultivate ecologies or practices but
for me those religions are off have been
often bound up with and that you know
and there's a spectrum here from liberal
to fundamentalist so I am acknowledging
the spectrum right now but right they've
been but let's but they have often been
bound up with adherence to particular
sets of doctrines about the metaphysical
structure of a worldview and I find the
metaphysical structure of many of these
worldviews well first of all I'll speak
on behalf for the nuns because I had
brought it up they find that
metaphysical structure and the
institutions that identify with it they
find it and I am viable they do it just
it doesn't catch them it doesn't
resonate with them or it feels to me
that it's kind of a no-man's land
it's like either you make it all up as
you go along or you're you're trapped in
some kind of formal structure well well
you can understand why they're
traumatized right they're they're
traumatized by the fact in fact the a
secular alternatives drench the world in
blood and so they don't want to belong
to put you know big political machines
but they many of them have seen the
various religions traditions fragment
around them and be admired in
controversy and scandal and also too
often many people myself included have
you know have suffered personal psycho
psychodynamic trauma at the hands of
established religions and so they feel
they make a mistake I think it's a
mistake but I want to explain what well
I think it's an understandable mistake
they think allegiance to any group or
any tradition will automatically make
them vulnerable to all of these kinds of
terrors once again what they don't
acknowledge enough and I think what you
put your finger on is that that
autodidactic fragmented thing is really
really prone to self-deception
and all kinds of you know which
you see if you actually look at sort of
the things they espouse and the and the
practices they try to cobble together
yeah I'm thinking of Zach's term
teaching Billy Authority the crisis of
teacherly authority as being maybe I'm a
key right here like we need teachers
right we need hmm do you want to comment
on that sorry
yeah I mean I agree with with John I
mean I think the the issue of what to do
with their religions is a big one
because they've been massively probably
Mac they've also drenched the world in
blood and this drama that has many many
many people and and so yeah it's really
interesting because I think it's easy to
compare like the worst religious
discourse to like the best scientific
discourse well correct we need to look
at the best religious discourse yeah
and we could look at the worst
scientific discourse where you're giving
a lot of the same you find in
religion except it's called science
that's a lot of what's happening right
now in the world that's causing many of
the problems that are drenching the
world and blood is the religion of
scientism let's call it sort of a freeze
in lab coats or well that's a whole
complicated conversation it has to do
with critical theory and political
economy and nature of the
military-industrial complex a whole
bunch of other things they ratified as
wrong bhaskar showed related to
positivism certain kind of worldview and
so at this point I feel like you know if
you're kind of like beating that kind of
like this dead horse
these pre-modern religions like those
have been passing away and it's been a
death throes but the largest to Germany
implanted right now terms of power is
the one that's run by science and
engineering and so that's interesting to
me then you look how that's become an
educational thing that the largest
reforms in schools in the United States
were on the back of the Cold War
and that they were not motivated by
religion their remote or I even ideology
they were motivated to get scientists
working to meet the Russians this is
right after Sputnik has massive influx
as all the STEM education began and then
used to run you know whether that's been
handed off not to some kind of economic
god is interesting but part of me wants
to look again at the things we used to
worship before and think about how we
can get self-transcendence
as you're describing Jon like how do we
actually have the archetypes to step
into the mystery schools were theaters
rights to your point about the role
playing and the seer display their
mystery schools were theaters and so
many of the initiation rites that went
down were theatric and the ritual being
like the mass being the living symbol
then right up to steiner who actually
resuscitated some of those it's the at
tricks to encode a new kind of
initiation ceremony and so yeah I'm
seeing some need to find a way you know
some needs to work with these symbols
and to kind of grapple with the
resurgence of religion which could be an
invitation to refine it so again and the
difference between the theatrics of non
religion and the theatrics of religion
let's say if we want to call it the at
record the two kind of ritual would be
something to do with the historicity of
the religious right when I chant Hebrew
chant this has been chanted for
thousands of years when I make up a
chant with my friends and we chant then
we take it very seriously and we can get
into an altered state that the chant has
not been chanted for thousands of years
by humans mm-hmm and so that's the
transmission that you are speaking about
it's nothing to do with transmission
it's something to do with less calm more
for genetic fields if I can bring the
shrill Drake into the room which is
perhaps controversial
at least to the scientism ground but it
has so it has to do with the insolvent
of humanity as an ontological factor
which is to say that even in a whitehead
e'en sense we're moving through a
sequence and there are patterns that
remain and so we step into temples in
space and temples in time and so the
ritual can create those you know this is
one of the notions of the Sabbath right
that it's not a temple in space it's a
temple in time and it's been made for
thousands of years so that's different
from creating a focal space to do Improv
Theater and as amazing as that is as
important as on this to do in that space
a ritual that's been done for thousands
of years it's different and so so yeah
and can schools plug into that in any
way right schools the United States
don't plug into that we plug into your
additions that are a couple hundred
years old at best and we don't even
really buy them like the you know
saluting the flag and on defense so the
question of how to unite humanity again
around things it's an interesting one
and right now we're desperate for it
we're super longing for like the Super
Bowl and other things these spectacles
we put in made-up holidays Valentine's
Day other things we put so much
attention into these things because we
want something that's what we must
remember together that's meaningful also
the virtual Exodus how much how often
people are willing to spend most of
their time and invest most of their
identity in these virtual worlds right
tell us because they're they possess the
orders of intelligibility that these
people many people feel are lacking and
in the so called like in India I think
the properly called real world you know
there's there's a narrative in which you
play an integral part there's a normal
logical order of rules that make
everything clear and intelligible and
makes problem-solving understandable and
then there's also a way in which you
level up you transcend and all this is
very well understood and and you and
your actions
directly contribute to successful in
those three orders and I think I think
the hunger for for this stuff the
spectacle you you you mentioned the the
the ER to Chris master Pietro and Philip
my Civic and I call the Earth SATs
religions like comic-con where you get
people I don't believe in religion and
they dress up as people and they spend a
whole day
typical in Bamiyan and they're getting
the archetype like strong he's in the
superhero heart to our typical Pantheon
city is fascinating
we had a weird replacement for religion
bulges for what sorry we we you you cut
it up for a second I think I spoke over
I didn't mean to no well I just said
like it so I think that does point I was
just strengthening your point about
there's clearly a hunger at work so I
guess there's there's two there's one I
guess two questions I want to ask and I
want I want I want to enter into good
good-faith dialogue about it because
that's something I deeply believe in so
one of the things I mean so because I
followed the debate the the perennial
list constructivist debate quite quite
deeply you know and it's it's even
showing up you know in carbon science
and the debate between like for men and
cats I won't burn the viewers with all
of that but there here's what I want to
say I guess I see perennialism as
pointing to what's importantly invariant
and I see the constructivist pointing to
what is importantly varied and deep
learning it actually cycles between
those two you you expect what's
invariant and then you have to know how
to vary it so that you get appropriate
fitted it to many different environments
and you need to be able to move very
effectively between you know compression
for what's invariant and generation of
variation I mean that's how evolution
biological evolution for example works
and of course I think ultimately that
has to do with things about relevance
realization so
we might bring this up as I explained in
explaining this idea was Jordan Hall and
some of our discussions that maybe could
we get past that that way of thinking
the you know perennial list versus
constructivist and instead of go to a
dynamic model where what we're trying to
do is not say no what people should be
doing instead of trying to get a stable
set of doctrines what we should be doing
is teaching people again an ecology of
practices that allows them right to
extract what's invariant but also then
run right to learn how to make run the
variations off of it so they actually
get this they actually instantiate the
adaptivity rather than trying to see
through the my criticism I like Huxley
by the way we have a family I can you
know I mean how can you not like right
and you should and I and what I might
say next might be a little bit unfair to
actually because you should read the
doors of perception alongside the
perennial philosophy but if you read
just the perennial philosophy it's very
it's and how could it not be again I
don't want to be unfair to because it's
a book but you can get the impression
that it's about trying to find the
shared doctrines their shared
propositions and tomorrow in mind um
this is this is this is still a
problematic way of thinking that what
they what we need to be doing is not
trying to find the perennial
propositions what we need to do is
affording people like I said that
process of well can you can you look at
all these traditions then draw out
what's invariant and then also can you
go back and in this context it becomes
this way and this context becomes this
one you see my model for this is
Socrates what's impresses about Socrates
seems to be like he's a you know what it
looks like his although he's looking for
his definition so that's not right
there's a there's a part of what
Socrates is doing is he's trying to he's
trying to get what's invariant but you
know it's also masterful about Socrates
how he buries that to whomever he's
talking to right yeah that's what makes
him the great teacher not just the
abstraction of what's invariant but the
generative the creative ability to vary
it as
and those two are constantly cycling
right when you're doing engaged in deep
learning so that that's why I don't know
I sort of don't identify as a perennials
or a constructivist I think I'm trying
to I'm trying to try to break out of
that at least how I see that often
argued about and discussed and I
wondered what this what this might say
how it could enter into dialogue with
what you're talking about exactly you're
talking about sort of a new perennialism
oh and I kind of let the cat out of the
bag
because that was that's caveny it's work
he's been working on this for about a
year and I've been in close conversation
with him can Wilbur's been in close
conversation and but there's a very real
need to get beyond that false dichotomy
and to see that even the staunchest
constructivist admit that there is some
commonalities and even the staunchest
people looking at commonalities are the
first thing they say is that well
different engines are all different
stones it's actually been a false debate
for a long time again one of those
things that's like it's visit for
ratings or why why are we making this
such a big deal why can't we actually
agree here because there's a tremendous
amount there's a tremendous amount of
important work to do in that domain and
so I'm loving what you in Jordan they're
saying the share Jordan as interlocutor
and yeah there's a sense in which I'm at
you know in a friendly way and there's a
yeah there's a sense in which what
you're getting outs to as a
developmental issue that there's a an
ability to work at a level of
abstraction and compress complexity with
domains of practice and propositions
that does allow like the Huxley like
move of pulling out things for ones Oh
making one's own personal synthetic
perennial tradition for yourself
basically um and so that's a quite a
hefty task demand on the individual and
what's interesting about the
when you start breaching the
constructivist view with the / Ilyas
view and you start to see what it would
look like to have both somehow you end
up with that as the educational
recommendation so I love what it looks
like theoretically it's like well I'm
not in the theory anymore I'm actually
about in ecology of practice I'm trying
to create yeah we write informed by the
informed by this new neo perennialism
and there's a whole bunch of other
things to say about it which I'll leave
for when the books you know but one one
of them is basically that there's a
there's a common sense there's a kind of
what we call an anthro ontological
Givens and so these are the things that
when Socrates epitomize them these are
the kind of natural working of the human
that moves into the realms that would
create a religion right and like what is
that dynamic of the human being that
leads up and through those are very
complex stack to create these things
which you're identifying John which are
like the underlying structural features
of religiosity and so being able to
distill some of that and saying that the
result of that in almost any domain
you've started to see things like first
hand for like life matters I got an
interesting proposition let me first
write that there is right and wrong I
mean these kinds of things like not not
here's what's right here's our drawing
can't say that but that there is right
and wrong right so you start to get to
these anthro ontological gibbons and you
start to be able to look to work with
them in different contexts and at you
end up getting something that looks like
a set of propositions eventually but
also like a way to craft Ecology's of
practice after that people can have a
refined perception and those become
things that they could prove basically
instead of things they have to believe
and so so yeah so I think we're working
in it from similar angles like we're
coming in from different sides of the
mountain to some three middle
and you know maybe we're taking the
faster longer route but you're taking
like this direct route and the yeah so
so I think yeah we're talking in similar
similar vein here that feels like a
convergence in the sense that you're not
talking about Commandments or rules of
behavior but you're talking about some
kind of something more dynamic or
something more something edgy or yeah
it's a negative and yeah sorry did I cut
you off it's not gonna mean - no I
please well I was just gonna say I yeah
I think so and it comes back to this
notion of serious play yeah I think of
Sinclair's work on you actually watch
how children learn you see if you see
you see this dynamic process let's say
they're trying to learn something for
solving a set of problems to achieve
some goal they'll come up with a
strategy for it right but what will they
do is they will they will they don't
stick with that strategy initially and
this is what happens in play they will
generate all kinds of variations on the
strategy and then they will put the
strategies into competition with each
other and then they'll until they get
one that sort of wins that out and then
they go with that right and and so what
I'm saying is you see this movement of
they'll update here's the situation
they abstract some invariant thing they
come up with a strategy but then they
don't stop there then they do this
generative variation right and then they
keep cycling and cycling and cycling and
cycling and I want I want I guess what
I'm trying to say and you see the same
thing in you know in Hinton's deep deep
learning that's how these things work
they they cycle between compression and
particularization I want to put an
emphasis on keeping the cycling going
rather than trying to stabilize it into
a complete set of propositions that have
sort of resolved you know the the baffle
between the constructivists and the
perennial list but that's what I'm
trying to advocate sounds like you're
saying something similar Zac am i right
yeah I mean and I think it's that focus
on the theologies of practice that
allow for the self-transformation that
allow for the personal synthesis like
that are you each end up being able to
have for yourself a set of propositions
many of which will be in overlapping
consensus with the propositions of
others and pedagogically it's
interesting because you do end up
needing simple lists of propositions to
tell kids and so when I think of the
free play and I think of the way rituals
spontaneously emerges actually think of
PJs the moral judgment of the child when
the kids are playing marbles and so is a
completely free and it'll actually talk
about Jordan about this there's an
employee up in space like literally the
kids have like the teachers are there
but they're not teaching the kids how to
play marbles the kids literally create
the game of marbles and it's a very
serious game in which there are right
and wrong and morally good and bad and
they have the young kids don't have
rules but the older kids give the rules
basically but the rules are flexible
often they know that can change them at
the beginning when you ask a kid who
invented the rules of marbles he says
basically a god dad some of that but by
the end by the adolescence planning
marbles when it's my very high stakes
because they're taking the marbles home
they should get marbles to take away if
you win you get a bunch of marbles they
know that they created the rules and the
play there is both physiological with
the marble they would also die illogical
we just say how do they without parental
intervention without the teacher coming
in how do they resolve a conflict either
is the rule being applied or is the rule
a problem and then how do you know if
rules a problem is it fair and then you
go right up and into the rosianna
Kohlberg in developmental sequence but
yeah so there's the there's the creation
of the free play in these different
realms and the free play in the realm of
the intersubjective and specifically in
the realm of let's save Africa bone is
what's interesting I think pedagogy and
hard to create those environments
because and so this gets your point
about we can't count if I a list of
rules that makes those environments
disappear right we need to create
environments precisely where
young people and young adults and adults
probably find a way to resolve their
disputes through dialogue and through
the creation of norms together as
opposed to the procedural application of
a norm to a situation like legal for
example or force and so yet with the
disappearance of the playground and the
retreat into the digital the total
intermediation of that and you know
they're developing a conflict in
asynchronous text-based exchange is
given then doing so I mean in you know
there's so-called real-world experiment
we don't know what the consequences of
that going to be exactly the
disappearance of the playground can join
to the virtual exodus we're running this
huge social experiment that's gonna have
I think some pretty nasty consequences
or that are kind of unforeseen by us
right now I I think you mentioning that
zach is I just want to put a pin in that
because I think that's something
important that needs to be brought more
into the public discussion as something
that we need to be thinking about more
much more carefully can I ask you
another question then sure because you
said something more provocative and I'm
gonna really I'm gonna really commit to
trying to stay open and relaxed here I
mean I I am a scientist by a profession
and I also think by vocation I love
doing science I don't just do it for a
salary I do it because I believe in its
capacity to make things better I'm not I
think I get what you say about scientism
I'm definitely not a positivist I do not
think that meaning is based on our
capacity for verification of our
statements i I think positivism is a
self-defeating
epistemological view so I completely
reject that I think I know what you mean
by scientism I think I've said something
similar along those lines and that I
talk and Kris and I talked about you
know propositional tyranny that we think
we've tried to reduce all forms of
knowing to inferential
computational propositional knowing and
a generation of theory and belief and
that has cut us off from a procedural
knowing respectable and participatory
and those which are much more embodied
and embedded and inactive kinds of
knowing are the main locus of where
religio and meaning is made and so that
that propositional tyranny which I've
tried to trace the history out I think
is a significant cause of at least the
meaning Christ is part of the fourfold
crisis so I'm deeply critical of that so
I guess I I guess I'm also dealing with
a bit of cognitive dissonance right now
myself I'm trying to my my like I say my
vocational allegiance to science and my
rejection of pop which I've sort of
found a way I think of holding those two
together consistently but I want to know
what you think about that and and then
of course and you know I think we should
pursue this because I think this is
directly relevant to how we see the
Academy right now because I do agree
with Zack that we've tried to tsiyon
ties the Academy in wait that's
inappropriate I was talking about this
today that you know that this this
fixation on stem is removing the
training of imagination and serious play
and symbolic and the imaginal and in all
the process despite and which oppose
also with the disappearance of the
playground I those are right those go
together which were the places where we
really cultivated perspectival and
participatory transformation so what do
you like yeah I mean it's sort of a blob
of words but I'm just trying to sort of
lay out at no for me this isn't
obviously what I'm saying this is not
just a theoretical issue this is an
existential issue for me and I have
great respect for your thinking so I
want to you know enter into some
dialogue here totally and
I may have said a little estoppel but do
you remember I was saying we sometimes
compare the worst of religion to the
best of scientific discourse now saying
could compare the best of religious
discourse to the worst a scientific this
person I call the worst of scientific
discourse scientist
right as if it was a religion capitalist
right then I said something like
military-industrial complex and a couple
of things and another way to talk about
scientism is something like techno
industrial scientific reductionism which
is the key is because I I couldn't say I
couldn't say actually I haven't spent
enough time to hide it maybe but it's
it's much more running at it's not an
obsession with propositions that's true
it is in fact an obsession with
applications specifically for
renumeration and a capital gain
so after Bhaskar wrote its philosophy of
science he then went on to a dialectical
period where he cashed in the cheque
that he had written to the positivist
about the fact that there was something
and this that had to do with the nature
of how the economic system was wrong
so basically scientism the reason
scientist some holds strong even though
it's actually not great for us has to do
with messed up incentive systems in the
production of scientific knowledge so
that in many cases it's not the unforced
force of the better argument it's not
even the thing that makes the most
scientific sense and so that is one of
the key vectors there that's had down
downstream impact on I think leading us
to these forms of the propositional
obsession and kind of reductive way of
thinking about right and bit of
knowledge and wisdom doesn't make sense
there's no interior or gates and all
that stuff but mostly the stuff that
worries me has to do with the places
where we can't even really do I love
science I also consider myself a
scientist and I want to save science
from scientism and I want to save some
specifically from the techno industrial
opportunism and instrumentalization of
science which is different than science
like is that a good place to bring in
the iatrogenic plague that you talked
about last time yeah I mean that's the
most scary place where it happens but
happens everywhere I I don't know what
you're referring to with that term can
you answer Janek has to do with injury
caused by
medical care basically oh I should
insert the notion being that if we have
a medical system that runs not ons not
for science right but for profit yeah
you could say it doesn't run for profit
well in America it does right and the
pharmaceutical industries retur
multinational which make more capital
than almost any other industry or for
profit I'm not reducing everything to
the profit motive but I am talking about
an incentive structure if that makes it
so that advertising revenues
direct-to-consumer advertising revenues
occupy most of what's a pharmaceutical
spend its money on not a research and so
the question of also how to bring to the
public attention things that are
problematic with the medical
infrastructure from a scientific
perspective when they've been so encoded
in the social fabric that it becomes too
hard to even talk about them but this
happens in all fields right so there's a
there's scientific discussions that we
had about fossil fuels which can't be
had their scientific discussions we had
about solar panels and the fact that can
we create net positive energy production
from solar panels or not that's actually
a scientific debate it's not clear you
know if you put them in space we good
for right now it costs more energy to
make them then they can pull so that's a
scientific debate for example it's not
being had that needs to be had but
because of certain motions in the
culture and specifically in industry and
economic growth and incentives of those
nature will you get scientism which is a
set of propositions about what's true
that set of propositions about what's
true about the objective world or about
your own body or about your own mind
that proposition becomes the thing that
regulates all these institutional
domains and interactions and ritual
spaces and question them it's very hard
all right how do you question it you
actually have to become a expert PhD
expert and so you're at the whim of the
propositions wielded by sign to some
future capture that's like the most
negative way to paint scientism now
that's what I was asking for
yeah I think that's you're doing a great
job so I actually know somebody like
personally here in Canada who's working
very hard to address the the plague you
were talking about we're trying to bring
a lot of transparency into and we're
getting like legal success on this into
the funding of pharmaceutical research
medical research this is a big movement
that's gaining steam largely due to
environment one individual and because
we Canada has a different culture
towards healthcare it gets more traction
here so ideally appreciate what you said
now that I understand the play you're
referring to so I was talking with
Johannes about you know the high
daguerreian idea about science and
technology being and did some framing
and a way in which it sort of traps us
into you know a cultural having mode we
see we see the world as heidegger's idea
as a standing reserve and it exists only
in its service to service that it can
provide to us and that we lack an
ability to even ask how we might matter
to it or how we might be in service to
it or that it might how to what degrees
it transcends our grasp of it and that
we should therefore respect it precisely
because of that this is or the high
daguerreian critique and it meshes back
with what we were talking about earlier
because I think of Thomas björkman
argument that as we've lost as we've
lost sort of you know religion and
perhaps science at least in the in the
way maybe you and I Thomas are all using
attack we basically what's the market
has been left as the default authority
we don't have anything that represents
values from the being mode we don't have
anything that does that we don't have an
institution
and I'm just wondering because you know
we used to have we used to have three
things that played off against we have
to the market and we have the church and
we had the king right and you could
always play them off against each other
and so there was this tremendous
capacity for you know self correction
and self constraint and not just in
action but also in theory and so what
I'm trying to put my finger on is it
seems like we've got this homogenization
of power down to the market and then
we've got right hamato were like we're
getting into deep moral confusion the
only mode is the market mode following
from which is you know the having mode
and modal confusion and then this lines
up with perhaps what I think I hear
you're saying we're where science is
understood or I would say misunderstood
as the halving of propositions and then
all of those things would line up like
they would mutually reinforce each other
in a powerful way is that does that land
with you does that does that sound like
it's it's connecting with what you're
talking about
yeah I mean very precisely and your
canons point about the fact that all
authority so the crisis of authority
that we were talking about legitimate
doctrine
the result of that is that well it's the
market now that's the only thing that
can serve and so that means that yes
science you can apply the commodity form
to science itself
yeah which is you put the scientific
finding on the shelf and you're actually
occlude everything that created the
scientific finding actually applied to
the line so that it speaks to you as as
a commodity almost like second nature
and then you just accept Oakland and so
yeah it's and that's the weekend the
worst scientific discourse right but
there is science going on or poor we'd
be dead back amazingly so somewhere
there are institutional niches where
there's been a preservation of the kinds
of interpersonal relationships and
personal practices that actually allow
for science to exist and doesn't
everything to remember about science is
that where I should talk about
scientists right here are people and
their capacities and their meaning
making nation and all of that stuff and
where are they and how did they get
trained and
and so yeah it's it's interesting
because as much as I am trying to I'm
critical of stem and the over emphasis
on stem but I'm also like we really need
actually better scientists and so it's
not that I want stem to be dialed back
instead I want somehow there to be an
understanding that you can actually do
stem if you don't have the human figured
out that the scientists won't be able to
work if I can't make meaning of their
lives like this is just what's going to
happen and if that's the case then we
actually have to handle these other
dimensions of Education or to prepare
scientists actually be able to value
truth for example as opposed to value
renumeration which is the default value
that decides what you should value
exactly and so yet the call for the
humanistic education is actually to save
scientists and to save scientific
civilization it's not to pull the
funding from science it's to say no
actually look at this world we've
created with your pure scientists who
haven't been trained holistically as
let's say Plato or Socrates would have
demanded they would they were trained
and so yeah that's interesting kind of
confluences of where the conversations
led and I think it's very important
right because who's the wise scientist
where's the wise well I think we need
why scientists I've actually made that
argument I just wondering then if
because we've now circled back again to
our educational history because I think
part of the problem has been at least
I've made this argument that provides
historical reasons we separated two
educational institutions I think it's
fair to call them this given their the
broad notion of Education we both for
all all three of us are using here you
know when we separated the monastery
from the University in the Middle Ages I
think that has had that has sort of
reverberate it and it it's let I mean
because then then the university touches
to the state and then the university
then attaches via the deconstruction of
the state to the market and that that's
well I think in a very powerful way how
we ended up where we are right now I
mean that's an incredibly exciting
what you said to me because that's like
that's like the thread through and it
has to do with what happened when the
Enlightenment got going right and the 30
Years War and the fear of religion right
and the meeting for yep that's two
separate these things and eventually the
separation of church and state but yeah
you get the powers of truth and beauty
and goodness if you if I can say that
attach to the state as opposed to a
chance to the church so there was a
deadly the University gotta hand it over
to eventually the state apparatus and
then eventually in the market yeah and
and so yeah the question of how to pull
the Academy back into the sacred and
make and the the places that make the
person which are you know traditionally
the religions but ever as we've been
saying that needs to be rethought so now
you're imagining academic knowledge
production know what did with the kinds
of apologies have practice that that
produces and look that way you just said
that I like that idea about trying to
make the creation of a person within a
community of persons the central task
that we're talking about because we're
not we're not oriented that way right
now
I mean we're not oriented that way we
wanted to towards you know making making
consumer producers as effectively as we
can but I think I just what you just
said there I think that's a real gem in
the dialogue trying to make that you
know that that that awesome and I mean
that in the sense of filling us with all
that awesome project that sacred project
of making persons within a community of
persons that the central thing we're
trying to were we're trying to do I I
think that that I think that's a
beautiful thing to have said yeah thank
you
I was as well also Bonita said the same
thing when I talked to her it's just the
redefinition of the human being or going
back to another vision of the human
being right as not being some kind of
end product or or but a process and that
that should be the the main thing
yeah main main main point of Education
it's it's just it seems like an almost
uh overly obvious thing which every
missing out completely right right and
the way you articulated and the slope
what you're saying Andrews correct and
it's because of what what John was
saying about Heidegger's notion of
technology right that we don't we asked
what it can do for us basically we don't
ask but we do for it yeah even in school
we're thinking about it well I'm gonna
go get this job so I can get that money
and then do that thing right or whatever
if you're they can conventionally or
something but you're not thinking about
what wait a second if I get that job how
much of my labor time will actually
contribute to the wages that go to that
guy and if I buy this thing how much of
that goes to so you're not thinking
about how you were actually needed by
the system your um and so if you flip
the script you realize now that the
school is actually making me so I can be
useful to that as it goes through a lot
alright so then if you flip it as we
discussed and you and put the tempo of
learning at the top of the whole
economic stack and then you end up
saying oh no what it wants from what it
wants for me but the whole technological
civilization apparatus once for me is
for me to be me there me to develop that
seems to be a deep complexification of
everything because one of the reasons
why we're in this state when I think of
my students is weird entirely confused
about that question about what it means
to be to be human is that make it I
don't know we should ask that question
Oh Andrew I think the question we had
before ism is is a little bit more
precise question which is what does it
mean to be a person in a community of
persons because I think that's what
we're what we're pointing to with the
word human the problem I have with the
word human is its nebulous and it shows
up in multiple domains you can get into
all kinds of equivocations but when
we're working right whereas I think this
notion of person making and and and and
I keep I keep hearing Tillich in my mind
you never have a person without a
community of persons around it and
that's just a developmental truth right
persons are not made in an
individualistic fashion
they're made of the communitarian
fashion always okay I don't I hope you
don't feel any no no worry no no worries
I just I'm also maybe a human is
something that's we're all human but a
person is something that we become well
that's but that's what I want that's
what I want ever you want to say right
yeah I want to emphasize your humanity
is something you have but I want to talk
about to go back to what we were talking
about I want to talk about this you know
that to which you aspire right right
which is the being mode there's an
element of transcendence there yes yes
exactly what we're saying and therefore
it carries with it it carries with it it
carries with it the the the deep
connections to well as we said the deep
connections to education and to a sense
of reverence for something that is
possesses sacredness for us don't
actually like the reframing of the
question from what is a human to the
question of what is a person or what
does it mean to be a person in a
community of persons and the question
what is a human is one that I ask a lot
and I realize I'm actually asking that
question that the human is perhaps the
only thing we know that can become a
person right and different from being
sentient different from being
intelligent as being a person and this
is part of the AI problem is the making
of a person and the being of a person is
it's actually interesting because it's
part again that talked about the best of
religious discourse right very very
interesting stuff about the nature of
person in the theistic traditions like
it was to get Corbin's work on the Borg
angelology and the notion of the
imaginal and that it's populated with
the person's then you get all of these
possible transcendental operators that
can we do through the imagine but it's
mystic wants the person not human which
is very interesting so thank you is the
human also something to kind of
transcend it in a way or am I going too
far here that's the thing like you're
from zero like if there's like a
human nature you know like there's this
question of limitation all right but the
person is kind of playing an infinite
game if I can say that like that's your
hand because you're lifted up into this
realm of person making which is
something like this communicative realm
it's linguistically mediated it's
imaginal and and so again now we're back
to the Hebrew tradition but that notion
that we've each got a letter in the
Torah right that sense that the person
lifts the human into something deeper
than just material reality and yeah the
the new etic and the imaginal basically
are the qualities of the person you
don't find in material or that animal
arguably now animals have personality
personality is different from personhood
begins right we sort of misuse ended up
misusing that term and in psychology and
when we talk about personality theory
now because that's fine we we need to
talk about sort of dispositional traits
I get that but we when when we when we
started using the word personality for
that we didn't replace it with
personhood as another phenomenon that
needed to be talked about and so we got
a neglect because of an impoverishment
of our conceptual repertoire that I
think has been sort of disastrous for us
so this did I mean I don't know if you
guys know but I got to talk directly to
Tom at Thomas Cheetham about Korbin and
all the work he's done on it we're gonna
talk again about it and about Korbin so
this this brings me again to something
about maybe I want to move question
about a reformulation of the notion of
person in some way I don't think I don't
think it's a degradation of concept so
Zach you talked about you know Corbin's
you know in geology and you know I
talked about the sacred second self
staying talks about the divine double
and
talks about us not being individuals but
being individuals that we're there
there's all it's like Apple Annie's idea
that attention is always a from - it's
not just a single thing we are always
from - were from this self right to the
sacred second self right and so and we
and and Angliss Keller talks about that
and about how you have that weird
structure and aspiration that I'm the
cause of the future self but it's
actually the normative authority over me
and if we're gonna really wrestle with
that we can we this is a difficult
question and because we have a long
heritage of the self being just the
secular version of the soul and then
again you guys both know I'm deeply
respectful to the mystic religion so I'm
not I'm not trying to be insulting here
but there was the idea of something
encased or at least it's come to be
understood that popular cultural I think
that's fair for me to say that it's
something that's you know encased inside
of me in my head right and that's what
that's what my self is and then I
understand personhood in a completely
interior way and it completely almost
like you know brain centric way such you
know well you could like the matrix you
could so much just download me somewhere
else right and you know you know the
cosmic the kind of cognitive science I
practice sort of calls all of those
assumptions deeply into question and
says no no you are you you know your
body isn't clay your your cognition is
constituted by you being embodied you
being embedded you being like I say
enacted and now you know I even want to
add this extra component that your your
personhood is constituted aspirationally
it's it's right and so you're you're
you're much more you're much more
distributed than you are sort of
isolated and compressed and locked in
sort of a brain centric notion of what a
person is did that make any sense it was
that
yeah that's beautiful I mean I have I
completely agree and there's a few
things the same in that notion of the
divine double is just beautiful yeah I
just love this notion and there's so
many ways to I think work with it in one
of the ways I think about sometimes is
with regard to like someone like Hillman
it's all there's actually probably many
right that you're you don't want to be
monotheistic about your divine yep
double but actually they're probably on
the set of trajectories that your divine
double as a museum as a musician like
the pan architectonic it's completely
different from my divine double as a
scholar or something I mean they're not
form a community yeah for Emily what's
evolving and in a sense what presents as
the personnel is is a conversation that
the self is actually a core conversation
between the many divine doubles that you
have so the self is inherently
biological to inherently biological
precisely and potentially the self is
witness to a divine dialogue between the
archetypes that are basically living
within us oh oh oh oh that's tasty so
this goes back to you know sort of well
you know the antilog within the
Augustinian framework of the you know
the psyche
it's an SI AIT's some of the you know
the form of the Trinity but what you're
saying is right the dialogic itself you
know has participatory knowing it
actually instantiates right the futures
of the dialogue the dialogue in is by
through action which is not just your
head the whole the whole body the whole
body becomes basically like a it's what
I forget may have been korban according
someone said it was the imaginal ship of
death and it's and so that that sense
that you have and so in this there's a
movement tradition actually the Rasta
who told me that quote practices spatial
dynamics his name is hunter Turin
he with spatial dynamics is a movement
based practiced in the Rudolf Steiner
tradition essentially if you've gone to
a Waldorf School
games and your games teacher and Walter
School likely trained in spatial
dynamics possibly was and the the whole
movement the most one of the most
incredible things ever said is that
every gesture begins in the future yes
that there's actually but there's any
imagination when you're doing movement
practice of any kind there's actually a
you create an imaginal shell around the
body and actually move into the frankly
what psyche of the imagination yeah
that's very it's very much like he works
with touch you guys a lot and so yeah so
there's that notion that yeah actually
when you're holding the divine double
correctly you're holding the full image
of the body and in a sense the way of
thinking about the resurrection of the
whole body your refine the actual matter
of your body through exercise of
imagination it doesn't mean you're not
material it just means that you're in
this imaginal worship of death instead
of being in some bag of skin it's also
that
how's it good I'm glad we got up and
into that the logos project that I'm
engaging in right now right because I'm
trying to get what's going on in deal
logos and dialectic as you know an
ecology of practices for trying to
afford the logos and how it's something
much more beyond dialogue as we where we
use that as a synonym now for discourse
and you know so this kind of stuff we're
talking about here's exactly you know
and you see aspects of this in the
Neoplatonic tradition around dialectic
I'm so I'm just I'm just saying I'm just
think I'm sorry I don't want to waste
everybody's time I'm just explaining why
I find it very helpful and then and it
is I mean I found it I found reading
Hillman and then Corbin and looking into
these ways of thinking about the
imaginal realm within basically has
extremely therapeutically helpful
because once you understand the divine
Devils not one then you get that there's
going to be internal tension between
your divine elements basically that even
the best parts of you could be in
conflict
for time and attention let's say in your
life and that's going to cause emotional
tension and so then you can actually set
up internally and sometimes you can put
it out in front of your constellations
which I've seen done we create you
actually create a dialogue in the
constructive imagination between your
two divine but that's an interesting
addition to this dialogue Louis idea too
isn't it that you're not just dialoguing
with another person you're dialoguing
with all your different sub
personalities and that was always here
that was always there yeah I just am
hearing it for the first time popular
Republic right it has it all through the
Republic and young young also has it to
some degree too but what I what what
came out for that for me was what the
this move of of taking that sense of the
sort of the intrapsychic
you know you know dialogue and also
putting it out into the aspirational
dialogue and then so there there's sort
of this dialogue and then there's a
dialogue out and then there's a dialogue
between all of the angels right if you
get a lamp with that symbol
so there's actually sort of three
dialogues that need to be brought into
consonant together that's what sort of
lighting up in my mind right now Andrew
that's what I'm sort of like aha yeah
and I've never seen all three of those
I've seen a couple of them in isolation
tonight when I think of the divine
double I think of this one thing I that
so I'm very not what's lighting up in me
is is is is it just makes total sense
then it's the pagan Gloria it's the
pagan glory of polytheism right it's
also the HOS the Elohim a right right
right yeah beautiful it is the Elohim
you know and yeah and that yeah so
there's that there's the refinement of
that conversation within which helps to
get the actions basically correct and
Hannah dog it becomes this much more
multi-dimensional process that's what
I'm thinking which isn't really really
interesting to me
yeah that's very cool
I've got to go soon gentlemen because we
start at 4:30 to 6:00 and we it is
almost it's the clock we have we have
I would very much like to do this again
I found this well as you just saw with
my enthusiasm I know this is namely
insightful and helpful to me I hope you
guys able I would much like to do it
again and I want to thank Andrew for
putting this together
oh I feel like I've just wandered into
an amazing place and and this is now
fantastic for me I'm so grateful to you
guys and I and I have the sense that
other people would be very interested in
this conversation too so so I'm really
happy to put this out yeah yeah I mean I
would let Andrew if you if you don't
mind sharing the files with me I'd like
to put this out on my channel too
because I think it follows up and you
know I released our first conversation
on my channel recently too so yeah you
know it's all of a piece I think in an
important way and I I would also very
much like to introduce Zack because I've
mentioned him multiple times but it
would be a wonderful way of introducing
him to my viewers mm-hmm his amazing
gasps this is like an anticipation of
this almost like it was going to be a
music jam that sort of felt like kind of
nervous gonna be a jam because it's a
triple it's a triple it's not a diet
I think it would I think this went
extremely well Andrew I think it feels
like that to me is there please I'm
doing extremely pleased yes if anybody
wants some closing thoughts they want to
state I I'm still here and willing you
know happy to listen did you have
anything else to say
exactly no I mean the meanest gorgeous
right now
[Music]