good morning happy Mother's Day
welcome to the very last possibility
during the pandemic I'll be doing other
things
there still is possibility during the
pandemic just not I won't be going live
every day at 8:30 in the morning I got
what I was meant to get out of this
hopefully other people did too and
moving on to other things but so usually
on Sundays I tell the story
honestly besides if he Mother's Day and
I was like also a story of how I became
alone didn't resonate I don't really
want to do that it's my Mother's Day
it's not going to it's already on my
channel and no one does what sorry Julie
Jay I don't know nobody does anyway so
yesterday I read this post I included it
in the broadcast and I'm gonna include
it again today because it's still
sticking with me and I just also weird
things are happening around it or like I
just posted it taking B and people
commented but I can't read their
comments and that's a Facebook thing
that's really weird oh thank you the
actual question right right because that
yeah the question is should should
people always return the card and this
thing that I shared I'm gonna share
again I had to find it that's why it was
a little late going live um I decided to
share their post a change you're gonna
see people's public comments on it as
opposed to just their page where then
you're gonna see my contacts which I'm
not okay with because they haven't
agreed to that so the others people have
posted on this thing publicly so if
they're on here I don't think it's too
big it's on Facebook it means everything
in a public Facebook group is public
nothing fun okay let's add this read it
so the shopping cart is the ultimate
list litmus test for whether a person is
capable of self governing to return the
shopping cart is an easy convenient task
and one which we all recognize as the
correct appropriate thing to do to
return the shopping cart is objectively
right there is no situation other than
the dire emergency in which a person is
not able to return their cart
simultaneously it is not illegal to
abandon your shopping cart therefore the
shopping cart presents itself as an apex
example of whether a person will do what
is right without being forced to do it
no one will punish you for not returning
the shopping cart no one
find you or kill you for not returning
the shopping cart got another piece of s
you gain nothing by returning the
shopping cart you must return the
shopping cart out of the goodness of
your own heart you must return the
shopping cart because it is the right
thing to do because it is correct a
person who is unable to do this is no
better than an animal I'm gonna read the
next part can only be made to do what is
right by threatening them with a law and
of course that stands behind it the
shopping cart is what determines whether
a person is good or bad member of
society it's not a source of info it's a
it's just that I'm just talking about
that and I'm referencing that so I
needed other people to know what a
reference e so but I read it yesterday
on a friend's Facebook page and then I
went with the comments you see is the
actual original post I'm not part of
that group I've no idea about that great
you go to the comment section though
there's people who feel very adamantly a
lot of people that they should be
returned it is up so the right thing to
do how dare you think that it could be
any differently and then people like is
already happening here who are like wait
like those people paid to do it or any
other reason to not return it and the
very beginning part which is the whole
thing I'd wrote on my friends page is um
to return the shopping cart isn't any
easy convenient tasks and one which we
all recognize as the correct and
appropriate thing to do no no we don't
because there's people who along the
side who aren't even agreeing with it
and along the sides of the comments
there are people who say that they can't
return it and so it isn't either
like none of that is correct to return a
shopping cart is an easy it's not easy
for everyone it's not convenient for
everyone and one which we all recognize
as the correct thing to do when I got go
I was reading it is also part of what
the reason you do it is the perception
of everyone around you
right if I don't return the shopping
cart I will be seen as a bad person and
so the response like reading that makes
you want to return my shopping cart less
like it's like if that's your litmus
test for self governance my litmus test
for self governance is you'll return
your own shopping cart and you
soon good for the reasons other people
have a nurturing her shopping cart and
if it really is bothering you return the
shopping carts and then if you get tired
doing the work that isn't yours because
all these people should have done it
then you learn with yours to actually
deal with like oh just ignore the
shopping carts everywhere there's people
whose cars get dinged a break because
shopping carts are blowing in the wind
why do you have shopping carts I don't
know outside if you should have it in a
Windy City on days of it's windy there
should be an employee is standing
outside just collecting the carts just
doing that all day every day but it's
not the it's not the store itself hasn't
had one person do that job they have one
person who goes out of a few hours and
collects the carts but otherwise is
stocking shelves and doing other things
because it's their bottom line and it
doesn't make sense the person who gets
their car dinged not really on the
shopping on the shopping center that's
in the terms of service that's on you
the fact the cars make their cars in a
way that when a dent happens you have to
go to a mechanic and get them to service
and it cost money is also a bigger
concern in the bigger economy than just
this like and that's the point a
shopping cart this instance doesn't
exist in isolation to the rest of your
life as a person the rest of their life
that you're making everyone be you and
that you think everyone should return
the coffee to the shopping cart that's
easy
and then that you're saying that good
people do it regardless of whether
there's a law or not there's tons of
good people who are like right no I'm
doing I'm helping the employees have
something to do there's one woman who
it's like I like having a cart right
there when I parked my car all right so
I do that for the next person they're
doing what they think is ready hmmm
think of you
right and that what even that right it's
like well then is it the action itself
ie littering or returning a shopping
cart that's good or bad no cuz it
depends on why I told the story at one
point in one of the conversations in the
last few weeks my I don't I don't know
what it was on one too many video I was
having you know there was this protest
in one of the Scandinavian countries in
like the early 90s late 80s where there
was too much packaging on everything
they
the storms they came up to the park on
every before they got in their cars
rather with their shopping carts they
probably returned their shopping carts
they took off all of the excess
packaging and left it in the in the
parking lot the shopping center was
eventually got tired of it and so if
they were going to sell things in their
store and had to have minimal packaging
on it and so they changed the industry
and so in that case littering is the
right thing to do so the act it's in and
of itself of returning a shopping cart
or littering can't be the thing that's
right or wrong so what is and in the
instance of the literally and they had
an intention that was just right the
reserve there was a protest there was a
reason whether you agree with them or
not and so then it's the intention of
the person what you're reacting to when
you hear that people don't return
shopping carts and therefore you think
they're lazy and inconsiderate or
whatever you think I mean this thing
literally says they are bad people they
are animals incapable of like.he regular
human decency it's like no that might be
if you were doing it what would be the
case but that doesn't mean it's actually
there
there's their circumstances and like I
was I was I wrote out ten different
things I was like here are 10 reasons
you could not return a shopping cart and
they just kept copying so it was like
well listen you should read people's
comments you don't feel like you're
listening to a podcast that's true but
it's also my last day so the learning
that now is probably not gonna happen
there is a link in the comments on
YouTube which doesn't appear as logic on
YouTube to come and join on camera which
why am i stopping because I'm reacting
to your comment no no figuring out that
I'm like I should be in the moment you
react to the comments especially since
it's my last day oh and so but I'm also
working through working through this
myself but just like today was supposed
to be a story tie but I'm like I'm still
dealing with a shopping cart and so I
will I will try to do both even though
I'm not gonna be on any more alive which
is what I discovered that's not sure I
just will only be I'm not gonna be on
live on a schedule that will come live
ready the universe calls it but that the
shopping cart like a task in and of
itself doesn't exist in isolation so
even if it is safe and convenient to mr.
safe and convenient I learn even if it
is super easy to return a shopping cart
that's for you it's there's no task on
this planet that is easy for everybody
that is convenient for everybody and so
for some people grocery shopping is this
like blipping your life you're doing it
on the way home before you cook dinner
for your family and take you know your
son to saw her and your daughter to
hockey right like it's 30 seconds to
return your cart nothing more with all
these recipes and considerate people we
all gotta get our kids to hockey and
soccer no some people save up all of
their energy for days or weeks in order
to go grocery shopping then they get to
their car they have to carry their
groceries and it has perishables just
like everybody else is they've gotten
home before in the past and their ice
cream has melted because their body has
collapsed and they haven't been able to
put it in and it wastes it that food not
has happened to me before I do rich on
shopping carts cuz I know when I'm
crashing now I know how to how to deal
with those things but there are days
when I don't incant there are days where
it doesn't make sense to the other day
when I went shopping there was a guy who
was asked because we have order lived in
Canada we have deposits in our parts and
put in a dollar so we actually don't
really have this problem with shipping
hurts everywhere
it used to be Porter knows and I will
read that in a second and this guy came
up and asked can I return your cart
right he's asking for the dollar for the
convenience for turning my cart
yes absolutely go for it thank you like
I didn't return it in my in wrong
like but return it's like what is it
what is it has never been shopping but
that's like we have all of these tasks
if we had to opt buys all of society for
returning shopping cards if we decided
this is the ultimate test of Bute if you
would be which the whole point is it's
not right it's this side thing that we
can litmus test people you can't with up
with someone's whole life you don't know
what shopping is for someone you don't
know attorney in a shopping cart is for
someone right and so it's like we're
judging them based on this is a one
minute task that should not be a problem
for anybody except when it is so where
did that stop then the money you mean in
the cart it didn't it just went from
when 25 cents was enough of an incentive
and some of them still use 25 cents
because it's more money take change them
over to Lanie it's more just you put
money on you got it back out right when
you were turning the cart
what do you mean to win it what about
when it's raining how does that affect
do you mean what about when it's raining
like you're less likely to return it
you're more likely return it I don't
know but that yeah that like weather
might play a predictor right you just
got your hair done and it's raining
you're like I got I didn't run to your
car or get the groceries head and leave
that doesn't seem like a very high
priority to me right but I don't know
what they did their hair for might be
their friend's wedding it might be
anything right like you don't know how
important this is to them maybe they're
beauties their highest thing they think
if anyone sees them not looking at the
pristine best they're gonna judge me
we're loose in a job a we literally
don't know what someone's going through
cuz they're reacting to what they're
doing means of them we're reacting to
this person we created instead of who
they actually are so we don't want to
know who they actually are we don't want
to know what actually is happening in
their life we just want to get angry at
them for not returning the card in the
first place hmm it rains all the time
here that's why I was like what do you
mean
choppy - the rain isn't that just normal
you get wet your groceries get wet it's
good fun then you drive home in the rain
I do not concern myself with my hair
guess what that's about really matter
this person they created yeah it's just
that you're you react to do a person you
created and
if the fact that this is a side list
this test is the problem because it's
ablest is like it's like you have
these things on my list actually are
like this person this person or someone
they love could have a medical condition
that you're on in no way because that's
also the comments on the side of of the
Facebook host is um my name is Jubilee
I'm just talking who's talking with me I
mean there's no I'm talking with me
looks the one here oh you mean like the
sorry I meant like on video cuz you
should have someone on video like
there's no one here are you seeing some
home video screen that'd be interesting
yes I didn't need to discount you oh my
hope that was gotta be no one's here no
one's here I meant on the screen not in
comments you can see how great I am and
children comments and so figuring out
because this is as I posted it in game B
because like is this everyone's idea of
self-governance cuz we talk a lot about
sovereignty and then I looked at the
difference between sovereignty and
self-governance and it sounds like
self-governance was basically just like
the sovereignty of a group which is
weird because it's called self evidence
but it is kind of like how a co-op
grocery store might run is that like all
of it all the people are like well you
know cuz someone said that employees
when they were younger and they used to
work at a grocery store they liked going
out for a smoke break and so it was the
thing they wanted to do so I'm just like
oh yeah but at Walmart we're not allowed
to smoke on property we have to only do
this one does the place over fired like
why isn't that the distinction of a good
human being whether or not you shop at
Walmart when they treat their employees
like
like that's a much bigger like better
leavens test and still not because you
don't know the reason people are
shopping at Walmart but why that's
you're good like that you returned your
shopping cart when you're passing off
all of your externalities unto the
workers in the environment for
everything
well yeah
leaving carts behind isn't what is it
simplifying a very complex subject to
one sentence yes it is that's the whole
point
it really is it's say it's making a
statement the returning a shopping cart
is easy and if you don't do it you're
not a good person so it's like wait why
is the person doing it when you talked
about litter right is the person picking
up litter because other people are gonna
judge them or because it's the right
thing to do as someone who just doesn't
want to see litter I don't actually care
why you're doing it I'd rather you just
pick it up but that doesn't mean every
time someone litters they're a bad
person
I might make them a bad person it might
make me angry and I feel wrong by having
to pick it up after other people if it's
bothering me but that doesn't make it
true
again I could make the list of why
people my litter that's all the harder
ones to do them the shopping cart
because most of us agree delivery is
wrong whereas returning the shopping
cart that's part of it 90% of people are
like yeah of course you idiot
return it and then the other 10% are
like what what do you mean like that's
what we do I thought I was being
considerate I thought leaving it there
was consider I thought leaving it there
was no big deal so we don't have the
same level of importance on the tasks
this level of ease of doing the task
isn't the same and our life
circumstances definitely isn't the same
and so there can't be an easy litmus
test of what self governing is to me the
litmus test of self governing is what do
you do in that circumstance and how much
do you need everybody else to act like
you think they should because you're
never gonna be in self governance if you
if you need the world to work in a
certain way you need other people to
react to a situation that you want them
to react like that's none of self
governance where it's least not
sovereignty me returning my car because
I think it's the right thing to do and
assuming that if somebody hasn't
returned their cart they have a good
enough reason and I don't get to judge
with that reason is it if it bothers me
enough then I can then return it so if
it were to return discards exactly
exactly
what the list of things that my okay it
might be more than ten like I said it's
cream what I suggested that someone has
my condition and they know that they're
they were exhausted and they still need
to put their groceries away last time
two ice cream melted and the meat went
bad and they're not willing to do that
so yeah they're gonna get home as fast
as possible that they're a former
employee and they know it's a sunshiny
and a beautiful day and they want to
give their ex their ex co-workers a
reason to be outside because it's
beautiful oh that there is just
everything else going on that you're not
even thinking about it your business is
failing your kids sick your parents are
getting old and life is happy here
there's a pandemic going on and you just
forget you just the grocery cart is not
even in your radar you're angry at the
store manager for whatever reason you
owned a little a little side shop and
they put you out of business coming to
town you're angry at them it's really
left you to them is it right no idea but
it is it's not just being lazy and
inconsiderate that you again what the
person said in the comments loving you
love having a grocery shirt right there
and so you're doing what you would want
for the next person for treating people
as you would want to be treated
even though society might not agree with
how you're treating them that someone
needs the wash room really bad and
they're a germaphobe and can't possibly
use a washer outside of their home but
there's a bee near the port where you
have to put it in and they're definitely
allergic to bees that they finally got
the call the son's kidneys their or
their daughter is in labor their wife's
in labor
like they there's something really
important that yes could probably wait
30 seconds but in the moment it feels
like it can't and so you jump in your
car and go off that your child this is
not a life-or-death situation but again
I would as a parent definitely put it a
higher priority than returning a
freaking cart which is like your child's
about to fall and have a nap and you
know this is the worst time for the
happen apps it's gonna throw off
everything you're like we gotta get home
now I don't have 30 seconds you just now
remembered something that is like whoa
Ted leave the stove ready is that leave
the water running in the tub something
that now is gonna peak that anxiety and
you need to answer it now and so again
it becomes a bigger priority
you need to rush to its fight flight or
freeze like this over what the shopping
cart which is like again you knew we had
epitomized for turning shopping carts as
your metric as a human being you might
prioritize it more but it's the fact
that it's a side task that is varying
degrees of importance to different
people dislike right it's a shopping
cart who cares
and other people are shopping oh let's
see what else Mr Bond oh you judge this
is specific to go bid nineteen that he
just seized and you like sanitize the
car is sanitized you but you want to get
a hold in case you haven't and not not
put anyone else at risk but like
something like that right were you like
oh god like you think you're doing the
right thing you're doing the best thing
you can but you're also leaving your
shopping cart there niversity and that
was the last no there was also one that
was like you feel migraine coming on or
your spoons about bringing whatever it
is that you know you have a very short
amount of time before you need to be you
need to be home you feel those mushrooms
kicking in you can you forgot for you a
grocery shopping because who doesn't -
mushrooms we're shoving wine is there's
other things that go a lot of people's
lives and you can't decide what they
should maximize for that's what's really
gonna decide what to maximize for it
shopping cart seems like a really weird
thing for it to be but if it was
maximized for shopping carts when we
agreed on that cuz that's the point is
there so many of these little tasks
there's hundreds and thousands of them
in our daily lives well why can't you
just bring flowers when you come to see
someone why don't you just bring a
bottle of wine
heaven forbid e to bring the wrong one
or don't bring anything but it's like
there's no right way cuz you'll assume
this common sense says this is the right
way when there is no common sense
there's your sense and there's their
sense and they might match and they
might not and so who decides what we
exactly we maximize for it how many
these little things are there and again
a so we're spooning as foodie you end up
seeing them you see all these little
tasks that add up and to a regular
neurotypical healthy person they're not
a problem they you are just being
inconsiderate lazy if you're not doing
it but there's also the fact of light
right and you might have something more
important to you might actually
either in your own life in the life of
your loved ones or in the world right if
a neurosurgeon is on call and happened
to be doing some grocery shopping and
gets Collins into an emergency aneurysm
do I want them returning their shopping
cart no I do not
I want them go into or they're going to
be and why is it on us as the individual
consumer to return the shopping cart but
again it's not illegal there's no fine
there's no anything so we haven't
decided that this is the thing you
should be doing why isn't it on the
supermarket to decide to discover people
aren't returning their carts and people
are getting their their cars dating to
in the we need to hire someone to do
that Michael hey is it on us to do the
right thing instead of looking at
whatever is happening and in making
systems that turned to the right thing I
mean under this category I definitely
did the wrong thing well when I was I
think it was when I was pregnant I
didn't have a car and the grocery store
is like four blocks away and I would
always get like a little too much to
carry and so what I would start doing
this is one of the ones that I would
save even had a 25 cent deposit I would
wheel at home and it was super loud and
I would make sure I left the money in it
so that hopefully someone would bring it
back because that's generally what
happens I'm either use it as their card
as homeless person or bring it back to
get the quarter but I needed to get my
groceries home I couldn't afford a cab
he's like this is my option it's like
you don't realize the options that are
available to you are necessarily
available as other people would it have
made more sense for me to get a cab if I
have the money yes or you buy less
groceries yeah but I wasn't asleep next
day or the day after to go and so it's
like you don't necessarily guys in the
raagh like I'm more on safe choice cars
gonna probably get back there eventually
I don't know and it's safe way much
money they make a lot and so yeah anyway
this card thing just still in don't
leave my mind because if this is if we
can get beyond this definition of
self-governance you don't get to control
anybody else's actions all you can
control is your actions and you can
hopefully control what you think about
other people's actions and even that is
a muscle you need to develop that you
need you need to learn that I think I've
learned and it would be beneficial for
people to learn that what they're
reacting to is the story they created
they're getting mad at a person for
something they've done right someone
doesn't return a shopping cart you've
made that mean they're a horrible person
they're gonna treat them like they're
horrible person and then you're no
horrible person as opposed to if you can
assume good assume one of these ten
things pick whichever because they're
not all ballots every one pick one that
could be the reason that's dialect
enough to you and let it be right it's a
shopping cart if it really bothers you
return it and then when that starts to
bother you more that you had to do that
work it was super easy
give me cost so many things you thought
they should do it why can't you do it if
it's so easy because it might not have
been easy for them and so the more you
start to realize what is truly yours to
worry about and what is truly what you
have power over what you don't you don't
have power over is anybody else's
actions and so it's like we don't feel
powerful in our own lives we want like
our governments and the authority to
figure it out in the end like grocery
store to figure it out and I do I am the
girl once you start to figure it out
because they're the ones who are
profiting off of this reactiveness
what's the word a stain company right
they're the ones with shopping carts are
the ones who require to go to to get our
groceries so therefore Rory in parking
lots that are super big and yes they
discovered that so like the funny thing
is I I don't really want to go to
America and see what you're shopping but
your places parking lots are like
because we definitely have the big box
stores that have like big huge expansive
parking lots and the ones that are the
biggest like Costco don't have returned
like you have to take it back to the
store of taking it back to the store so
you put it with the next cart you put it
with like the closest cart and so that's
not taking it back but it's like doing
what your neighbor did it's like well
they put it here so I'll put it with
theirs it's more considerate less
considerate than taking it back when I
like think of superstore where I shop
that no matter where you park your
within one of the places the shopping
carts are I always grab my shopping cart
there because half the time there isn't
one in the store and then I
return it there probably because I want
my dollar but it's that right it's like
as me a consumer in supply and demand if
I had to walk back to the store to get
my dollar it would never be worth it and
I would let the dollar go and I believe
it there whoever did take it back would
get the dollar that I'm sure that's what
happens and so they've made more and
more coverings so that it's more and
more convenient for their customers if
that's what they want them to do but
then they also have to pay their
employees to go all the way out there
and get them a couple times a day and so
it's they're making decisions on profit
so let them make decisions on profit if
they did get sued if it was up to them
when you get a dent in your car that
would be a problem what if there's debt
free everyone who drives the Lexus he
drives the things if they care about you
all get to park here not it's for just
parking places because you think you're
really important and you all are gonna
really care about the things in your
cars
and no shopping carts in here at all
something can go wrong you get to carry
your precious groceries to your car
because there's clearly no disability in
the Lexus and Mercedes group of people
like I'm being sarcastic but like find
solutions that are outside the box
instead of needing everyone to act like
me if people aren't returning their
shopping cards finding out why and
fixing it cuz also most of these things
well I mean I've garfish the shopping is
something I hate doing long before
ghovat 19 something I put off constantly
and it's also something I'm like we
don't need to do grocery shopping like
having grocery delivery is more
environmentally friendly and if it was
done in a way that we all participated
in it then it would also be very
efficient it would be it wouldn't be 10
bucks to get your groceries delivered it
would be X amounts of hours per year
volunteered in order to get your
groceries delivered and sort and you
know not everyone can drive a big car I
know I get you know the delivery choice
but we can sort oh we can do a lot of
other things that are part of them I'm
getting totally sidetracked our project
but there are other solutions and that
would not be if that was my solution to
shopping carts and be weird we're going
to not have shopping anymore so there
are
shopping carts and no one gets their
gardening I Mauro don't want to go shop
because I don't wanna go shopping and I
know it's not efficient so why aren't me
delivery on our groceries to every
individual play it's not a plastic bags
not in like it's a for-profit company
then they keep staying secret and they
partner so in the most efficient and
they have to make different decisions if
it's open and transparent and democratic
then we're gonna make decisions in the
manner but I'm totally gonna buy drugs
so it's just my mission in life that
we're creating a world that works for
everyone
which is like a global consumer
cooperative by today is I'm gonna get
off producing but my last day doing
possibility during the pandemic alright
but now it's ten days loving it's 30 I'd
like 41 days it's pretty good
41 we're sorry it's like a place I used
to work at two of them
it's Starbucks and been City for both 41
I'm sorry anyway not the point
so this is my last pasta later in the
pandemic next week I'm just doing the
solution raising on Wednesday I don't
think it'll be on here because people
don't seem to want to watch it on
periscope sorry thank you there's people
in both places it'll be on YouTube it
will not be on periscope and Twitter
because people don't seem to watch a
conversation with multiple people and
that's what I'm gonna be doing that is
that's why this doesn't work it's it's
broadcast since we've seen talking and
reading the comments it's like does it I
a strain of thoughts hard enough without
also reading the comments whereas having
a conversation works much better I am
still on about it make me about the
shopping yeah the other thing was I was
lunching short tanks we go walk on that
I can Oh Billy there is telling us I
don't live during the pandemic don't
worry we'll be more ingenuity no one
else in charge pick you say one of my
favorite shows then make sure to not huh
oh yes I inquire relationship it's a
whole bigger ecosystem the shopping
carts happen within an ecosystem run
their lives but to be able to solve our
problems
nikoline I guess
people leave shopping cards all over the
place that's your biggest problem like
truly you're welcome your life must
needs pretty sweet if I get but shopping
cart is your biggest problem because
even in that all the circumstances I
listed about disability that's none of
their biggest problem which is the point
right like they have much bigger
problems to concern themselves with part
of which is they need to leave this
shopping hurt because of those bigger
problems and so have you people who are
like what you consider Inhumans we need
to deal with this now let's make it a
legal hierarchy down but in order to
create solutions from the ground up we
have to deal with this interpersonal
nough spilling of you did it wrong and I
need you to do it right because I don't
know why you did it so you either have a
dialogue if I really feel you need to
return your shopping carts and we're
friends or family whatever then I can
have that conversation with you but
otherwise if you're a random stranger I
can just assume you're did it for one of
the good reasons good intention so it
does have a negative impact in my
emotional health right there's that
Buddhist well the color proverb my mind
look my vibe create new words words that
don't belong there um whatever two
months they're allowed to be in contact
with women one of them finds a woman on
one side of the river picks her up and
carries her to the other side they walk
down me one months like like how dare
you know you touched a woman he's like I
put her down on the other side the bank
you're still carrying her and that's
very much how we react to lies like we
get so angry all the time dealing right
now that was the other thing I was gonna
say which I cuz they did a couple big
events one of what's happened in
February this person that I liked fell
from grace in big way and keeps falling
from grace and his brother just joined
the Facebook group that I want to be
admins of but have very little like
actually I didn't do anything I just
started great when we first started the
group in February we had this meeting
where we were talking about
confidentiality it was like nothing in
here can be spoken outside I always find
weird rules what Kaufman is she a letís
I'm like wait like what does that
actually mean it's like you want to put
this blanket don't talk about it I'm
like like ever like it can't exist or
don't name names because it's very
differents me when I go home from a
group are we by confidentiality I'm
talking about my learning and I'm like
oh this one mother shared when she did
XYZ but I'm not sharing her name and I'm
not sharing her kids names it's me
talking about what I learned from them
right so is that unconfident reality so
I like to clarify that in those meetings
look if I talk about this anonymously is
that confidentiality and it was very
unclear what confidentiality meant and
then after if something happened I don't
remember what it was that someone got
kicked out a group because they should
have known that that's not a
confidentiality bad I was like I didn't
do that but I wasn't clear about this
confidentiality man I would have thought
that was like that wasn't cool so let's
have an actual rule then now Sonia this
person's brother join I guess he gave
screenshots I don't know some text about
his brother or it was with his brother
and not quite clear but this woman was
all about confidentiality shared it with
the guy that we all have a problem with
so that she could get money back for
something wouldn't was like but like get
her money she wasn't doing the wrong
thing I'm like they don't see the
parallels but like this is a very woman
who was like this should be common sense
that this is the confidentiality is what
common sense doesn't exist this is why
there's conflict and I'm I'm you sitting
back because I'm not really want to be a
binge watch she needs amends I don't
know after what immature in a way that
I'm like I don't understand where
they're like they get mad at something
one week and then four weeks later it's
like they're on the other side and it's
like how dare they how dare they
I'm like what you don't see that you
were this first in and out here that's
person well interesting that you're all
it's like this is so hard we've been
dealing with this all day I'm like item
2 min I haven't been dealing with it I'm
good peace so like it's like you aren't
going to Z I have other things going on
that are much more important got this
this thing that happened is important
it's of course important to his brother
and their family and it's like but we've
been dealing with it for months you
might be making me more than it is
because it simultaneously we learned
from our negative and also how dare they
do anything negative I'm like are you
really in your mind like what person
called one of you mins and murder and
they were like
Halloween's not allowed I'm like calling
someone a martyr it's not named Colleen
like what's the level if I call you a
mother is that even Colleen like what is
the level and so it's like when you're
on the receiving end of it it feels like
you're being called names and they're
being mean and you're making it mean a
lot of things and I just got off a call
yesterday with I talked about this all
day yesterday I was talking about top of
this on the possibility on pond endemic
yesterday where there's this
misunderstanding and conflict with one
eye with one of the people that
surrounds me and there were in the
vicinity of each other and an ad we had
a conversation yesterday and it was
amazing so we were able to clear the air
we were able to say hey this is what I
actually meant and we were also mature
enough to realize that um when we're
triggered by something that's generally
our own thing and so to deal with what
does it mean when something's triggered
by something someone else says is it on
the person who's did the triggering to
not trigger the person is it on the
person who is triggered to learn from it
and and just own that they are in art
sometimes and what they do when they are
like what is our responsibility to other
whether the anonymous other or actually
people in our lives the other how much
of what I say that could offend someone
in my responsible for I think if I tell
you you know you're ugly and a
horrible person way to misconstrue that
like that's me being a whore that's me
being mean but you don't understand why
right that's clearly a reason and
underlining tantra mean emotional need
not getting that reason but that's not
okay behavior but if i say something
like i feel i believe in a bloodline you
take that meaning well you look more
attractive than i do and therefore you
call me ugly and mad at me for calling
you ugly and that's not what I did it's
like you're reacting to the story about
when I said in the actual thing but we
all do it all day long and so even I
know it now Hollywood knuckle on my
journey that would I react to something
it's my learning it's what I'm here to
learn so no matter what anyone says in
the comments no matter how trolli or
anything else it's like how do I show up
how do and there's every time like quite
as well as I would have liked to but
it's not about handling it perfectly
it's about improving it and the
like okay what did I feel in my body
what can I learn from this interaction I
miss intractable I think little due up
and I'm very grateful for it this other
interaction because I don't think
anything in that was wrong I don't think
her response what I said was wrong I
don't think he said it was wrong in us
having a conversation actually needed a
benefit but this other mistake of my
sister and this thing with my community
member both of which when I look at them
objectively I'm pretty good at looking
at things objectively I'm not in the
wrong
like I'm like there's no wrong here and
yet I've gotten from that me and
even that's perfect
okay so they just have been in a perfect
way to teach you what I needed to learn
and so it's like are they wrong for
doing it and yes but no I don't really
know how to explain it like it's like if
the community member hadn't freaked the
 out of me for no reason
not once but twice I wouldn't have the
relationship I have with that community
I wouldn't have oh and this just
happened right the fragment line so last
year are you falling I don't know huh
nothing else showed up so periscope
thinks wrong completed your other
comment that's so last today's Mother's
Day now Mother's Day doesn't happen on
the same day every year ready here we go
on Mother's Day and I did because so I
just went to the washroom before this
started and I have a sliding door washer
in off my bedroom and it locked it never
locks but just like locks I'm locked
it's self locked and did then coming
back because I thought my daughter had
done it as a practical joke she was like
no I didn't it's like okay and she
usually Saudis let those things like it
was walking here and I was like oh my
god last Mother's Day I was hosted in
eco housing and the people whose dog
sitting for have a sliding door and I
went to do yoga in the yoga studio had a
conversation with a parent it's my kids
at the house and she can come and see
you know any time and that's how life
works closing and I got back and she was
locked in the bathroom and she'd been
locked in there for like 45 minutes but
I you know what I mean she could come to
me but I didn't when she was locked in
the bathroom I was like this is just and
I've never be like this is a stellar
Mother's Day what
mother I am and the I heard it she got
locked to the door again another next
day or something and I got this neighbor
downstairs so I have a conflict with her
partner came upstairs and released her
from the door and then we just left I
just he just left the door open
I like taped it open sit down of the
other kids we can walk today and I was
like how weird that that happened this
morning as well because I wouldn't have
remembered that unless I got locked in
the bathroom
this morning and I was like that's a
weird thing to have not been here apart
right you don't love it like no other
time have I been locked in the bathroom
in this year and no other time is my
daughter been locked to the bathroom but
last Mother's Day this Mother's Day wage
that loft and a sliding door bathroom
what am i weird those things constantly
happen and that's why I'm on the lookout
for because those things are cool it's
like I have no idea what that means
don't lock yourself in the rooms like
what's the learning there no idea but
it's cool that it's like I registered
that happened then it happens ow I have
this um fine dear journal that I kept
for my kid between 0 & 5 and because I
enjoyed it and it was kind of a cool
experience I wanted to pull me one that
looks the same and I'm doing it for five
to ten or six to ten and so you know
January 1st it's like 2013 14 15 16 so I
can see what I did a year apart and
constantly there will be I don't always
read what happens and there are some
days I do and I usually do it right
after and I'll look can be like Oh weird
we went to like Stanley Park three out
of these five years on this day we don't
put a stone we park very often like it's
like these kind of things happen
regularly now if it's someone's birthday
in which their birthday party that isn't
that's unlike the probability of that
happening very high but when it's
something like this Mother's Day get a
look to the bathroom it's like wait a
minute
interesting interesting
yeah and just that those patterns repeat
and I wouldn't see those patterns so I
wasn't keeping the five-year journal cuz
I wouldn't know I wouldn't remember him
in the Stanley Park a year ago and three
years ago why would i okay or is there
something that happens is there a reason
I go to Stanley Park at this time every
year there was because one of the local
parks I buried one of our pets in
a tiny bird and it felt that media like
the ecosystem and so I buried it there I
didn't remember what I know it still
don't remember what they fear even time
of year then it died in and the next
year we went back the same day that that
happened it was like it was something
that was big you know our pet Dottie and
and very yet but I did we register and
it wasn't like I was like like
subconsciously I possibly did it was
like hey that's not a part today and
then when writing to no realize that I'd
gone there previously two years before
and those kind of things happen
constantly we are aware of them because
we don't keep my beer journals we don't
see the patterns and we're
pattern-seeking machines so we try to
see this that we it's like meeting them
about the shopping carts bringing a
background that we see shopping carts
we're like we'll look there's a pattern
that everyone's following because I'm
when I do this I'm doing it because I
know that it's the right thing to do
they must be doing the wrong the wrong
thing for wrong reasons instead of right
this this might not be the right thing
for everybody
also they might be doing the wrong thing
for right reasons and if I'm the one
giving that there was a reason that it
was kismet and the patterns though as
because we're seeking patterns we're
seeking patterns and other people so we
make one of the other things on Facebook
my god this white woman so sweet like
she's like all this racism is going on
and I'm calling an end to racism I'm
like yeah and how's that working for you
like it racism isn't a hashtag how do we
actually end racism do you know how I
don't know how how do you actually makes
it's like people are constantly right
now encounter there's a lot of racism
towards Asian people I think that's
happening a lot of places it's not
logical it's not the person experiencing
the racism and having it come through
them is it like not in their best State
at that moment guaranteed and at the
same time it's like okay they have they
see an Asian person somehow make them
completely responsible for all of it 19
they're angry cuz they're stuck inside
and like all of that gets thrown out the
person in that moment is that right no
clearly
I don't want anybody in our community we
have a lot of Asians in our community to
have to go through that especially like
gross at the same time I'm aligned it
making it illegal doesn't make it go
away that person is still even if they
aren't saying racist tyrants which I
think that's the level you're not
allowed to do in the world if they're
thinking it and feeling it they're still
treating them in that way and so to just
say like no racism I'm like okay you do
realize that's not racist but it's just
prejudice like you're someone feels
anger and they're spewing it at someone
and you're telling them they're not
allowed to feel the anger you can't
outlaw a feeling you can't outlawed
disgust or anything like that so unless
we can actually tackle the underlining
issues you can't actually deal with like
you can't you can't make racism illegal
and make it go away or it would be way
right it's illegal basically everywhere
all the countries in I mean America
Canada Europe Australia all the
Democratic large countries it's illegal
to be racist and every citizens
everywhere are sexism is everywhere
homophobia is everywhere because for
cumin and that's for like this most of
the issues I can see in
misunderstandings to me or ablest
because most of what I can invoke and
most of us are getting to the place
where we can understand this is like
what where people are waking wakening up
that mental and physical health and
things that stop you
someone needs to be accommodated what
doesn't seem to be the next step is like
we understand people have physical
disabilities and those are much more
clear on dealing with it right putting
in rounds I mean elevators we still do a
horrible job of it
but like we get it even though we don't
we're like well if you're in a
wheelchair you can't possibly Drive
actually you've totally can wheelchair
you can't walk actually tell the people
walk run Realtors but like having there
were more accommodating to fit of
physical disabilities we're starting to
understand that mental disabilities can
be just as debilitating may be invisible
but like they're real and they're there
and we're starting to accommodate those
too but we don't seem to want to
accommodate emotional disabilities like
like if you're so quick to anger if this
is like you're so traumatized that
you're spewing into the world in these
ways it's like the trauma that we need
to be dealing
and saying like this is what how I got
this learning is when I came out to my
mother um I just don't name her Cherie
but we're transparency I I figured I was
queer I was 36 so like under four years
ago and at the time I was like well in
case I get a girlfriend I better come
out to my parents and family I've yet to
have a girlfriend
wait what these do so um when I came up
to my mother I was 36 and about to turn
37 actually and she was down for
Christmas she was here for Christmas and
I told her and she it was not a great
response if I had been 19 it would've
been very traumatic however she was like
talking about one of my childhood
friends who has a lesbian mother and
they were really good friends and she
was basically like I had a crush on that
woman but like I asked God to save me
and he did and was talking about how
it's not that she doesn't love me it's
that it's like wiping your ass with a
gift that God gave you is basically what
she said
and it wasn't hurtful because I could
see in that moment that what she was
rejecting wasn't me or my queerness cuz
my clearness is good like my queerness
you think this is anti-god if you think
this is nothing but beauty and light and
that's why I'm trying to share with you
it's not sin and gross Ness that you
seemed to think it was when I was
growing up and so but in huh right she's
rejecting her penis she's rejecting her
piece of her that fella that was in love
with her friends she's rejecting I was
like oh she doesn't choose to be
anti-gay any more than I'm choosing to
be gay it's not a choice it's not a and
so that's for when people are like just
don't be racist I'm like do you know how
to get somebody who's racist or not be
racist even if the person wants to not
be racist how do we get them there
because if we don't have an answer to
that in society and we don't I don't I
don't mean we just allow it but like we
need to deal with it at a different
level if people are being violent if
people are being like what is happening
and how do we actually deal with it
instead of just screaming across at each
other and so the self governance thing
is huge because I know a ton of people
who are creating life-changing things in
the world and I'm one of them and if
what we need is everybody to get on
board and do what we want them to do
it's never gonna happen it's not self
governing
whereas if we can truly get to a space
of I do what is in my highest integrity
I'm gonna return shopping carts I'm
gonna pick up my litter when I can like
I have a daughter who she's seven she
caught something it's like anything is
gonna be bad give me this and there are
times I get there are times I can't
because I'm going energy so because
there are times I can't I'm more likely
to do it when I can if I had full spoons
all of the time
I'd probably be a more strict parents
right I'd be like get your on water but
I know there are times where she based
this get around lunch so I'm like yeah I
can get you water on some other times
right so that's like our families I know
my kind of rabbu I brought that up
except that you don't understand
people's outside circumstances about I'm
changing ideas oh just that if we need
other finding the world to work in a
certain way and believe me I do because
I've planned it out I know how we could
create a world that works for everyone
and so I really want that to happen the
more I need it to happen my way the less
it happens for sure
it's proven itself the more I surrender
to what is that's why we're doing
solution raises we're gonna start doing
process ratios to see how can we create
something with 10,000 people because
when you create it together it is it I
created it and then I bring you on board
it's like your solutions as well so
although we are never gonna do a
solution to the grocery carts I don't
think until we're picking up that that
is that's literally our next focus
that's the biggest deal because that you
can ask you bring people in and said of
making it okay who's for who's against
it which is kinda what this title did
and pit you against each other let's see
who wins this debate like no do you
think our shopping cart should be
returned if you're yes why if you're a
no why if you're a yes you think they
should but you don't return them why and
then create a system and it's like Oh
self-driving cars return themselves and
don't run into into into cars or we
don't have shopping carts like whatever
does conveyor belts they go onto your
car I don't know what the solution is so
the point is in we're creating solutions
together I know the solution is that's
never having cursory stores why do we
need them
really but if we've solved that right
well we've solved that than grocery
parts aren't a problem
the solving of
the ground up part of what we have to do
to solve them is that everything brings
up emotion and we have to be able to
deal with that and whose emotions are
whose when I when something I say makes
you feel anger is that on me or is that
on you and when it's on both of us
home it truly is I can say what I'm
gonna say and um that if I'm seeing
horrible things I have to make that
right but mostly I'm just speaking from
my heart and I'm not meeting in the way
you're taking it then I'm not
responsible for your anger in any way
and even if I am saying something that's
that's setting someone off they're still
responsible for their anger because
other people aren't being set up and at
the same time they're not responsible
for their anger because we all have
different capacity to actually like
different trigger points I know I would
love to have infinite patience for my
kid never get angry no matter what she
does that's definitely not reality yet
because of who she is and that she
caught Sleater Kersey my patience level
my flip over from from to angry switch
has changed a lot and so it's a much
higher point it's the same time there's
things she'll do one time I'll get very
angry another time and I laugh at it
because I almost should always get angry
on it but I can see it the humor in it
like oh I'm gonna share this story about
three weeks ago two weeks ago she farted
in my face a bedtime a bedtime is not a
great time for me and I was just like
angry I was like yeah oh you're not
sleeping with me it was like I didn't
know I'm like you had your naked butt in
my face and farted that was not okay and
then a week and I don't know how we're
doing we were like tickle fighting or
something and she also ended up not
having he goes on cuz that's my kid all
the time and if she there was something
else end up party in my face but it was
something she said right afterwards her
she was like I can't get mad at that and
then this or now she does it on purpose
and says that I'm like no it's not okay
it's disrespectful it's never okay to do
it's more but the one time I reacted
like that positively somewhat don't do
that like um that was the anomaly
I'm usually gonna react to the anger way
because it's not okay to partner someone
say
but at the same time it's like a um
anyway he's like I'm not the most
consistent parents I can't be but I
would prefer to respond in not in the
humor way because that gives her
permission to do it more but in a stoic
that was not okay
we don't fart in people's faces it's not
funny I mean that's not possible it's
definitely not in that moment in the
evening time my point is is that we're
both responsible for Ankur know it's
more responsible for my anger than me
and yet I'm still not quite responsible
for it I'm responsible what I do when I
have it I'm not responsible for having
it I don't choose when to have anger and
we're not - and there's like a knee-jerk
reaction I cannot control but I get
control of it half a second later and
that is like I don't have control but I
have control and so to look at that as a
society and say okay people that can't
necessarily control that they get angry
how can you help you control what they
do when they're angry because I'm never
gonna experience someone else's anger so
I don't know but if we talk to people
who've gotten so angry they've beaten
someone up or killed someone and find
out what that moment was like they might
be the perfect solution to find you not
gonna get that to not happen in the
future but if instead we need to bill an
eyes that somebody you know was drunk
and angry and they punch them in the
face that's not great that's not a
shopping cart right that's it's like
black and white not okay and yet should
that person be removed from society for
forever no if our response is to like
mandate anger classes well if they're
not ready for any classes that's gonna
have no reaction it's like asking people
who've been there who've had trouble
with anger what got you over it how did
you get control of it rather than
looking at the few who easily have
control over it or who got control of it
and then demanding everyone else do that
offering an invitation something that is
hey if you feel angry how can we deal
with that then we're not creating new
things to be illegal that don't need to
be illegal oh I'm getting beside myself
alright shopping carts today was our
story time saison if you follow the link
in the YouTube description by the way if
you're everyone's number so you're on
YouTube John Paris don't find me on
youtube cuz that's where i broadcast
most often it's where you get all of the
else is Jubilee saves the world by
meandering through life was also be idea
cafe channel and the tech channel we are
creating a global tech cooperative bring
people with their own tech projects
together to create mu n solutions not
even tech projects just world-changing
projects and that's under the together
tech umbrella and then I'm doing
solution reasons and process Racing's to
figure out the solution tracing is how
what can we generate as an idea that we
could implement now if we had 10,000
people and $100,000 and we've done them
on transportation and education and the
food system and infectious disease and
there's always something very powerful
that we can do with those 10,000 people
and my version of those 10,000 people in
creating it together is that we don't
create for those 10,000 with those
10,000 like 10,000 people who think
shopping carts have to go back create a
campaign that makes it so you get
beheaded it's shopping carts don't go
back like that's not what we're doing
it's a it's a system of creating with
10,000 people something that solves
their problem so if their problem is
shopping carts all over then everywhere
I don't again besides taking away
shopping stores I don't really know what
the solution is but the point is to have
an hour-long conversation to come up
with a solution and then process raising
is gonna be actually looking at how can
we create a process that involves 10,000
people so that you have personal
sovereignty you're solving it with and
for yourself you're solving it with
other people for yourself and they're
solving it with other people for
themselves and so in 10,000 people
solving it for themselves we solve it
for the collective because out of those
10,000 people if it isn't shopping carts
have to go back you're a bad person if
they don't and instead it's shirt
shopping carts go back and how do we
make that happen how do we make it so
that cars aren't getting dug dented and
this happens then it's a completely
different conversation and we can come
up again DIF no idea what a solution be
for 10,000 people hundred thousand
dollars for shopping carts but we don't
need to get all the furniture for
transportation and I think we're gonna
do marketing this Wednesday I've yet to
actually pick one but today Sunday so
I'm clean up on the videos to
retainer politics
solution recents on Wednesday process
raising will be at some point the
following week have yet to decide the
both be at 9:00 a.m. on the Jubilee save
the world by me and raise your life
channel and then I'm gonna be
participating in the Omega groups I've
been participating for months on
Wednesdays those are not broadcast
anywhere except the very odd one which
was in the break mankind's channel and
then bit together time they were talking
about how technology saves humanity and
that's life worth conversation which I
was gonna create another one I would
have like 8 9 conversations going every
week instead I realized that I actually
had two of them already so I didn't need
to recreate them and that is what I'm
doing and then besides that I'm gonna
focus on just living life which is like
cleaning my house and having the
students to hang out McKidd and
proposals together and watch shows and
go for walks and let the rest soon where
I'll do what it wants to do because I
also constantly shopping carts on a big
deal but everything else is and it truly
is a big deal I mean like slavery and
environmental degradation and the
widening gap between rich and poor is
huge and I can't just put it under
shopping carts and yet it's the same
it's a bunch of people making decisions
that are in their best interest and
because we're disconnected and there is
no transparency and you can be a
sociopath and get away with it
these things happen constantly and so I
can't even get mad at people for like
trafficking someone but to look at the
system and say why does this happen how
do we fix the system so there isn't the
poverty there isn't this stuff but I'm
gonna do that in just my conversations a
little let it go no no for the rest of
the week I'm not gonna no really not but
I'm going to learn to let it go for like
five minutes ten minutes a little bit at
a time but I'm not gonna put the what's
on its myself beyond stress intention on
myself that like you're not doing enough
and you have to do this faster and has
to happen faster and everything has to
happen now and you've got to do more
more and more and realize I'm actually
you in a whole hell of a lot and it's
happening that's right time and now I
get to say goodbye to possibly academic
thank you for hanging out with me for
the last six weeks and I will be on the
channel or
explaining how we created technology
cooperative how we implement the five
questions and this dance and just the
magic of life that is unfolding we don't
even I love it he would have to worship
this God this magic this thing it none
of the old rules apply I love it anyway
that could be a whole another hour-long
conversation you know itself take care
check me out on youtube you please save
the world by meandering through life and
together