good morning a few minutes late today
because I went grocery shopping I just
called myself a hero for grocery
shopping to my kid and she laughed at me
it's like you don't even know you don't
even know how hard to grocery shopping
these days so because I went grocery
shopping I did not prepare any specific
notes for today No thank you no idea on
other days but which means I had I just
decided to get over myself a bit and try
to just explain how we saved the world
together the thing that I say I can't do
that I know how but I can't explain it
and so I'm just gonna do the best of my
ability explain how it is that these
save them all together I find its
easiest to go through the like who what
why when where why how to explain
anything so where do we start what how
we saved the world the what what we
actually create together this is where I
can't do it in just the five because
there's like multiple layers of what
we're creating but mainly a technology
cooperative solutions cooperative the
ability to be able to solve our problems
together without going through a central
body without needing our governments to
- ok things or regulate them or make
everybody comply with law and punishment
because we the people actually have all
of the power in the world but we have we
feel like we have none of it right and
one individual has very little power but
collectively we do the vast majority of
people the 99%
maybe not 99% in democracy because 90 99
% of people live in democracies but we
are the voters we are the workers and we
are the consumers I was just watching
the family on Netflix which is about
once it's not actually about the cult
it's about Christianity and politics and
basically the powers that be hundreds of
years ago sat around we're really angry
at the labor movement decided to use
cheeses to combat it with a god
breakfast
I watched it and I still don't
understand how how this is okay how this
is happening but so why not use that
same model that the one of the reasons
they started was they were in a crisis
the crisis happens to have been the
labor movement there is a lot of history
of people squat of people being the
government's and people with money and
power squashing grassroots organizations
the Black Panthers have happened to I
mean anytime you want to combat poverty
anytime you want to give people who
historically don't have a lot of
privilege and power any kind of a leg up
collectively there's a lot of force
working against that which is why we
need a bigger force working for it and
luckily we are the bigger force the only
reason they're able to to divide and
conquer us is by doing that dividing and
conquering by making it into its the
left versus the right and to the people
who want change which is the way the
people who want things to stay the same
and there is a real true conflict there
in that anytime we have a democracy
whether at the city the state the
federal level where I love those
provinces but to still States and sense
that having we elect our leaders but
because it's it's based on democracy um
the majority wins the minority is never
really going to be happy I learned in
school democracies definition is rule of
the majority with respect to minority
but that never really happens especially
with the big minority right so in the
States there's a two-party system in
Canada there's basically a two-party
system but there's so many parties that
it's even I don't know if it's more
broken but it's broken but it's like the
Conservatives and the Liberals or the
basically the two the two here which
kind of conservatives kind of like
Republicans and Democrats are kind of
like the Liberals and one just under
just over 450 percent right votes for
one just under in just over fifty
percent votes for the other one which
means you're ruling over nearly 50
percent of your population
it can't stand you write that like but
wanted you not to be there and so if
that's how we have to solve things right
and then you have these governments
working with other governments in the
world to try to come up with solutions
that they have to bring back and sell it
to their people right it's kind of
happening now on a grand scale they're
kind of it up they're kind of
doing the best they can with the k√∂ppen
19 thing we see that you know like
everyone has their which works well
because everyone has their own idea so
we can look back at this and see what
worked and what didn't but we're not
necessarily going to know well we're in
it what's working and what's not working
Kovach 19 i can't necessarily solve this
has to be something down on the grand
scale right we can have some people stay
inside and some people going out not in
a city we could have some city stay at
home and some cities going out but
that's not how we're this first right
just like we're not dispersed it's a
Republican and Democrat cities we're not
dispersed in a Republican and Democrat
states even if there are states and
cities that are known for that right
there are cities that are always gonna
vote Republican or Democrat or
conservative or liberal but because
there's people who are like this is a
farce why am i stuck at home the
economy's collapsing and people who are
doing the opposite they have to rule
over everybody and so they have to come
up with blanket statements right it's
basically based on whether the person in
charge falls in the this is overhyped or
underhyped camp right the economy or
people's health which one's more
important in which one do I believe more
in which one it's not even up to the
majority it's up to like their belief
and whether they think they're real
estable based on what they do I'm two
beverages I forgot to have my coffee
this morning before I went grocery
shopping but I don't get a headache
until later in the day if I don't have
that so that's good so how we saved the
world together
is by not needing to come together to
create solutions that make everybody
happy it's about bringing people
together finding our commonality right
finding out what it is we want because
even in koban 19 I guarantee you
everybody wants them in their family to
be safe and healthy whether they
think they're gonna be safer and
healthier going to work bringing home
food not leaving that up to the
government or they think they're gonna
be safer with everyone staying at home
that's that's where we differ
we don't differ on that we want people
to be safe and healthy
we'd make different whether we want how
much importance we put on our neighbors
and other people's health and safety
over other people's economic progress
but neither sides trying to each
other over right he's like they're not
people going out of the house truly feel
caged and they're not most them fast
food journalist they're sociopaths
aren't out there to cause disease right
there are these exceptions so finding
our commonality is what we do and then
we find solutions that actually entice
people so if we need everybody to go
vegan before we're willing to feed them
that it's not a solution that is a
higher key down I think I know it's best
everyone could eat if we ate vegetarian
we want everyone to eat healthy so that
our healthcare rates go down we we have
we live in a you know individualistic
society and we've swung the pendulum
very far on that end but to require
people give that up in order to put the
will of the group first is it gonna
happen so anything we create has to come
from that space you have to be doing
what is best for you and it happens to
need to be best for the group as well
luckily cooperation is what's best for
you in the group so if you're you
imagine there were like two islands one
of which is based on uber competition
let's call it capitalism Stan wood
competition and the other ones based on
cooperation and ideas and products and
people can flow between them but if
you're here you're your cooperative and
if you're here you're competitive and
most the truth is most like so
cooperation land wouldn't have a patent
system because if I come up with
something I'm freely giving it to
everybody in cooperation it right I'm
you don't need to pay me for it because
my needs are met because everyone else
who was cooperating already got my needs
writer I wouldn't be able to invent this
new thing that it's gonna help people so
in competition land you come for the
patent you have to sell it to everything
one us Becca's dad I love it that's like
us Becca Becca Sam he's always been a
breast of all us because at us did they
do that on purpose I don't know honey I
don't know having these two islands if
you could choose which one you wanted to
live in but if you live in the one
that's cooperative you can't make a
billion dollar business and sell its
everyone right like you can't make a
product that's gonna make a lot of money
cuz literally you'd there's nothing
proprietary if you're gonna gouge us for
price we're just gonna come together and
cooperate no compete out-compete you
with cooperation right in competition
land it's survival of the fittest you
come up with something you own it you're
like great-great-great great-great
grandchildren can own it sure you but so
does everybody else so because everybody
every every thing that you buy that you
put into that resort that you put into
that product or service it's already
gonna be astronomical so you're not even
going to get to be made rich because of
the competition right in the
co-operative world you're not going to
be rich but you're gonna have abundance
because everything that anybody creates
is going to be available to everyone
right so as people who think about ways
to improve food people think what ways
to improve clothing and efficiency and
energy and and neither of these lands is
actually a good one if you're forced to
live there if you're a competitive
person and society what gives you no
road place to compete in tells you
you're wrong for wanting to
who's your ingenuity from that space
right you're like well I can't with an
idea but if you're all gonna take it
from me then I'm not gonna make it there
are absolutely people like that and
there are in our current society right
now we've set up the entire society for
those people well people won't innovate
if there's not profit actually people
innovate all the time for not
for not profit all the time most people
who are who are innovating in fact are
people who are paid to innovate sitting
in like in their R&D department they're
there for a paycheck they're not there
because they're gonna make profit a lot
of innovation in history has come from
the very privileged to have the
privilege of not having to work for a
living who have time on their hands look
at what's happening Jerry copa90 more
we're stuck inside there are bad actors
there are people who are who need this
time to just mentally decompress who
aren't in any way bad actors they're
just needing a breath it's only been
month um but a lot of people are like on
board what what can I do right how can I
help what can I put out into the world
of making facemasks great my neighbor
needs food I'm on it
because they're looking for places to
help their don't you don't need a
competition right they're looking for
the quickest oh not an employee-owned
company because here's the difference
you employee owned company in it and
consumer owned company we work one place
theoretically right except we have three
jobs you work one place so change you
have a boat and a say in one democratic
workplace which is great I will support
democratic workplaces when I can but I
shop I buy from hundreds of companies so
that is where I want my say because if
worker if the whole world was worker
cooperatives we actually get what we
have currently we still have a
competitive system where we are
proprietary within our company or
proprietary yours we need a profit you
need a profit and that hurts us all with
the inefficiency if the whole world was
consumer cooperative then monopolies are
good because
wait why did you create your own pasta
sauce company when we have a pasta sauce
company you're just gonna hurt us
why not come and bring your recipe and
make it with our stuff right unless
there's an actual reason to make to make
a competitor to make a cooperating
competitor why would you do it and so
when you're a consumer unless it's gonna
be a better thing right it's gonna have
more diversity of product you're not it
doesn't make sense to compete within
that space because there's not a profit
to make within that space right like if
right now it'd under communism
historical of communism people have
lived through it's never perfect but
they're from what I understand when
there were things on the shelves there
was like one thing to pick on the
shelves that's not that doesn't feel
good to us we'd like to have diversity
we'd like to have rights oh so if the
pasta sauce company owned by the people
does it make the pasta sauce that you
want to eat that's a recent for a
competition right that's a reason to
start your own but if the pasta sauce
company that exists is willing to work
with you to be like right how can we get
you yours how many do you use a year if
you're the how many people like yours
how many can we create at that at that
cost do we have like creating with the
data and the information in mind is the
and we have we have the we have the
ability now right we have the technology
these things could have maybe been
possible in the 60s 70s and 80s
but on a small small scale right you can
have a commune you can have a kibbutz
you can have something where you're
collectively working together but it can
only be so big because trust can only be
so big right when I don't know these
relationships and I don't know I can
trust you with technology we can build
trust into it in fact most of the things
we can do together with the technology
company the reason I'm focused on a
technology company then people's eyes
glaze over it so like technology it's
the problem not the answer whatever just
like Google and Facebook run our lives
they'll don't let them run our lives
break them up do it's like why we can
just recreate them and we could own them
and they could be for the common good
instead of for profit we can create a
world where we we can use our data for
so many much better things than
selling us more we can use our data
to cure cancer we could use our data to
not shut down the economy drink Obed 19
and tracker we could which is what
they're saying right and the
government's gonna pass it it's gonna be
creepy and it's gonna be shitty and it's
gonna be a front to our freedom when
they pass contact tracking if we pass
contact tracking if it was an opt-in to
a bowl system that is literally what we
came up with during our solution raising
for infectious disease is oh if I could
track I my contacts track where I was if
Google wasn't evil which Google was
trustable and we were able to have our
phones it knows where we are door he
knows it it's just using it to sell us
more and and and backdoor to tell
our government stuff right if they need
to if we owned our equivalent of Google
or we were able to utilize Google in a
way that we felt safe and efficient then
we could say hey we need 90 percent of
people to have their contacts tracked if
anything needs a hundred percent of
people it's never gonna work because
they're just needy and a hundred percent
of people means you're not getting a
hundred percent people people who see
even a cooperative system as as a
authoritative system and the point is
never to put our personal individual
autonomy into a central governing body
it has a ruling relationship over our
lives right we're not hopefully not
recreating the government we're creating
something parallel to the government
that actually solves problems invites
people to those solutions the government
can't do that because they have to make
blanket solutions right they have to
make solutions that are happy for the
left and the right for people who need
them and people who don't want people
who might need them in the future they
have to somehow collect no new taxes and
spend all new money like the government
can't make people happy and they have to
be reelected all government corporations
can't do it because we didn't we're not
even empowered with them right we can
choose to be a consumer or not but
tomorrow if the monopolies are the less
of a choice I have right I don't really
have a choice whether I use Google or
not even if I'm using all open-source
products some of them are going through
Google some of them are using
some of them are using these not
information if we do it together in a
way that because we don't have the power
we can never we're not we can't say you
have to give us your data we can only
say what would make you safe to give us
your data what would make you want to
give us your data and then let's create
that then we could have contact tracing
and we could be out in the world but
when our governments do it and they
probably will because our cover our
economy can't be down for four years
that it's gonna take there might never
be a vaccine that probably will never be
a vaccine because of how viruses work
how coronaviruses work it's probably
gonna be like the common cold that we
can't have a vaccine for because it
mutates too fast how big of a scale is
necessary community state countries
organize your Redemption well we're
starting none of this has to be done on
a global scale but it is done on a
global scale
so we're starting a technology company
just like Facebook right its global like
you can have an account anywhere you can
connect with people but it's not there
are some projects we're doing solution
raising and solution raisings are about
finding of coming up with a solution
that we could actually implement if we
had 10,000 people and $100,000 and so
for some of those projects those 10,000
people could be in the same city and
that would be really powerful right to
start our own food cooperative to start
our own how do we feed ourselves for
less money and have it actually be
enticing to the average everyday person
so you can eat delicious nutritious food
for less and less actual resources right
your time your money put into it that
would be hard to do with 10,000 people
globally but 10,000 people in Vancouver
if we created a food delivery system
especially right now but would this
would be the harder times created in but
if we created a food delivery system
where people didn't have to go to the
grocery store pick out what they want it
was like a meal plan meets a recipes
meets food delivery and we share in the
in the in the time and labor if it works
and that's why you're working it out
with 10,000 people and like inviting
more people after then
bankruptcy every grocery store in
Vancouver nearly overnight because who's
gonna choose to go to the grocery store
and pick up their own groceries for a
surplus price rather than be part of a
system but they can either trade time or
money for and probably both and can get
their food for cheaper and cheaper get
really good nutritious food and if it's
not working for them right if there's
just a really little reason why it
wouldn't and so they're still shoes in
the old system why and how can we get
that that one percent that five percent
that ten percent on board right well
with my dad own save on sorry
they can't help with that but like oh
you don't have this this product you
don't have this product well how do we
get that right how do we actually get
more and more people so it's not the
profiting side that's like how can I lie
to you
how can I trick you into giving me your
business me your money
how can I be the most can pretend I'm
the most convenient cheap by marketing
right by pretending on those things
either being those things or pretending
on those things you can't know you're
the cheapest price everywhere so you can
put in in little gimmicks right like
well if you tell us it's we'll give it
to you for free and we'll prep the price
well you know you're like um and then so
there's like or the old the historical
communism or something equivalent where
okay so we're gonna write a commune even
right that works on a small scale and
works beautifully everyone's eating this
we're buying it in bulk we're making it
for you this is it's this or nothing and
neither of those things is great so we
couldn't possibly think of anything else
well we can cooperate on a grand scale
the bigger it is the more power there is
but its internal power and a little bit
external power but mainly internal power
right it's like the more of us there are
the better and more we can feed
ourselves for cheaper and cheaper real
cheap right
not current cheap which is like how can
we pass the cost off on to everyone else
how can we actually ethically get our
food costs down as much as possible
well it's growing it ourselves right
harvesting it ourselves cooking it
ourselves delivering it ourselves and
actually mapping what that looks like
and what our current contribution looks
like right what does your current life
look like for food
Co vid 19 to pre cope at 19 right how
much time and money do you spend on food
shopping and prepping cooking cleaning
how much of that how can we come
together and bring that down and so the
more the bigger it is the better it is
only if that's true right if we become
big enough that we are like will bring
art bro here off Kirsty everyone's
eating celery soup on Monday because
that's what we need then we lose
everybody right because nobody wants
celery soup every Monday unless you
really do we have a very tiny group of
people but if you are asking people
right how much diversity do we need in
options and if there isn't one for you
especially if there's a specific diet
that isn't for you right like you're
like no I'm keto none of these work for
me
how can we add that to our system
instead of you needing to go off and
branch eating creating the competitive
one because it's not vilifying or making
a competition illegal right you always
are free to go and start your own but
the more you start your own separate
from whatever already exists the more
you're costing both of us why when we're
not in competition and we're not
designing it for profit your business
only hurts our consumers right it hurts
our user to have to pass to companies
why do I always go with best to pass to
companies now rather than just one and
passing that efficiency off because if
we're not selling for profit there's no
lying right there's no marketing and
pretending or something or not it's like
what is truth what are we putting in our
pasta and why well this one's here to
give it a shelf-life
okay do we want the shelf-life probably
it's faster okay let's move on it fresh
so having the information available so
that everyone can write we can make the
decision do we want salts in it
do we want it to how much of a shelf
life do we want it to have how many
varieties do we want it to have there
might be one variety that is the vast
majority of us want that one is gonna be
the cheapest because it's gonna be the
one we can create on scale and then we
have to hopefully I hope we make
accommodations for people who it isn't a
choice it's a real need that they have
in Asia right there gluten-intolerant
there's enough gluten intolerant people
that's really not a problem but the next
thing right that you're one in a million
on and you're like no I can't eat this I
need it to be made in a because a
peanut-free facility though they'll
think we have three facilities but if
you're I don't know allergic to olives
and we use olives in nearly everything
olive oil
it's like oops we need to now
accommodate someone right but that that
shouldn't be more expensive for them
it's not their fault but at the same
time a bigger system can can absorb that
right a small town can't a small town
can't absorb a peanut-free bakery and
and of this free bakery no this free
bakery unless you're gonna have one
that's all like it's a free bakery
nothing costs just we don't cook with
anything because someone's allergic to
everything that there is reason for our
diversity we have to build that into the
system but at any rate there's more
options most of our world exists on this
binary of like if it's not capitalism
it's got to be communism and we don't
want communism so we can't do anything
better than capitalism done let's just
kill our planet and kill our economy
we're all stuck inside and it's like
what we know there's like infinite
number of options besides capitalism and
communism right whoo and we had we we we
simultaneously actually have the power
and have no power right me as an
individual I not passing laws I can't
invoke something on you even if I really
think would be great for you to do it
right if I think it the world should go
vegan which a little bit do even though
I'm not a vegan it's like yeah I can see
how environmentally that would be good I
also see how eating meat is good for my
body and dairies aren't good but it
likes it like all all of that and so
I can't invoke my will on people like
the government can and yet we have the
power to come together and create
solutions in a way the government can't
because they have to do it for a hundred
percent of people we can create
solutions for a portion of the
population who wants a solution and
instead of creating it for a profit for
I created this solution and I'm gonna
sell it to you and market it to you
which costs me something because there's
a real risk to that and it cost you
something there's a real risk to that
and so creating it in a way that
minimizes the risk because we're
spreading it and truly minimizes it if
there's 10,000 people involved in
something who are gonna create a
solution it's already nearly risk-free
because one those 10,000 people put in
ten dollars a month or ten dollars total
into a pool if that ten dollars is
astronaut is a risk for you don't do it
if it's not a risk if it's like playing
the lottery you know you're not gonna
win but it's fun to play and you're
putting it in and this is way better
than winning the lottery because it's
literally everyone's playing whoever
wins we're winning together no it's not
but it's like we're creating a system
that is how can we feed 10,000 people
how can we improve 10,000 people's
health care not with a hundred thousand
dollars right we can't create a whole
new health care system with a hundred
thousand dollars but you can create a
doctor tracking app you can create a
know what pills I'm taking when app you
can create like there's there's so many
options it's like which one can have the
most powerful impact if we if again if
the government had to make that app it
would be astronomically expensive and it
would it'd be way too complex because
they would need to make it for everyone
we can say hey what's the most powerful
thing we can create the food medication
tracking run the doctor tracking one
which one would give you the most which
one would you use the most find ten
thousand people and create that one and
who knows in those ten thousand people
doing the medication tracker you might
find that they also want the doctor
tracker and you might incorporate it
into that but it's starting with
something that
work for 10,000 people and then
continually improving it and it's not
one person or a tiny group of people who
owns the thing we're creating it's all
of us who owns it it's owned by the
Commons and knowing that you're putting
your ten dollars into the Commons right
to sit and you're not getting what
you're getting back is product and
service what you're getting back is a
better world is the actual solution
you're helping create not a profit not a
well this ten dollars might become a
million dollars someday it's like no
it's the same reason you know you would
you give money to someone to to send
their kid to school in another country
right it's it's to feel good it's and it
actually so it's like the best of all
worlds because it actually gives you
something because in the beginning it's
going to be people who are truly drawn
to creating a better world together I'm
looking for the people who want to have
the conversation about how do we
actually create a process that 10,000
people want to be a part of how do we
get 10,000 people the solution raising
is already happening under my capacity
but I can't move they happen with five
people not with 10,000 how do five
people talk about creating a bigger and
bigger process right what could it look
like to create a system with 10,000
people
what are they voting on what's the small
group of people doing what's the bigger
group of people doing who wants to be
involved in a smaller group if 10,000
people want to be involved in the into
the small group we can create something
that works for that but that's not how
society works 10,000 people want to fund
it a thousand people want to do a lot of
the work and and have the conversations
and feel like they were contributing or
not a bigger scale 101 or like full-time
this is my bitch and this is my purpose
ten people even you know who are focused
and they happen to be the 20% that do
80% of the work that's how the world
works that's how how our population
works so why not utilize that creating a
solution for this if those 10 people
need everybody in the 10,000 to act like
them and work like them not gonna happen
if the 10,000 require are like vilify
the 10 for doing all of the work and
also not going to work great but if we
can create a process where the people
who put it in ten dollars are ten
thousand people and like what do you
want to get out of that ten dollars do
you want to just get a right to vote
do you want a entertaining like a show
to watch that's gonna tell you what's
happening you can follow along like what
is the the key thing that most people
want and then how do we find because I
give that 10 people they exist the
10,000 people exist like 10,000 people
who want to solve something anything I
guarantee you if if it was possible for
me to send a message to everybody in
Vancouver and I was like hey want to
come together and figure out our food
system and actually had a way for 10,000
people to come together and figure out a
food system I would not have a problem
getting 10,000 people in Vancouver to
come together and talk about our food
the issue is we don't have a system yet
so what are we doing with those 10,000
people and that I don't have a marketing
system that does that right I have to
pay a lot of money to get those 10,000
people and that's where like once you
have 10,000 people who eat they also
probably have health care and they also
some of those people have kids and even
if let's say one in 10 has kids that I
need child care those people have
friends who have kids who have child
care so no matter what you're creating
next you start with a rather nice group
of people right and maybe because it's a
nice group of people you start with a
broad group of people so like everyone
needs to eat so the food app is a good
place to start but once you have that
niche once you have that 10,000 people
you don't need to find a new 10,000 for
the next project if the process itself
was engaging if people felt they got
more than theirs money's worth out of
the $10.00 they're gonna want to be
involved in every coming project and in
fact they're probably gonna want to be
more and more involved right if you were
part of that 10 and you feel gross
because you feel like you contributed to
much and you feel like you didn't get
paid for it are you which honestly those
10 are getting paid but like you're part
of the hundred you didn't get paid but
you felt like you should have gotten
paid you thought like you or like just
shy of whatever level it was it gets you
paid versus your doing volunteer work
and you feel gross and you don't need
one there's hopefully way for you to
communicate that so we can find out what
that is but beyond that great and then
you don't have to participate the next
one or if you do how about you don't be
one of the hundred how about you be one
of the 10,000 what you just give $10
where do you want your energy to go and
then you know whatever circle you're in
it's people who want to be there it's
people who want to focus on right
there's nothing wrong with being the ten
thousand thank you we need you there's
nothing there's amazing those thousand
that want to participate amazing those
hundred who want to give their time and
energy and not get paid for it and
awesome those ten people who are so
focused on it we want to pay you like we
can solve nearly every problem on the
planet with this method finding ten
thousand people creating a solution and
inviting the world and where the
solution doesn't work either improving
the solution or creating an off branch
solution that works for that you should
right if we create a bring ten thousand
people together let me create a food app
it's not gonna work for those ten
thousand people because you can't make
something that works for that right it's
it's we need it to meet most people's
food needs most of the time and so if
there's let's say a hundred things that
a food out could do and we're putting
fifteen of the top ones into our app
that's not theirs there's gonna be a
certain percentage they can't use it at
all because of that but they really
needed those key features and there's
gonna be people who are like well I'll
use my other one until this one's better
but as you're continually making this
one better you're also asking right so
I'm sorry that a thousand of you we
didn't we didn't fix this or even with
your ten dollars what could have fixed
it for you right and so those people can
then either go form their own ten
thousand group people right but then
it's like well actually my kid has a
really strong allergy and none of these
things work because you didn't take
allergies into account there's enough
allergies I think we take into account
but then we o'c awesome you know how
many people are with allergies so many
let's find ten thousand people with your
common allergy or with a severe allergy
and let's have those conversations to
figure out food systems for people with
with family members at the severe
allergies or severe conflicting
allergies right so because maybe that's
what we didn't do right we we did it for
peanuts and eggs and milk but we didn't
do it for peanuts thanks a milk and so
creating solutions together that are
actual solutions and this is the issue
right now is people are like this is now
I don't understand it right like how do
we create a solution together that's
what we're figuring out there may not be
create a solution together because when
we create it together we have the power
and the ingenuity to make it happen but
when I create it I have to sell it to
you whether or not for even if I create
it in and not for profit it's really
good for you it's really good for the
planet everyone's awesome you have to
trust me for that to be something that
you're gonna use which is great because
I'm really trustworthy and awesome but
you don't know that and you do end if
you don't know me and I don't want to be
known then you're not going to know my
next product my ex run right unless I'm
Jeff Bezos
unless I'm you on musk and you know who
I am you're not gonna you're not even
gonna know my name behind the next one
so all the people out there with with
genius ideas aren't able to actually put
them into the marketplace and if they're
competitive they're uber competitive
they want to patent it they want to make
tons and tons of profit off of it have a
good fine follow the old market follow
it doesn't work for you whatever it's
how it's designed design the nine out of
ten of them failed we don't get the best
solutions in the market if what we want
is the best solutions in the market and
the person who is able to create
solutions just wants the solution in the
market right I came up with an idea when
people be able to use it I came up with
a new product and when people are going
to use it then we can create a system
that's much more favorable to the best
solutions being in the marketplace right
because is it a solution we want to be a
part of and can we help make that
solution better starting with literally
anything and then just incrementally
improving it starting with any number of
people and then just growing it and
growing it in a way that isn't lying
right it's honest it's like we're not
promising something we're not delivering
which is why what I'm promising in the
beginning which I'm hoping we will
deliver is literally a world that works
for everyone
that is much further in the future a
solution is something that will work for
most people most of the time and what
I'm hopefully promising is that that
process is enjoyable for you because if
the process isn't enjoyable for you it's
not ready for you right it's not yours
yet to come on to once this thing is so
easy it's it's it'll be
as fun and as engaging as being on
social media that is you contribute in
finding the way for you to contribute
and it's for the diversity of human
human ability out there so there's
somewhere for anyone to compete to
contribute in a fun engaging way for
themselves you can see it's fun right no
one has to convince you it's fun to be
on Facebook you're just there you're not
right if it's that easy to be part of it
that you actually have to like rein
yourself in hey I should go see some
friends and stop saving the world for a
bit that's my life
that's my life right now without having
the thing that makes it easy and fun to
do and don't go see friends cuz we're
all second side and resiliency but in
the normal world this is kind of my
normal as I've mentioned several times
so finding just that by creating
solutions that people want to be part of
and then inviting more and more people
and when you can create something that's
scalable right if we create something
that's in what's the word internal some
word like this solutions just for these
10,000 people right now we can't have
more people involved on board with this
particular solution but we just created
a solution for 10,000 people so even if
you can't be part of this specific group
we can give you that knowledge in that
system so you can create a another
10,000 people group but most solutions
are actually gonna be wait if we if we
can do this for 10,000 we can definitely
do it for 20,000 we can do it for a
hundred thousand we can do it for a
million so it's scalable some of them
like my my cousin community that's not
in session right they're like we aren't
eating together we're not cooking meals
for each other right now but that that
community and that there's only so many
people can be part of that right not all
the vancouver can come and eat dinner
and cook dinner in this kitchen but
there can be a like anyone could have a
cohousing common meal plan right if you
have a kitchen and a space to eat in it
can do that for a hundred people okay so
how many hundred people's in the city
right like we can it's still scalable
even if this group isn't scalable right
we can't have everyone in this group
everyone can be part of this and that's
where we're looking
for omni wind solutions we're looking
for things and because I have this
doesn't mean you can't have this right
me having connection and friendship and
love and food and doesn't cost you and
let's define it-- resource and food is a
finite resource only cuz we designed it
to be that way we can make enough food
right if we have enough labour and we
have enough lands and we have enough
knowledge we can definitely make enough
food and with 10,000 I can pick any
10,000 random people and I guarantee you
we have enough knowledge we have enough
passion and like wanting to do the labor
and we probably have lands amongst those
10,000 people who are willing like I
have a backyard I'm not oh I don't own
it
I rent but by all means go for it go for
it grow food I don't have the knowledge
I'm trying I'm trying the best I can
this year to grow a garden but I know
year after year it fails we and then of
course like most of the food I eat isn't
grown from a garden it's packaged it's
done that right so but where did it come
from can we bulk buy it can we like any
sector of system all the sectors are
intertwined
you can't fix or break the food system
without that affecting everything else
and that is part of why everyone feels
so paralyzed by our current situation
and our bigger city like the current co
bid 19 thing and the bigger oh crap
we're all like our climate change
you can you can see play this is the
tiny thing playing out of the big scale
- right there's people who think that
climate change is we're not doing nearly
enough and there's people who think it's
way over hyped and I should be able to
drive everywhere I want and fly
first-class everywhere in the world for
the weekends no problem and there you
know like that affects both sides in
fact the other one right these bones
want regulation these ones want free for
all we're seeing this this thing play
out on a tiny scale this has a two week
data feedback system the co mid-nineteen
right if you're doing something and it's
working you're gonna see the numbers
dropping in two weeks if you're - no if
you're not doing anything and you
up by not doing anything you're gonna
see your numbers skyrocket with
few weeks climate change is on the scale
of decades and so we need to be doing
action now to see the outcome in decades
once we see the action once the people
are dying in the hospital needing
respirators there's no backtracking with
climate change there is no let's
commandeer forward to make respirators
because once we start the positive /
negative feedback loops once a positive
feedback loop ISM the more something
happens the more it happens so I don't
know why this is but like the more angry
you are the more the more often you get
to an angry state the more likely you
are gonna get to the angry state because
your brain goes with those pathways but
it doesn't mean going to angry state
once it's going to get you there but the
more you repeat that pattern the more
you repeat that pattern I can't think of
it in thermostats for some reason
hundred positive feedback loop but I
never understand those like wait so it
turns off when it turns on - turns off
whatever response Fe that loops or
negative feedback loops which is that's
also a thermostat this is why it's
confusing so it goes to certain it gets
to a certain point then it turns it
flicks it the other way and it turns off
right your heat turns off your air
temperature turns on not the point I
mean I think there's some negative
feedback loops fit into our positive
feedback loop of the planet I think open
nineteenth one of them I think mother
nature knows what the she's doing
and so there's gonna be a lot of things
that are but also she's not kind she's
it's I really wish this disease only
impacted the rich white people who had
spread globalism and up our
planet to no ends right like that would
be really kind
I really wish this only affected rich
people rich people in power I think
that'd be great and then it would shut
down oh wait my life's on the line
no we need we need to stop everyone stop
moving I'm getting so sidetracked but
it's actually kind of work today I
didn't have notes I just came on like
how we save our world
bucket I don't care if I can't explain
it I'm just gonna keep explaining it
because that is what I'm hearin do us
explain the message and figure out the
process with other people but I can't
figure out
processed by myself because they don't
have to explain and communicated to
other people which is great because it
means people a group of people need to
come up with the solutions right like
the solution raising is a solution so
tomorrow during this time period
I've yet to make it yet to invite people
so we'll see if it actually works is
like I could do a solution raising on my
own but that's not fun um happy and
thanks dr. X happy and in case you're on
YouTube and on periscope
finding saying finding solutions yeah
finding a group of people who want to
have the conversation hopefully live on
camera because it just is better for
every or trust or recruitment for
everything but but I'm okay if I find a
group of people who are willing to have
the conversation about how do we create
a system for ten thousand people I'm
willing to do it on June what we're
going to do it on video chat that's not
live on YouTube but the main thing is
finding people who are who want to have
that conversation who want to
participate in the solution raisings but
more even more than that a solution
raising on solution how do we actually
get 10,000 people and what does the
process look like to have them involved
right if it's ten thousand people
donating and it's just that level what
does that look like so that we would
want to be that 10,000 people even if
we're not right we're clearly the five
coming together we're currently
completely the central body and not the
big 10,000 but if we were the ten
thousand how to be creative right is it
a show is it a is it bodean is it and
part of that's having 10,000 people and
if they're not on video in like watching
in the comments saying yes I would want
that and not that or this and not that
right it's it's creating it with and for
the people and so if there's something
here that's not quite working now if the
solution is some some bad actors from
Google being like no actually I think
Google should get to own everything and
I don't like we're not gonna fall for it
but if someone truly feels that way I
mean I don't even know how to back that
up I do I really don't I really think
that Google should own all of our data I
really think that more and more people
should be billionaires and we should
have more of a disparity between the
rich and the poor
cool awesome you go focus on
that solution and we will focus on
actual solutions right actual solutions
that make life better and easier for
people because that's what we want and
there's also people like myself like
many people who I come in contact with
who wants a better world and are willing
to pay more for a better world are
willing to do more work for a better
world and then there's the vast majority
no I don't think it's the vast majority
there's a lot of people who don't even
want to know the world's broken they
just want to continue with their life
they just like that's too much it's
overwhelming and it is overwhelming
like having dealing with it having dealt
with a lot of it and dealing with it
it is overwhelming if you can't handle
that that's okay but please don't stand
in the way of the rest of us creating a
better world and part of creating that
is is owning that we're that is how we
need to create it for right if what we
need is nobody to shop at Walmart and
we're gonna boycott Walmart and
everybody needs to not shop at Walmart
that's not gonna work if we created
actual alternatives to Walmart and
Amazon and our products are cheaper and
better and faster to you if we actually
meet the customers needs and where we
don't right they're like Lillian I did
buy this off Amazon and not you because
it was cheaper there people are gonna be
more willing to give us that information
than give you an Amazon that information
right because this is ours and this is
evil-looking this is ours if it's not
evil it's for it's from Jeff Bezos it's
not for Humanity this one is for me and
humanity so it doesn't mean I always
have to shop here but if I'm not
shopping here and I'm willing to why
wasn't i shopping right why did I buy
this here what was not convenient I was
in my way home I needed to drop in I
couldn't wait three days awesome good
things to know maybe if our data system
can track it it can by the way we know
you're running out of bread because you
always run out of bread this time we're
gonna send you anyone in your in your
basket right yes or no um
there's things that we can do that are
just more powerful because we're the
people we want our thing
we're creating together to be better for
us and then we make it better for
everyone right if I can fight if I can
figure it away to improve the service or
product for me and enough people are
like yes that also improves it for me
right then it gets voted in and it gets
in the next iteration so any innovation
helps everybody you need to mind control
all the bad actors so they're here to
showcase what we have to include them
bad actors have to be included and I
love it because very rarely that's not
true bad actor show up all the time but
not in the way like they always come up
in conversations as like a secondary
right like you believe but what about
the bad actors what about people are
trying to tear it down what about like
because we the people who hopefully
aren't bad actors know that they exist
and quite frankly we all are them right
we all can be bad actors we can't we can
we don't sweep it under the rug
we don't ignore the bad actors exist we
don't stop them from existing but we
always honor that they could be them
right that anyone and everyone could be
them what if I'm the bad actor well then
this thing's but I don't know but
because the truth it's not though
cuz even if I was the bad actor I don't
know how I'd be a bad actor all this
like I'm just cuz I'm fully honest about
like right I'm saving the world to save
myself I'm doing all of this for a
hundred percent selfish reasons which
are also selfless reasons because my
selfishness is selfless and my
selflessness is selfish it's all
connected
but because I'm not designing it that
you believes in charge and Jubilees way
goes and jubilee gets to make the rules
at any point literally even now I could
be kicked out of it right I could be
like it's like you're right we're gonna
hold an election decide with it or the
Board of Directors are and you're not on
them but like so if the idea continues
forward if it doesn't continue for it
the bad actors vilify the process or me
before it everything ever gets started
just me I hope that doesn't break it
there's nothing to vilify about me but
they can make up complete lies I mean
I'm literally open and honest about
everything good to go but again if we
make something reliance on a central
figure then it is fragile relating to
that figure right as I'm finding out
from the Kyle C's community that if Kyle
sees falls from grace the entire
community breaks apart and like how do
we create that and how do we and happens
time and time again with cults that
watch binge-watching cults on if the
leaders eye is the thing guys this is
about creating something that's
resilient that anybody can be part of
that anybody that is without it
controlling your life how can it enhance
your life how can it give you the tools
you need to live your best life no one's
ever going to and that's not even true
it's like no one's ever gonna hand you
the solution
tons of people will hand you the
solution because you might not have been
involved in the ten thousand people and
then they're inviting you to the
solution but if your solution is nice
right if you're the only one who needs
your solution then you're the one who
needs to speak up for it and that's
where we're inviting people to solve
their own problems together collectively
and that is how we save the planet by
helping by creating a system that people
can come together and create actual
feasible solutions that improve their
lives right now without needing to go
through the government or a for-profit
corporation but both of those things
still exist right we still live in a
world that has governments thank God and
corporations also thank God right
I just went grocery shopping yes many
corporations I just supported a lots
because we haven't figured out how to
feed ourselves without corporations not
on a grand scale so they need to exist
but if that's who we're looking to to
solve the problems we're gonna get the
same issue we're gonna get the same
solutions which are solutions that make
them profit and solve the problem enough
that we're willing to pay that profit
but we together can make much better
powerful solutions that aren't designed
for profit they're designed for purpose
right we can make transport
systems that here we go transport goods
and people instead of making profit for
people who have corporations who
transfer people in goods we can create a
world hyung-suk item help I'm healthy
with your insomnia taste bag cuz you
were here yesterday with that same same
things creating a food system that
actually helps people be fed nutritious
delicious food instead of how do we make
the most profit how do we squeeze the
worker for as much as we possibly can
why not create a system that actually
feeds us we can't come in and what's the
word steal the means of production well
we could but that's violence you know I
don't want to live in that world as
that's going on we can recreate the
means of production though when it makes
sense to do so right we're not gonna
open all the factories all at once but
as we have our data as Amazon does this
all the time and they're becoming a
monopoly because of it right you put
your stuff on Amazon they decide it's
you did all that you took all the risk
they now see it's profitable they're
knocking you off China does that to let
you go and make things there then
they're like yes thank you for proving
that that's really profitable we're
gonna make it now cuz we're not we don't
listen to your buttons they've gotten
really rich from it Amazon's getting
really red from it we can fully do that
out in the open because first of all
break aren't likey like if we can make
it for cheaper if you're here to make a
profit you're in the wrong place right
if you're here for purpose you're in the
right place so if you're here because
your cracker is so damn good and so
nutritious that everybody should have it
why not have it then right if you're
here to make profit there's someone who
can probably make it for cheaper and
then you want to keep a proprietary but
if you're here because you want the most
people weak we could help you get to the
most people right for the people so if
we let your cracker how can we make it
on a grand scale if it may if it meets
the needs of more and more people and so
that is that is how we save the world by
coming together and creating for a hope
that works together oh this guy he's
Larry's
much longer and streaming I'm getting
off pretty soon I'm only on for like
four more minutes but I'm back tomorrow
and that if you want to come I'm doing a
solution raising tomorrow for packaging
and materials I'm gonna be putting it up
in the game be space later hopefully
find people I also have a idea cafe in
half an hour that I know wait didn't
much recruiting too so I'm just gonna
show up and see if anyone else shows up
from the Tuesday idea cafe grip
otherwise I'll be back tomorrow
even crackers save America maybe may be
perhaps I've been on for an hour so I
was stuffing out a 30 second challenge
but I like crackers I don't wanna live
in a world without crackers so I get
some crackers but the point is is like
all all the food companies that come up
and go out of business I get all of
their product at Qwest so it helps helps
that but it doesn't actually help with
the next time I want to buy them these
are really good
oh they're on a business coach Jeff you
didn't like our entire economy is very
risky we're about to really see that on
a grand scale all of our medium and
small sized businesses are going out
because they don't have the privilege
and power to stay in existence and all
and a lot of the big ones are gonna go
away too like they're not necessarily
designed for I think I actually kind of
really want to engage with you dudes big
ski like what is it exactly because
there's tons of contents online that I
can't stand but I don't sit there and
watch it so Russian bots I'll just I'll
just big news
you're just news news max he just comes
out and tells me that I'm boring maybe
he doesn't want to watch it so then
don't
am I the only thing on YouTube right now
did that happen cuz that's awesome look
good times good times I probably don't
need to say only for the last three
minutes but way back tomorrow the
solution or you see me do a solution
raising every Wednesday at this time I
came on five minutes late today cuz I
was coaching shopping so I got that box
checked and I will be on on Thursday I
don't have anything
civically planned Friday we're gonna do
life coaching together live and we did
relationship with others last time and I
did another one the week before but this
time we're gonna do relationship with
ourselves so fine you know more about
what you're here for
or we might do period piece so happy and
because what I need is vodka in the
morning Bernice no strides striving to
not smoke pot sure hey and I made it to
2 p.m. on 4/20 without sunken pots oh
yeah me me it was literally 2 o'clock on
the dot oh it's like counting down the
seconds did it I did it I assure you it
would not me
more interesting it would make me less
coherent which definitely makes like
this is the most coherent I have cup of
coffee first thing in the morning if you
can't they all snap happening well yeah
I know but that's already yelling with
your deuce that's over the Elizabeth and
I'm gonna save the world from this this
stance so I'm good
like and does I actually want to know
what makes it horrible to you I'm
actually really curious is there
anything actually tangible like what is
it bringing up in you that makes it
horrible and yet you're still watching
it like I often think this when I'm
watching my bit I'm binge watching cult
stuff at the moment I don't know if the
family is called called I really liked
Waco Waco was really good and um and
then it made me watch some YouTube ones
and I watched one on the childhood
children of God which is like I've
watched a few on that crazy but um like
do I need to know more that's wrong
with the world do I actually need to
learn more about about more like human
trafficking more environmental
degradation and I've always been I'm not
obsessed but like interested in and
learning about calls I've learned a lot
about the member names are do
fundamental latter-day saints that are
here in Bountiful and of course in Utah
as well and like when I was a teenager I
was learning about those things it's
like this is interesting what's going on
why are they have multiple eyes why are
they kicking the boys out
I am a think-tank person but that's
thank you Oh Matt I can send you the the
information I think I think write an
email I'll send you I'll email you the
link on the idea cafe it's in 25 minutes
so I will go go and do that now because
I'm know at the hour Ohio so it's like
when it's I'm ready it's like go live on
the hour but I'm getting better going
alive a few minutes after like today I'm
like okay it's an hour gotta get off and
I have to like keep it on until an hour
it's all good all right I'll Redemption
maybe we can talk talk
anyone else have cults as one of their
special interests and you'd have a whole
idea cafe on that I mean my was babe I'm
basically in existence because of a cult
so I guess that might be part of it I
don't know all right thank you for
tuning in thank you for hanging out
including you deuce you're always
welcome back you just common this could
be like your way to have a nap you have
insomnia
share it with your friends that's gum
good with that I know that who this is
meant to reach will reach you it's meant
to reach and those people will be the
people we start the process with and
once we have 10,000 people in one
project we're gonna create it all like
this is this thing starts slowly and
snowballs so fast is it already
snowballs fast several times I'm like I
need to go back because it's got a cat
again with the snowball but it is it is
it is gonna keep happening like once we
have a way to have a conversation and a
process with 10,000 people and create a
solution then we're gonna create all the
solutions and continually improve them
all and own them all together and then
it doesn't matter what the bad actors
are doing the bad actors can create
their own solution he's you can create
whatever reason this is really boring
it's like I don't understand I really do
but I'm gonna go and say what's it with
I'm not gonna say with anything I'm
gonna go drink my coffee and send a link
to Matt alright thanks guys