the idea cafe does it just be me talking
about Star Trek and I have some thoughts
um would you like to go first or I can
go first you go ahead all right so I
watched Star Trek a lot when I was a
little kid because my dad watched it and
I haven't watched the next generation
since then I've watched a few of the
other ones
what's the newer one the newest was a
Voyager another part of the discovery
discovery oh I haven't seen that
apparently it's terrible I don't I don't
mind it but it's always interesting when
you have something that's in the future
but it's like the prequel cuz it's like
both more technological than the 90s one
less technological it's like wait you
guys are just discovering warp drive and
I mean I like fantasy ones but watching
the next generation specifically I
watched season one and then I just
finished watching the one that keeps
being brought up about addiction the
holodeck one and I find it really
interesting because it's both ahead of
its time and now 20 years later way
behind the times like the amount of you
can tell they're trying they're trying
to say we've kind of gotten over racism
and sexism and and ableism and yet
they've been no way gotten past any of
that like every like there's a one
planet where there were their tans and
blondes it like fit they they have like
Geordi the only reason he's kind of seen
like his his disability has been
enhanced so he's he's seen as having now
being a contributor but not in and of
the fact that he has a disability right
and they constantly mean everyone to
conform to their way of thinking like on
the enterprise itself it's very
authoritarian and I get that it's built
after the military but we've like
changed the military into something else
but yet they haven't like it's not like
even the fact where they will what does
it call the military but they like take
you out of one assignment and put you in
another assignment like deploy you they
do that and I'm like there's no how do
you have a crew when that's going on how
do you you know made it like it's I feel
like we would have evolved past
I gotten to the point where it's like
here more voluntary right more like hey
we really need people who have these
skills who wants to come and do it
rather than a central authority
dictating where everyone goes I do think
having leadership is important and we
would still necessarily have
organizations that have strict
leadership and hierarchy especially
things that would be like the military
but not in the way that it is like I
feel like Picard's leadership style is
very behind the times now like it's like
he gets angry so fast and he is not
actually very diplomatic
and yet he's looked at as the epitome of
those things within the Trekkie universe
are you talking about the new show oh no
I just watched the first that one was
the next generation you're saying he's
still kind of patriarchal in the past in
the old show even though it's in a kind
of positive sense yeah yeah and so it's
um in the primary directive I mean that
is both like even the fact they go to
places that don't yet have spacefaring
is against the prime directive like what
are you doing but then they won't get
involved including when they kind of ask
for it it's a very like wishy-washy like
we're here and we know better but we
can't pretend we know better and we're
going to break the prime directive and
every opportunity for a plot device I
really love the Star Trek and the
currency they've gotten rid of currency
but they really have not like the people
designing the show haven't actually
figured out what it means to not have
currency including like when they
there's one episode in particular where
there's both like this species are like
they're one of the planets creates a
drug and the other ones addicted to the
drug but they think they have the plague
and like they can just manufacture the
drug they could just give them anything
and they're like well you know no that
would be against the prime directive and
they have to figure this out because the
other ones that reliance on them it's
like really this seems like a very
because it's not even on one planet it's
like one planet preying off another
planet and
if they I don't know like a lot of it
and it's of course my bias in it and my
bringing you know that yes baby but they
also portrayed the attics in a very
addict nineties way and not in a and the
one that I just watched which was the
holodeck one where it's like he's
addicted to the holodeck but he has he's
like has a queer quirky personality and
yet they have not accepted him in any
way they're like you need to get over
your instead of like society
accepting people for who they are and I
really hope 300 years in the future
we've embraced our diversity we're just
cuz you're an oddball it doesn't mean
you're you're you know an oddball and
excluded that we can embrace all of our
oddball lists and and find that the
beauty in it and so that was more than
five minutes I think or just five
minutes they're perfect what have you to
say oh wow I've lots of ideas but I want
to pick up off your last point because
you know the the next generation is set
on the Starship Enterprise
right so there is certain kind of
expectations for crew that are
reasonable there's a kind of you know
just assumption that in the Star Trek
world of course there's a place for
everybody somewhere you know there's all
these planets with just ordinary people
living on that that's when we come into
contact with this sort of you know or
ordinary people I don't mean that in a
pejorative way but just people that are
not Starfleet right so with with
Berkeley and his different anxieties and
and addictions they they want him to
conform to Starfleet stem standards not
not because it's a kind of authoritarian
cult but because it's you know it's just
it gets everyone hmm you know calm and
on the same page and able to work work
with each other and so you know it's
it's the the aesthetic and that the
atmosphere of the of the enterprise in
next generation that really captivates
me because it's like it's just so such a
calming environment you know it's got
this background hum it's relatively Side
and otherwise and it's just like it's
not like the other Star Trek
incarnations or any other science
fiction where there's lots of warfare
and explode explosions and fights and
stuff like that the next generation
tries to to tame it all down right and
so you know we need to keep in mind
these are just shows written by people
very imaginative people but but but by
that measure the next generation stands
out so much compared to the other
versions it's just so there's so much
like compassion and and thoughts behind
it to imagine this this what-if kind of
scenario of you know if if we have peace
and if we have a spacefaring
civilization like what what how would it
play out what would it look like and so
it's interesting to the kind of paradox
you noted about how you know it's it's
based on military traditions but more
specifically it's based on like naval
traditions right they they they take a
lot of that language you know captain
and you know portside and you know it's
it's all it's all naval kind of
terminology and of course that in in
truth that's associated with you know
conquest and imperialism and colonialism
and all these things um and the show
tries to you know treat human history as
something like they don't whitewash it
they try to treat it as something that
was very primitive and vicious right
there in the 24th century looking back
at the 20th century as something pretty
pretty vicious you know they're not
looking back necessarily at like slavery
in the 17th century they will sometimes
but more specifically it's always about
reference to our present time the 20th
century so
you know and so when we think about the
next generation juxtaposed with the
other Star Trek's
there's so there's so much going on in
terms of like I like like the kind of
how its corporate funded what writers
are selected you know what what they
think fans want and that's why the the
new JJ Abrams series of Star Trek films
and even the next-generation theatrical
films they're like they're just very II
you know popcorn style like tons of
explosions tons of fights tons of
fast-paced action and it seduces us all
away from that very very boring you know
diplomacy a driven ethic in the next
generation um and I think like your your
critiques are valid um
insofar as like this is a show of people
imagining what it would be like and
trying to idealize the situation but
because it's fictional
you know we might still think different
aspects of it are weird or regressive
but it's really thought real real
thought experiment to put yourself into
that world this specific world of
science fiction yes and it is like I
it's a love-hate relationship I have
with Star Trek I think from my childhood
I'm like like almost being forced to
watch it and now I'd really love sci-fi
and I love putting myself in that world
and at the same time there's things that
work me about the science of it like the
fact that there's all these half species
right like half half Vulcan half human
like know biology states that is
impossible there's no and it's like it's
just through you know like sexual
intercourse it's not like they were like
designed in a lab or something that
would make it maybe somewhat possible
and
yet I do like that difference between it
being the imagination of people in 20 30
years ago and yet even the people who
are writing it probably were more
advanced than what they wrote but they
didn't figure the regular population was
so they couldn't include certain things
or any like I think Star Trek had one of
the first interracial kisses and you
know like of course that would be like
even the fact we still have races in the
human population that are quite distinct
when you know like what is the chances
of a Caucasian person still existing 400
years like really we're pretty much like
the white page like we we disappear and
there's um and that happens in a lot of
start of spacefaring human like what do
you do only cast people that are at
least you know don't look Caucasian yeah
actually that's a great opportunity to
do that what about all the other the
other universes and but I love the
exploration and I'm going to different
different cultures and they do have like
the Klingons in a very wharf area and
the Vulcans that are very logical and
Betazoids that you know are empathic but
and that's kind of like they embrace the
culture of species but they don't
embrace the individualism of those exact
same things right that like a human
being who's more violent has something
different to bring in a human being
that's logical and it's like our
combination of selves that makes us
unique and able to give something and
yet it's still very needing to conform
to be part of Starfleet and I don't even
think we're there now 20 years later and
let alone 400 like 300 400 years from
now and hopefully there's more more
diversity and the ageism like Wesley for
the whole first season is basically sees
everything before they see it and I'm
like okay the first few times I get it
right as a kid they don't see but come
on by the time they get to like the
seventh eighth time this happens they
should kind of be saying okay no last
time we remember tell us what you think
let's let it does get there
exactly like like yeah I mean keep in
mind like he's like a teenager and and
they give him a position as ensign acne
acting ensign on the bridge of the
enterprise so like he he you know
there's not really ageism it's more like
like rate isn't well yeah I mean it's
it's ageism at first as you would expect
like what like like Picard doesn't like
children and he's like get these
children off the bridge right but then
the whole point of Wesley in the show is
to overcome that and for him to become
such a key character at a key
relationship for the card
mmm but um you know it's interesting
like your point about the kind of the
reality of science fiction like it may
very well be that there are limits to
certain things like like space travel
and so when we imagine these worlds like
Star Wars or Star Trek or the Marvel
Cinematic Universe that have
interplanetary travel that may very well
never come to pass that might be a
science fiction a kind of fantasy that
we never achieve or cross that's not to
say other science fiction things can't
come true like all sorts of bizarre
transhumanism here on earth or going to
Mars and stuff like that but the actual
idea of you know civilizations meeting
each other we've we've we've really
embraced this idea of course because
it's great for storytelling and
imagination but but technologically it
might just actually be impossible and
impossible in the sense that like it's
never been achieved in the universe and
may never be achieved you know by by any
species anywhere yeah and it's just like
all like as a biologist it's always
bugged me the interbreeding day like
it's not a possibility but even beyond
that the fact that almost everyone is
humanoid the fact that almost everyone
has two genders two sexes the fact that
those two sexes are very gendered
exactly how ours are
right despite the fact that we can see
in the animal kingdom that's not always
the same right like it's more so in the
in like mammalian species then
unnecessarily the bird and reptile
species and fishes it's like come on
just looking at and that being said
we've come to those realizations in
biology kind of in the last few decades
it's not like we knew that I mean we
kind of probably do it 20 30 years ago
but not like just at the infancy of it
and so like I'm again only really
rewatched the first season so I don't
know maybe when they do encounter a
species with like three genders or yeah
I think it gets a lot more advanced
after the first season like ivory
watched it recently as well III don't
remember how far I got into it I might
have got enough to like season five I
was just just binge watching it last
year as I watched it my childhood as
well but I wanted to watch it again and
I think the first season you can see in
the aesthetics some similarities with
the show from the 60s which was like a
long time ago but there's still in the
very first season still some of the kind
of aesthetic crossover and like bad
special effects and stuff you're like
what's going on but then the show like
really gets good like in terms of the
writing and all the characters and what
they encounter out there I just like
Whoopi Goldberg just got introduced okay
yeah I'm just gonna say but like the
first officer what I come upon his name
is Will Riker Riker
he is such a womanizer like he won't be
she's for like the first time is all
like hey just like likes no personal
space just like right up next to the
above like again
20 years later past that I can only view
in 400 years
not to me that that's not still a trade
right of course probably but like in for
your professionalism and like all the
women are very like beautiful and
feminine in that being like and there's
there's the one officer who's who's of
course straight because there's no gay
yet even though they let you don't mean
in the 60s one one of the main
characters is
chillie gay in real life right and they
know that he's out in the cast but not
in the show because again the world
can't necessarily handle that but I
remember she gets killed off in the
first season she's got like short hair
and she's a little more masculine
she's also yeah I guess you know she
hooks up with data yeah yeah which is
also interesting right I don't remember
specifically but I'm pretty sure they
probably have some gay characters
explicitly at some point in the show I'm
I don't remember specifically but it's
just like there's there's so much
progressivism packed in there whether
it's hidden or explicit so I yeah I
can't think of an example but yeah I
mean even like this is not fantasy at
all but Grey's Anatomy right it's in
it's like 15th season and if you watch
from the first part where one of the
doctors like one of the people plays a
doctor got fired for being homophobic in
one of the first few seasons and now
it's like gay trans you know what I mean
like like it's not even like token
characters like actually a lot of a lot
of characters right and they kind of
have and that's in its own show format
and I can only imagine seven years in
Star Trek it's gonna be the same thing
where it's like how you've kind of like
progressed in our actual time period
during that and watching that in the in
media and I think that that is like life
imitating art and art imitating life
right if we don't have heroes and that
are that look different who have
different abilities and we can't imagine
it and therefore we can't create it and
then we also think that like well
because we can't imagine it the world
isn't ready for it so we can't put it
out there like when Hunger Games first
came out that wasn't that long ago and
they were like oh this is never gonna
take off it's a female lead and it was
huge it's like no I think we can handle
it like you do know 50% of the
population is female right like that's
not so you can have a strong female
character people
use like like like the Terminator the
series was based on a strong female lead
you know like people really easily
forget these things in the kind of
history of TV and film yeah yeah
absolutely like you look at I mean even
a significant story that's not right at
all
Wizard of Oz and how the Wizard of Oz
has like a female lead is the main
character yes she has three male
companions but like it's a very
different story than what was happening
isn't he at the time right like it was
like she was on her own journey and the
witches you know play a big role both
like they're really good I'm really bad
very archetypal but at the same time
yeah we can it's not and I'm sure the
pendulum will swing back and forth every
everybody it's it's a cultural thing
it's like like Star Wars too like
Princess Leia is a badass female lead
like like very feminist for the time you
know like like extremely strong
character and not drawing attention to
that fact either it's just a matter of
fact and so yeah people today who say
stuff like that like like this or that
won't sell or whatever like it's just
dumb it's just dumb clearly and
literally anything that's out of the box
as long as it's also good right like you
can't really have tokenism where it's
just like let's have a female lead just
to have a female lead or let's have a
black movie just to have a black movie
like oh my god what was the movie that
was the superheroes where they were like
one of the African fictional countries
where they had that it's like árbol
Sirius Black Panther I find her thank
you and it's a good movie like alone
it's a good story
exactly it's needed you know I think we
need more we're starting to definitely
more abilities and more like feminine
men and masculine women being in those
roles and still be in you know what I
mean like both heroic having good
qualities and having more characters
that are what is the word have a balance
right where you're not all good or all
bad and that definitely I don't think we
can have all good and all characters
anymore in media
they don't sell we don't resonate with
them whereas characters like Nurse
Jackie and Dexter and ones that are like
okay you've got light and dark you've
got you know both and those are that's
actually what we are is resonating we
have all of that in us and so when we
see it on the screen it's more it brings
it you know we notice anymore with those
characters we like them more but I don't
know like a Dexter and a Nurse Jackie 30
years ago wouldn't a flow and like that
would not have been in any way and those
are even those ones are over a decade
old right like yeah so it's interesting
that that Picard is is back you know in
this show I haven't seen yet but I've
read reviews and I you know it all the
behind the scenes stuff is really
interesting because you know initially
Patrick Stewart said no and then he kind
of listened to their pitch and went
along with it and when he what he liked
about it is that you know part of the
purpose is actually to engage again
specifically with the political moment
right right so that's why it doesn't
have the T in the next generation tone
it has this kind of you know reactionary
like like trumpism and brexit like like
those themes and so Patrick Stewart has
talked about this explicitly he's like
that's what drew me to it and this this
is what I think the world needs and
that's why it's you know so action
focused and like a lot of the the bad
characters in it are you know
separatists or segregationists or
whatever right there's some kind of
progressive ideology that completely
goes against a Picard's whole diplomacy
thing whole embodiment of Starfleet but
that's also this is also a kind of flaw
in the show and kind of its generating
backlash but where am I going with that
do you know like because I'm in that one
I watched the pilot which is the
overground so far they talk about the
Romulans having something happened with
the Romulans
they're there to start with their son
went supernova as well as some androids
whatever they call them in there went
rogue and went bad is another they're
illegal is that from one of the movies
or one of the shows yeah it's a
reference to I think Star Trek in 2009
the the 2009 film by JJ Abrams where
they you know something happens in the
and the star goes supernova and it kills
the planet and so Picard was apparently
involved in some kind of evacuation that
that's the connection and that's
premises so so this is the interesting
behind-the-scenes connection to because
the the writers and the showrunners for
this Picard series are the same people
that made those JJ Abrams films like
mm-hmm
are the more a more recent Star Trek
movies about kind of the coming-of-age
of the the first what like the people
who star in the very first one yeah yeah
it's about the original characters but
but and it is a parallel kind of
timeline but this Picard series attempts
to like weave it back in so it's all
sort of Kant
Canon but so it's not JJ Abrams AJ
Abrams involved but Alex Kurtzman is one
of these writers involved in and
showrunners and if you look at his
filmography it it's a lot of like
blockbuster type stuff that has not done
well critically it's done well
financially but not critically right so
so it's just super interesting like like
what's going on kind of behind the
scenes with with the writing and you can
you know because we know these are
fictional universes in the first place
so we're actually trying to appreciate
it on a meta level to you know read
between the lines and get get inside of
it
and
so yeah I don't know what else to say on
that point but it's very interesting
yeah no I mean I think that sci-fi and
fiction in general is how like we can
imagine a world if we can't imagine a
world we can't live into it for sure but
and I guess my point is they haven't
imagined right like they don't even know
what it looks like they they haven't
even imagined a resource-based economy
fully right like they haven't even
imagined what it actually means to not
have currency and yet they have right
like it's in between that it's kind of
like having how they enact the prime
directive and then for any plot point
they get rid of it it's like someone's
aren't actually sitting there being like
wait no that's not much like they have
gambling right and it's like they're
putting in actual chips that equal a
currency and you're like wait but
there's no currency so what are you
buying with that or what are you well
when they where the new is when they
play poker which is it which is a
recurrent theme on the next generation
it's actually just for fun they don't
you know there's no there's no stakes
but they act as if there's stakes so I
think that's that's kind of funny - um
but but this is this is the point again
like it's like for the most part the
next generation has kind of processed
that kind of scarcity mindset and and
built it into the world whereas in all
the others it's like there's some sort
of conflict based on something mmm and
and in the in the JJ Abrams versions
especially like the the reasons for the
conflict is a lot more kind of like
diluted and Oh oversimplified right like
oh this person's angry about something
and they wait you know they want to get
revenge on Starfleet and the truth is
like in a resource-based economy post
scarcity environment like history and
life would actually be relatively boring
in that sense like like there wouldn't
be conflict and that's kind of the point
is I can envision the conflict there
would be yeah and so we can't tell
stories about it because it's not
interesting to us yeah now when
everything is based on emotion and based
on scarcity when it's not based on like
these
tense emotions or someone gets super
jealous and kills someone and someone
you know like it's like you can't see
Who I am and I don't have power over you
and I'm like take that like it's it's we
can't even imagine so we think of it as
boring we're gonna come up with new
drama that you know what I mean is like
worthy of the human species when we get
there I mean going through the
interpersonal work now in the world
right like going through your own
going through your trauma and dealing
with your own emotions is its own source
of drama but like the more you get into
it it doesn't go away like it's not you
get less triggered by the things that
are on the outside world at the same
time it's just as it's more interesting
and it's like your own thing is sitting
with meditation and being with that and
discovering that but I don't know how do
we tell stories about that that are
interesting right that are exterior
stories when it's an internal challenge
and that will be for artists to do and
to imagine to that world because it is
one of the like proponents of why people
don't want to create game be you create
you know proto peon Society is that it
will be boring like please can even have
boring men if you think of it as boring
let's try boring let's try not having
war let's try not having you know like
massive poverty because there won't be
new things that are like we're always
gonna have romance and that - monogamy
right they're so intimate agha me in
that show I mean it's like even now 20
years later I'm like I see my friends
and people have all been past monogamy
into polyamory and it is an evolution
one I don't know if I can be part of
like it's like to have one partner is a
very different it's like a post-scarcity
romance right I'd like to be like oh I
don't own you and you can be with other
people we're gonna have to like deal
with the emotional that comes up
and talk and talk and like you can't
just be comfortable in this venomous
relationship and accept each other for
forever and like you're you're bound to
like never have sex with anyone else and
only me and I don't care if I grow or
don't grow we're tied together and
there's like I can see it evolving
already let alone 400
in the future RIT's like all the species
are monogamous all the species are
gendered and very feminine masculine I
don't know I think but I wouldn't have
been able to envision that world in the
90s even though it existed so like I
mean I even knew about war in people and
that they had multiple wives but that's
different that's a different energy
it's interesting how it's handled
because you know for the most part it
seems as though a lot of the crew is
just asexual like they don't have sex
lives they're just they've so fulfilled
from the work that they do and the
friendships that they have that's you
know they don't need to and Picard
especially Picard is like you know put
like the few times women you know come
on to him he pushes him away with a cool
with a couple exceptions right but it's
um no I think it's interesting how they
manage that because another show that I
love that avoided the kind of pressure
to to you know bring sex into it is the
x-files
you know such a such a long long running
show and they you know the writers
purposefully and strategically kept
Mulder and Scully apart like sexually
they kept them very close personally
like like partners but kept them apart
in terms of a relationship and it was
just you know it's so beautiful like it
speaks to a kind of integrity that we
don't really have or it's not that we
don't have it is we don't see it on TV
very often you know where where the
relationship is the relationship itself
without any sexual aspects the
relationship itself is is what is for
grounded and celebrated mm-hmm
yeah no I mean that is an important
point because it's both weirdly weirdly
sexual and yet not sexual like that like
Riker how he's like always like right
there
it's very and at the same time like him
and Diana have this like they're kind of
like but not owning it not actually
getting together again it's the first
season I don't know what happens later
and even for card and Wesley's mom have
like you know what I mean like they've
kind of paired off they have and yet at
the same time because it's not the same
Diana and and the captain's relationship
and you know neh mean like they haven't
kind of paired off into these groups and
yet not right they're not together or
they're not dating they're not they do
get together as well but it's a similar
kind of relationship like it's
professional first and and personal
first and then romantic
later you know and that's how I think
it's I think it's beautiful in the sense
that it speaks to the priorities of the
the the the crew and the group itself as
opposed to the priorities of individuals
mm-hmm like I would you riven by our
individual desires a lot and the whole
idea with with the next generation is
that they're elevated to a much higher
purpose and and they're freed from those
vices let's say and in my own life I
find I'm more freed from those vices
that I was 20 years ago it's yeah free
can be even have a relationship I had to
pick between the two I pick and be like
a bright radiance something bigger in
the world yeah nobody has to pick
between those right like I'm like
there's nothing this is more satisfying
finding a community creating something
together dealing with the interpersonal
work I mean I did an ayahuasca journey
almost two years ago and when I got out
of it was that my partnership is
community like it's a group it's not
individual and like oh like all the
thing all the work people do in a
relationship as like one-on-one is what
I do in group like I'm like oh okay
that's that seems right like there's
something there that I pick to be this
in this world in this way like yep that
makes that makes sense but there's also
a piece that some like because I'm not
because I'm not in a relationship I have
a certain amount of freedom to be myself
that I didn't feel when I was trying to
be in a relationship I didn't feel
because it was like I had to be
something to attract someone I had to be
something to be acceptable in him you
know in a work space and I'm still in
the like I haven't gotten past like I'm
like I choose me I choose me first and I
choose this mission that I'm here to do
but at the same time you can have both
right like you can get beyond your own
 and be like oh and I can find a
partner if that happens but I don't need
it like it's not a it doesn't complete
me I'm like I don't you're in my life as
long as you're in my life and we're
growing together and we're like offering
to each other we're not committing for
the rest of it all time because I can't
like that's not what if something
happens in 10 years knows knows what
happens I think this is why people like
Picard you know typically don't have
kids they don't want to have kids is
because they kind of see themselves as
just like a you know part of a broader
kind of human civilization movement and
that that has all the fulfillment you
could you could want and yet I have a
kid you know what I mean not the thing I
was willing to give up that was part of
my journey and part of something that I
absolutely needed I did it on my own but
it was like yes this is something that
needs to happen and she is if anything
my partnership the one that's like shows
me all my shadow and all my light and
like triggers me at all the right ways
and I couldn't love somebody more
completely and be triggered by them at
the same time or which is I think what
other people get out of relationships
and I can't because if you trigger me
we're done like I just can't get back to
that where she could trigger me all day
long and I'm never gonna give up an
ounce of love for her I don't know and
it's not like I don't know what that is
it's been there my whole life like my
sister and me have had this conflict for
a year and I'm like I don't know if I
can get back to loving you like I'm
getting there I can feel it but if it
takes a year with my sister I'm like
what's the chance of a relationship ever
working yeah like that's a long time so
like my nervous system that calms out
and not
react in that way and let's hope I never
get there with my child because that
would be even more devastating but
relationships are like that's where our
drama is gonna be that's gonna always be
yeah we're just going to play it out in
different ways than traditional monogamy
yeah and it's such an important lesson
of the show that even once we have
post-scarcity that you know certain
types of problems will still still play
out you know like yeah that's really the
lesson for right now is because we we
don't quite have post-scarcity right but
we have some types of scarcity and if
it's not equally distributed around the
world like the fact that you have you
know we can go to our taps and have
clean running water water means there's
no scarcity of that of that resource for
you but it is scarce for other people so
that changes all of your behavioral
dynamics and opportunities in it it's
like absolutely I mean with water in
general even when you look at it like
Vancouver doesn't we don't charge for
water it's part of our taxes but
Richmond charges for water and the
difference in even though it still is
plentiful right it falls from the sky
constantly all year round but it has to
be pumped to you and it has to be
cleaned and had there's a cost to it but
the actual cost being associated like
they don't know I don't know about if
they have water restrictions in the same
way we do during the droughts during the
summer because it's like well if you
paid for it you probably wouldn't be
watering your lawn especially if the
price is really high then in like
California where they're having like
massive droughts where their industry
you know it's it's we're getting to
scarcity on water and scarcity of clean
drinking water that you know it's a
isn't solid needed and isn't any at the
same time I don't experience that I
experience that with electricity I
experience that but not with water like
it's it's yeah a different mentality
when you have to pay for something
and when ants even if it's readily
available and when you don't have to pay
for it and yet that means I probably
waste more than I what if I paid for it
right like there's a real even though I
care deeply about the planet there's
still times where like my daughter wants
to play in water same with how she
crates art and it's the most uninvited
friendly it's like a lot of tape and
paper she could not reduce scrap paper
like brand-new piece of white paper cut
something on like boy but um I'll allow
it because it's her artist like I can't
really get her into the environmental
mode without demanding right and then
she's not gonna get there because he's
not gonna like I do I'm like well this
isn't the greatest for the earth and
that same with when she wants to play
water it's like let's not run the water
let's fill the sink up but at the same
time it's like yeah playing it it's hard
to kind of deal with scarcity with your
kid in the same way I will with adults
like maybe that's not the best way to
use our water anyway yeah and that that
at all continually comes up every time
every week when I put out the recycling
it's a lot of recycling I need to figure
out the entire supply chain I believe
you are too
and yeah I just I just want to see it
streamlined you know like yeah that's
weird and that's the nice thing about
like the idea of like a Enterprise kind
of ship is that it's all self-contained
you know and you don't have like
different sets of clothes and you know
it's like everything's kind of
structured like in a military way but
it's not military in any conventional
sense like like they have hierarchy
still but you
just not based on the principles of
militarism right it's based on like
really abstract ideals about peace and
diplomacy you know that method that
protocol having faith in that process
like that's what we have to aspire to
mm-hmm
I guess that was part of like the
hierarchy of it that like triggers being
I wanna see like when I look at in our
worlds people getting into medical
school and I went to school with a lot
of people who get into medical school
and once you're in medical school you're
basically pushed through like you're not
there unless you do something absolutely
horrific you're gonna get through you're
gonna be a doctor it depends on what
kind of doctor you're gonna be and at
the same time to get into Medical School
is such a rigorous process that only a
tiny fraction of people can do it and I
know that there are people who would
never get into medical school to make
much better doctors and many people who
get into medical school who make
horrible doctors and it's the same like
when you have a central body that
decides who's involved and who's not
involved I don't know what we would do
for medical because I don't want doctors
just deciding they're doctors either but
having a more equitable you know way to
get people through out of like here are
the skills you need maybe like the fact
that you need to be able to be a surgeon
when you're never gonna be a surgeon
right like autistic minds or maybe some
of the best doctors but the worst people
skills in that same in that same aspect
I'm saying like that uh yet that's who I
want to be my surgeon I'm pretty sure my
brain surgeon was autistic actually it
was very not a people person and seen it
now from this this side of life thank
God like he's but that's who I want like
as an autistic person I want my doctor
to be autistic I actually want you to
not have like oh that you don't have the
people skills and only what you know and
don't know and that's not a sane
autistic trait like I want that like
lack of arrogance and I think in the
Starfleet it's kind of a psyche there
could be people who are absolutely
brilliant and wouldn't be able to make
it in Starfleet like when Wesley goes
through it in the first season and they
only take one out of the four why why
are you taking one out of four instead
of like anyone who meets a certain you
don't I mean you need the physical
traits or you need you know there's
these five qualities and you know it's
so funny that you're talking about this
specific
because for whatever reason on Saturday
I decided to watch police academy cuz
it's it's on Netflix and actually I
didn't remember how good it was I
thought it was just like a ridiculous
spoof what which it kind of is but but
it also is like pretty well written and
pretty well shot like it's got pretty
interesting block like shots and
blocking and that and the humor is like
ridiculously like really funny and not
just like slapstick like there is some
slapstick but then there's like some
setups that are just ridiculous so
ridiculous um so but the premise of that
of that movie is that the the mayor of
whatever town decides to open up the
police academy for everybody so nobody's
turned away anyone can come and then the
whole premise is that all these rejects
come like different people with
different shortcomings and and you know
weaknesses and and you know because they
have inner strength they overcome those
things right they they you know in the
climax of the film they all kind of
succeed in whatever they're coming
overcoming their problem was and this is
really beautiful in that sense like it's
a message of including everybody in the
police academy and I'm challenging the
authority uh and all that kind of stuff
no I think those are important like game
be things like you need to like I said I
don't want anyone to be a doctor and you
know at the same time I don't want the
medical school and decide who becomes a
doctor like there's an in-between that
where like maybe anyone could go to
medical school and at the end you have
your test right like which in a
post-scarcity world could happen do you
want to go and have that information in
your head then go and take it as opposed
to you know needing this rigorous
because there's a lot of energy and and
resources that goes into making a doctor
and you only want the people who are
gonna stay you know stay with it I mean
I want a very individualistic world
where like I get to decide what I learn
and I get to decide what resources I
need and without scarcity I can have
access to those resources but there are
trade-offs
a bit like we need to figure and figure
out like I don't think anyone needs to
be a police officer we can figure out a
world without police officers but their
role right we need peacekeepers we need
people to like there are certain things
we we can think differently on and
create great forces like the fact that
police are called on every crime and
they have to deal with any mental health
and addiction and they're bad at all of
that and there's very few they're good
at it and they're not put out in that
way right they're not like well here's
the mental mental health force here is
no like family dynamics force it's like
it's just you broke the law and let's
deal with it and some of them are better
than others are dealing with those
things but that's not what they're
called on right it's like who's the
closest officer not hey who has the
people skills who has who's been shown
they have less bias towards you know
people and creating a world where like
it's both it's like you can figure out
where you want to go and go for it you
can figure out how to increase your
people skills but you also don't have to
like it's not and that's where this idea
of like leadership which Picard is very
like masculine you know and yet still
loses his all the time and it's
like really I feel like how do you get
to be the captain of a starship if you
like don't have your name doesn't always
have my emotions under control you're so
hard on them you know 27 years ago I'm
like no I wouldn't like 300 years right
I had 300 years I kind of I kind of see
it differently though that like when
when things get heated on the ship like
Picard is the one that's like tries to
avoid avoid disaster at all costs he
brings everybody you know back down to
earth like he like he does you know get
I have to get authoritative and and uh
you know angry sometimes but mmm he
almost never loses his cool I think any
you know always tries to like resolve
resolve the tension of the show that's
that's built up by circumstances and
other characters I mean he does a really
good job in some episodes and a really
bad job enough there is much like a
prime directive it's for plot point it's
like well we need someone maybe react
lead to this and for some reason you're
in that position so let's have you react
less like there's people I know now who
would be much better leaders in that in
that regard people who do have the
interpersonal skills to like bring out
people's net you know like there's a
leadership style that's hierarchical and
as a leadership style that like gets
people to work together and finds your
key strengths and he's almost there
he's like the 90s version of that but
he's not there right like it's the same
as the rest it's like 30 years ago and
300 years in the future at the same time
and it's not that combination of like I
don't know why it's bringing to mind but
there was an article when when Bernie
and Hillary were running together that
said it was something along the lines of
like you know talking about Hillary as a
woman in her happy to go through
politics as a woman and get media to be
very masculine and it was like by the
time the world was ready for like a
female president we also were like way
past Hillary like it's like we need
Bernie and yet Bernie can only be Bernie
because he's white and male and he was
able to follow through on that through
me he wouldn't be able to be a black
woman and having had his history yes
he's been I mean like help an allied to
like people in color and women and you
know like gay the whole time and that's
great and Hillary has if not and it's
like but at the same time she couldn't
be and it was like that the same thing
interplays like you can't like we've
evolved to the point where we can handle
diversity but we also you need to be a
certain age right to run for president
and then you would have had to like go
through that history and I feel like
it's something like that here it's like
okay thirty years in the past and 300
years in the future
yeah it's very true and it's like your
your point about tokenism earlier we
don't just want a female president for
the sake of it it has to be eat the
right person yeah and it has to like but
they will have had like they what's 40s
maybe the youngest we can have be a
president and you know I just turned 40
I'm like I don't know if I want to throw
your own president but I also honestly
don't want the 7 year olds like I'm like
no you have no I don't mean Bernie I
mean like the 70 mentality right that
like 70 years ago is where you were
brought up and it's like that very focus
it's like we need someone who
think new and has been through some
host things don't necessarily coincide
in one individual all right you've
bounced then take and real your whole
life but if you've if that cost you
being in a position of authority and
that's like where I do see us as a
species evolving where we do have more
capacity for diversity where we don't
need someone to be an archetype to be a
leader where we can see okay well even
if you're not like leadership happens in
every different personality type and
what does that look like right without
it being an archetype and then eating
someone to look like that archetype or
all they're gonna do is be playing a
role instead of being actually who they
are and it happens all the time in
politics right you they can't be honest
and if they are then they're there
compared to people who aren't being
honest so it's like well the person who
can lie the best then all the lies come
out and it's like you're all cheating on
your wives and you're all gay and you're
all like what the like what is this
and yet you could never be a republic
enemy out and you know I mean like hey
actually me my life have an open
marriage
and yeah I totally see men on the side
like that's never gonna fly and at the
same time that would actually be more
authentic right actually we're together
just so that we look like we're a
heterosexual couple and can portray that
to you guys because that's what you
really need mm-hmm what you really need
for someone to be in charge it's like
actually behind the scenes it doesn't
look anything like this whereas like I'm
ready for a it doesn't look anything
like this I want authenticity I want the
leg in fact if you're in like a normal
like that's your life I'm like what what
if what see what have you actually been
through what have you actually
questioned and chosen something off of
the beaten path but if you choose off
the beaten path you don't get the
political career mm-hmm yeah hopefully
that whole zeitgeist is changing so you
know we can just are having more
authentic political leadership like like
going back to the new Picard series and
how it's a reaction to Trump ISM and
brexit like there's so much going on all
over the world like I was just reading
about bolson ro yesterday who's the
president
Brazil and like he's instant he said
some really just disgusting homophobic
homophobic things but he's actually like
hmm like like these are like you know
those those progressive steps forward
you know like we're supposed to be part
of kind of you know a universal trend
you know so you can't rollback stuff
like that like it's but it's 2020 and
there's like world leaders that are
homophobic like it's it's um yeah and
racist and yes I mean package it's just
so backwards you know in in this context
and we're talking about about values
that we ostensibly already have and
we're talking about the future and how
we get there and how we have peace and
then you have like world leaders like
just embracing this whole package of
regressive reactionary ideas and
policies that like really hurt people
mm-hmm
yeah and I it is it's like both of them
like there's a reason Trump and Brooks
in all of these things are happening and
it's it's reactionary and yet not
reactionary it's very logical it's like
people are hurting and people are
disconnected and addicted and all of
these things at once and it's like
yelling is spreading their anger onto
whoever they can right instead of taking
any ownership or leaving it up to people
who actually have power and could
actually do something about it and all
that at the same time it's like yelling
at people to not be disenfranchised
right no matter if you're like a white
heterosexual able-bodied male you can
still be disenfranchised you still feel
like you are and then people are like
yelling at you that you're not and at
the same time you know you are you're
disconnected your poor your you name and
you're like sick you're whatever that oh
maybe not sick you put like those same
you're still feeling it all right you
still have that like anxiety and tension
and like you're not allowed to express
your emotion and like it's so then you
vote in Trump then you you blame it on
the people who don't look like you and
you it's like making them wrong for that
we're not
their logical progression isn't solving
the problem it's like you have to look
at the root cause and like solve which
is the post-scarcity world yeah that we
can't get there with people in this
mentality who are like no we need to do
is take it back from them or like give
me back the power that I had four years
ago yeah would have done yeah the thing
that I find shocking is not that people
vote for Trump or for brexit like like
you're saying like I get it there's all
sorts of practical reasons but the thing
that's so shocking is that like leaders
or intellectuals who you'd think would
know better really also buy into the
kind of xenophobic narratives and and
help along that right-wing movement you
know it's like there's no I know there's
no excuse for that like it well if
there's enough people in the right wing
they're gonna vote in people who are
saying the things they wish they can be
saying and I think a big part of it is
the shadow side it's like well if you're
not allowed to say these things in
public then both the leaders in who can
say these things in public yeah if
people have more freedom to actually
express their their displeasure in every
aspect of life and it wasn't broadcast
right it doesn't need to be one person
saying that you're on a soapbox and then
everyone freaks out because you were
racist and homophobic but like you can't
dictate that people don't have racist
and homophobic thoughts and words
because they do and so if we want them
to get anywhere it they have to be
allowed to express that without the
soapbox and unfortunately live in a very
soapbox world or that's the only way to
express anything right around the dinner
table with your family or on the
Internet and it's like there's a space
between those two of like okay there's
there needs to be a freedom to be able
to say hey here's where I am I don't
it's true or not true it doesn't really
matter it's like where I am yelling at
me to be somewhere different isn't gonna
get me there and and creating the spaces
to make that doable without running for
office honey like without like it played
out in our political sphere where it's
the only place for it to play out if
we're not playing it out personally
happy nose
spaces for the last three minutes of our
yeah we we made it to an hour with just
the two of us which it which is a little
more challenging yeah it's a different
it's a different dynamic which is two
people or sure but I don't think I've
been in a game B conversation that has
gone in less than an hour there's no
natural and this is over it's like an
Aston on the tide of it that's not sure
the natural is two and a half to three
hours but it's generally let's talk
later
I'm tired we have to go kind of done
more so that it's coming to a natural
conclusion yeah we don't we don't solve
anything we just resolve it yeah
any closing thoughts Brent um I think we
should keep an open open mind about
Picard himself but be skeptical about
the new show to and what's going on
there like like I watched I read I read
some really good critical articles and I
watched a really good funny critical
review on YouTube and I just I love that
stuff I love the kind of meta frame of
another thing so you can you can
appreciate it on different levels but to
bring it back to the next generation
like to the to the to the calming
soothing atmosphere of that ship I think
it's mmm you know it's like it's safe
like a womb and it's like this vid
the whole landscape of science fiction
it's a very rare kind of product in that
it mm-hmm
you know it really tries to invest in
and create this world where people are
enabled to behave differently like
really self actualized humans you know
not restricted in any way and they're
very educated and compassionate and part
2 for Star Trek maybe when Eric can join
us and yeah once I finished the series
because it is just the beginning part as
well and I will keep an open mind is
there
I can for sci-fi that like triggers me
and the like stop breeding this doesn't
make sense but that is suspension of
disbelief
take a step back yeah we should cut it
there I'll add one thing after all right
bye YouTube join us for part two another
week the girl would next week s