it's one of his name's hello welcome to
Tech with purpose goal setting we need a
better name but that tech with purpose
goal study and it works it explains it
Adriel who has who will introduce
himself and Bentley we're working
together on the idea cafe the first
project for together tech and you also
can introduce yourself if you would like
to do a better job but not Adriel do you
want to explain who you are what you're
here for sure so my name is Adriel I'm
starting wiki election which is a tool
to fight misinformation initially it's
focusing on politics and science but
will expand from there
awesome and I can take over from there
so I'm Bentley Davis like Jubilee said
I'm working on the idea Cafe the tech
cooperative and then my kind of side
passion project that are why I talked
about more here is well actually I don't
know which name to go by so it's reason
score which is a way for it's a tool for
mass agreement it's kind of what I'm
saying so helps people kind of dig down
into the facts and come to an agreed
shared interpretation of reality but one
of the other uses of it is going to be a
goalie bot which is a automated robot
that helps people explore their
differences and or their disagreements
so that's the project and I'm jublee I
am creating together Tech and the idea
cafe and exploring all the ways that we
can use cooperative technology to create
a better world for us as individuals and
groups efficiently run the things we
need to run on a global scale with as
much personal autonomy and trying to
explain the big vision I'm being me and
working through the steps to create it
so that was a great elevator pitch good
thing there's watching all right um I
did write down here what we took on for
last week
and I I had said that I would pick a
time for the idea cafe game be ongoing
time and Bentley had sent out the doodle
poll and I sent that out and picked the
time for Tuesday at 11:30 a.m. my time
which is Pacific PDT fine you know what
that stands for I'm always like Pacific
Pacific I'm like there's PST and the PDT
and they're different because it's yeah
these for daylight saving s is for
standard yeah thank you thank you I
think when you're talking about without
the the daylight's issue I think is just
Pacific time I never really understood
that that's how I'm always said it just
like you know what time zone you're in
this eastern time you figure out your
savings yeah yeah I'm like is anyone
gonna show up an hour later because I
said PST is that a PDT I don't think
maybe one just ignores that middle
letter yes which is what I assume and
and then right you know the scheduler
which is definitely done because we
discussed it yesterday for for the idea
cafe during the board meeting that was
live on this channel that was what I was
taking on as well as my personal stuff
that I'm doing from now until the end of
the year which is not smoking pot doing
daily yoga and daily meditation which
I'm doing very well at except when I
haven't done meditation and that has
been it has reinforced in me how
important meditation is so it's it's
kind of good to miss that I kind of
napped one day instead of meditating
them like I'll count that no does not
work to like help my nervous system calm
down and remind it that it's not under
constant constant threat so yeah that is
what I took on and I did those things
and Adriel I don't know if you remember
but I just rewatched the end of it was
the three updates for the Democratic
leaders and as well as we this wasn't
really a goal but you were supposed to
send me your contact information so
people could get a hold of you for
elections and so I only just reminded
myself to so we'll do that today and
then you can I can update the videos if
anyone wants to get in contact with you
and Bentley you weren't here so you
didn't have anything that you had
committed to
he goes to show up to this one yeah so
my goals I didn't get as far as I want
but I was also already farther than I
thought I was I wanted to go check the
prototype and that there wasn't much
showing some like okay there's still
work to do and then I went into the back
end and I forgot that the prototype has
paging so there was multiple pages of
people's stances on things I may
actually need to clean it up because
there was a bunch of other you know I
was trying to focus on the three but I
had you know the 27 there and stances
mix it across them so I need to update
some of them because this was prior to
II Elizabeth Warren so I've got a plan
for that thing so she actually has a lot
of stances that she didn't when I first
filled this out but it's further along
than I thought it was and I did I did do
some injury and some updating it's not
like that so all right cool all right I
mean I don't really I think I have been
concentrating on the idea cafe YouTube
channel for this and now that I have the
time picked for idea cafe I feel pretty
good just seeing what that's like for
the week and I want to concentrate on
this thing which is making the videos
making this channel that we're on not be
quite as chaotic as it is making it more
I can remember they're called but like
tagging the things and putting them
under under organizing it I'm gonna
organize this channel as well as
creating like the ten videos of
explaining like the power of tech and
why we need a cooperative technology
that we can work with so that I can like
and then creating I probably won't do
this all this week but creating the
document that links to all of those
right even if you're not on the channel
so that I can see if we can put it on
the website and do and do that piece of
it so I'm just sitting with that I don't
even know what I'm taking on yet but by
the end of this I will I will have some
concrete goals that I am working for
this this week including five
conversations that I have set up for
that are ongoing weekly conversations
the one with Bentley on Fridays this one
on Saturdays and then three more
are either personal or about creating a
better world for people so we also
talking about what is this.what making
our commitments for next week if not
necessarily we kind of need that closer
to the end but right it was filling
silence I don't I mean yeah I can go
ahead and say some things that I was
supposed to do I actually ended up doing
it I have someone who wants to use
recent score for an internal business
discussion so to get that working I had
to make it say actually save the data it
was just a prototype it didn't do
anything so that's working and you can
put in hyperlinks and you can delete
claims that you made so those all I got
done this morning when I couldn't sleep
so I'm actually kind of ahead of things
and then for next might be a little
early but I was just thinking for next
time
I'd talked in in our idea cafe meeting
on Friday that I was gonna look for
technology to use for the scheduling
tool see if there's pre-existing stuff
so I have that on my plate I'm also
trying to do meditation and I've got
exercises for my elbow but I don't know
if I'd make any promises for that but
I'm trying to add and yeah so exercising
a meditation or on my list daily list as
well all right perfect and then we can
also talk about like generally it's
supposed to be like we say what we
didn't do or say with what we took on
last week whether we did or not if we
did yeah if we didn't why we didn't I
guess and and then crowd source or peer
source a problem we're having right so
if we want some feedback on like this is
what I'm dealing with
then that is what we are here to do and
clearly my brain it's working really
great sorting this by for 11:00 a.m.
when I meditate for an hour before had
this
when there isn't time to meditate maybe
I will take that on next week get up
earlier and meditates my brains more
focused and yeah and then we just
discussed we discussed technology and
saving the world and that's for for the
remainder we usually I was keeping it to
half an hour last week I don't know why
there was no rhyme or reason to keeping
it to half an hour it was just just for
the first one because it was the first
one we didn't have everything and out so
if we go longer than that is it's fine
if someone needs to jump off we can
always get their goals and then you know
let them go and continue on or we can
try to keep it to half an hour but I
like the discussion period the point of
what my brain likes to do it just
discussed how technology can write a
humanity saving endeavor and I think
both of you are in that realm as well so
yep and you guys are very similar
projects as well and I know yesterday
you had talked about someone in the UK
who is doing something with politics and
as well as just like how how we create
sense making tools that like we can all
trust and use whether they're
individually owned or collectively owned
it's about giving access to humanity for
humans to have access to those things
yeah so for example I know a founder of
its political in the UK and he has
similar goals I'm not sure if the
approaches are similar or different but
I know him so you know if it's something
you'd like I could do an introduction a
drill and you know it might be you might
find it interesting to also bounce ideas
off of him yeah I mean if we're you know
if we're even in the same ballpark then
we'll probably have done some of the
same research and have some of the same
general
concerns and challenges and that kind of
thing yeah and if he find it valuable
the the reason score tool that I'm
making is kind of a way of digging into
the truth with fact-based things which
is actually some of the wording on wiki
election so it might be interesting at
some time for for me to kind of show it
to you and get you drunk and see whether
it be one of the many tools that if you
find a valuable ya know that when you
were explaining items like this sounds a
lot like yeah the sort of content review
and topic summary part of with you guys
yeah I'm not sure if we want to do a bit
deeper into that in this caller if
there's something else that Julie thinks
that you know I'm coming so I I guess I
can give a bit deeper explanation of
sort of both sides of kwikki election
one of the things I've been struggling
with the last while is just trying to
come up with content to explain it to
people
I had a Kickstarter earlier this year
and it didn't do well it all partially
because people like it wasn't very well
explained it's still kind of mmm
nebulous so I'm taking the time since
then both sort of change how I think of
it and then actually to come up with
some content to it explained the
different parts of it now I've got it
sort of split into four areas on the
politics side there's two there's the
individual person or so what I've been
calling IMDB for for politics or the
idea is it's sort of a 4:53 of what each
person has done how they voted where
they got their money from all that kind
of thing and then there's the the
election tool we're just meant to sort
of take that information for each of the
people running and then also allow the
people to crowdsource things like okay
if there's an important election issue
like let's say you know climate change
or taxes they can go and collect all the
proof on sort of what the person has
said about did
topic in the election and then try to
sort of summarize that as like okay they
think this or oh they've got two
different stanzas depending on who
they're talking to
that's the the politic side then on the
science side and these two will end up
merging that there's a reason why
they're part of the same project but on
the science side there's a Content
review where the idea is that people go
through and they review individual
scientific articles like they highlight
different sections based on what is
needed so if you know where's the
hypothesis where the findings what part
describes how the experiment was
designed that that kind of thing then
the community goes through and sort of
reviews how well that experiment was
designed how well it was run and then in
the end they start to sort of group
those up based on on topics so if
there's you know ten studies that are
talking about a certain ingredient in
that scenes and you are trying to make a
argument for against it being safe you
would then be able to sort of reference
the findings from those articles to
start making your larger point and then
the topic summary is sort of the end
result of the of that it's where you can
start to actually compare the different
sides start to say okay there is no sort
of pro or anti vex campus just we're
talking about the ingredients in
vaccines
what what what lessons have we learned
from these scientific studies and then
that will end up sort of coming out and
to your pro at the very end to sort of
prove what are the the other's point
does that mean fed yeah yeah yeah it
sounds good
yeah
so yeah that's interesting it is quite a
bit of a it's a lot of features I think
did you say like last time that you even
kind of like a parrot it down and
narrowed it down to those kind of three
different sections well so what I'm
trying to build towards is sort of an
over
framework for evidence-based discussion
in politics and economics in legislation
and then taking the results of those and
saying hey you know in this politician
speeches he's saying these stats here's
where these stats come from are they
being used honestly are they correct at
all that that that kind of thing and
then also as you go through like the
person's voting history it allows things
to sort of reference each other so if
they're referencing what a certain piece
of legislation means the the audience
can decide like is that truthful or not
or are they trying to bend the truth in
their direction but to start with yeah
it wouldn't do all of these things and
that's a part of the challenge is to
describe it enough to make it
interesting because the first version is
very simple it's just the the individual
politician history and then completely
separate the review of individual pieces
of content I'll be summarizing and
linking and stuff happens in sort of
litter on down the road man well I hope
that answered your question
yeah so your next step is to get yeah
you were gonna do top two top three
Democrat in the u.s. selection yeah so
I've got some prototypes online the tool
that I'm using for it because I'm not a
coder it's fairly limited and now that
I've gone through and see like and I saw
how the content looks in the prototype
it's not really showing what I want it
to so I'm not sure if I just need to
mock those up and sort of use that as a
fallback like here's a live prototype
but it's not displaying it very well so
here's like just pick the top five
issues for the defeat up through three
candidates I just mark it up it's kind
of what I'm thinking because it's not
yeah what Latorre using for the man okay
and a secure in a secure KN azj I
haven't seen that one yet
interesting yeah it's just it's a fairly
simple like you know you you build
objects and fields and you can build
like a self-service side and so it's
kind of like just a a really simple
objects database with a member for like
front-end if you want it then you can do
a fair I'm at with it but the
visualization options are very limited
and the end goal is a kind of want am I
guess a matrix shook showing like here's
all the people on one axis here's all
the issues on the other axis and then
being able to sort of have a quick
summary shown and then you can drill
into a specific thing to see like okay
did they actually say that and you can
see the evidence behind why we're
allowing you know this summary of it
Elizabeth Warren stance on Medicare for
all mmhmm yeah I think it's important to
get the to where people can understand
and unfortunately yeah you know that how
the information is displayed these days
is it really kind of biases people one
way or the other when they see it
unfortunately it'd be nice if people
could see the the promise and something
right but they don't really so yeah I
mean I would I would think doing it you
know with it with a tool that's more
visual and you can kind of just position
the things even though it's not hooked
up to a back end might get the the
concept across right and you're hoping
the future is that this that this would
be all crowd-sourced ad you wouldn't
have to do everything right yeah so I I
agree with that with that concept that
you might want to just kind of prototype
and other tools that they're more kind
of visual more static tools like I've
got a subscription to I want to say
balsamic oh yeah I know like the
wireframing prototyping but like you
know static image prototyping tools yeah
even Islamic I don't haven't looked at
him recently they they were still kind
of keeping things looking wireframe II
but they may have changed that to where
it looks completely live now
but I mean even like you know using well
I guess it'd be tricky to do it in like
a Google Doc with images and stuff I've
I for not the prototype yes for some
prototypes but mostly for like big
conceptual stuff I've been using google
draw yeah where you know it's really not
pretty at all but like you can have
shapes and you can get the general idea
but and I think kind of to your point
you'll lose some people if even if you
have a prototype but it's ugly they just
I can't get past the fact that it looks
ugly and they'll move on
so I'm starting with ugly prototypes and
then hopefully I'll expand either learn
how to make them look nice myself or get
somebody involved who's capable of
making them look a bit more presentable
yeah I guess even with the right tools
that will be challenging to get them
really looking professional without some
graphic yeah experience I was just
looking at Masonic I think they do keep
them looking like wireframes it might
not be I know but alec is one of the
ones that used in the past I haven't
used the tool that I've been paying for
for a while but I think I've had it
wasn't especially nice but I believe it
did have some non wireframe but again it
did it doesn't look super great you're
just looking for a graphic that looks
like what the functionality will look
like right um
Dennis can do it for you if you give him
the look of a hand-drawn or a Google Doc
he's unit killed he's he did my logo for
idea cafe and Dennis is our stepdad more
than he I would say give him one thing
at a time I'm still waiting for the
banner form idea cafe I have to kind of
remind him yeah but he's he'll do it
within a couple days and it's interested
to see how he handles this because it
sounds like for you it's more like
banners and logo isn't like but this is
like kind of part graphical but it's
also sort of part like there's you know
big chunks of text
throughout a lot of them because it's
trying to explain things and it's
showing sort of here's a mock-up here's
a wall of text split out into you know
nine or twelve different sections but
yeah and I had the beginnings of the
idea for together tech and one of them
was like the Facebook for neighborhoods
and I remember what the one was like the
zoomin and zoom-out history one and he
did a mock-up for me for each of them
like I was like here's what it looks
like and it little differently really
good using like Google Maps and zoom in
and zoom oh no functionality of course
because that wasn't the point the point
was to have a like presentation to show
what I was okay good thanks that's
yeah I could always forget that he's a
rather static so yeah so you're saying
that they don't have they don't have a
weight or you could take the data and
put it in that even just a grid a table
where it's um but it's so no it's a
pivot table basically exactly right now
the only feature they have or just like
your you know your basic tables with
rows and then you can group Oh lost him
throws in I was gonna remove and put
back on right when I went to remove any
other your back that's my version have
turned it on turn it back off turn it
off turn it back on have you tried
dropping them out and putting them back
on the screen see you yeah your back or
are you can you hear us
hello yeah nearest okay yep yeah yeah
alright all technology yeah where's it
cut out you really good question comes
broken with more about you cutting out
than me remembering we're right we're
talking about sort of how it can cuz
your life stuff and instead of it been
like a pivot or a matrix it's it just
rows where it's the individual rows and
then the grouping is also doing with
just a skinny row in between the rows so
it's a group a couple records and then
as a small bar saying you know Group B
and then
some records yeah it's mark soft access
for the web which is something I wanted
to build but someone beat me to it and
it's if it's about ten records before it
has to go to the next page which largely
defeats the purpose but you know it can
show like there's some form of a live
prototype it's just not altogether nice
and so I think a combination of showing
that there's a live prototype that just
doesn't look that nice and that there is
no points out said frozen - it's gonna
come out right away
this used to be okay on alright yeah I
thought I did have did enough audio come
through - yeah I think so yeah so yeah
yeah so I agreed to try and do a static
mock-up it'd be good with the little you
know if you're already gathering the
live data for this election cycle it
would be good to use that but like you
said the top three is an example I think
would be right have you also a troll
because you're doing this in part I
don't know if you still want to that so
we can go to UBC and we can talk to two
political science or which I don't know
any of those but I don't even know where
that room is unlike where the building
is on campus but we can find that out
and then go and talk to people I like in
real life we'll see if it's something
they want to they want to go and then of
course the other part of UBC which is
sort of almost more important to do in
person is the science part yes I have
more of an understanding of the
political science part than the science
part yeah you know it's also the more
people you can get that are involved
that are helping you do the crowd
sourcing right like the American
election is in let is in a year right so
to be able to get something up in
in six months so that it's usable is a
big deal and I think that even at UBC
with Canadian people hope that they see
the importance of that on our planet and
the more that that's like it's
mid-november they're going to be an
finally even mm-hmm yep
yeah exactly to be able to explain
exactly not so in the intro if you
already kind of looked to see what's out
there that's similar to your project and
kinda yeah Aaron contrasts them yeah I
did a bunch of research it initially and
then when I did my Kickstarter I got a
lot of like how is this different from X
and what I found is a look like there's
a lot of good information out there but
a lot of it seems to be made by and for
data heads people who are comfortable
you know just a wall of data and and
digging deep and seeing what's out there
and the goal looks at how that as like
it's available it's maybe made a bit
easier to look at and a bit easier to
understand where you are and what you're
looking at but the big thing is that
it's summarized in a way that the
average person can go in there and
understand these summaries and sort of
say like okay here's what the data is
showing and then they can drill in where
needed to sort of prove the point like
if it's something that they say oh that
seems wrong they can drill in as far as
they want down to the individual like
news or you know news articles or
scientific studies and see oh that's why
it's that's why people are agreeing on
this certain thing and again making it
the usability is the key difference
between this and a lot of the other
tools out there for it plus it branches
out into other areas like they don't
tend to offer a lot of the proof if they
do is like on another website stored
somewhere else you know here's the three
sources go read through 400 pages yeah I
understand all these sources behind this
article which no one has even if you do
it doesn't matter it doesn't quite
matter cuz nobody else has you you go
spend a couple hours so that only you
understand that thing now yeah and
you're dealing with all the people who
are like Trump doesn't lie true he lied
doesn't we can't keep up with all the
live but like having a non-partisan way
where it's first is that it's like truth
versus yeah I'm sure a great example
because one of my complaints about how
did they meet angles that is that when
there's something important I think it
gets lost in like the they never stop
talking about him they talk you know
about like some silly dress his wife
wore four four four four days like
nitpicking so for somebody who's
pro-trump
it's pretty easy for them to get the
picture of the media is very antitrump
well these certain channels are so to be
able to say like okay here are the
things that are you know pro-trump that
might be true here are the things that
antitrump it might be true and why
things boiled out that way yeah yeah
showing that it's non partisan and if
he's showing it in the data that comes
out yeah it's great to have the tools
that give us the new cycle in
information that we can digest so we can
stop paying attention to the news and
actually work on what matters like I'm
my whole Twitter feed is just full of
like pro-trump anti-trump not really
from Angie Trump Angie Tron but I'm like
the government isn't gonna solve the
 we're just so focused on the leg
first that is going on about like who's
wearing the dress and then real things
get lost in that even political ones get
lost in that in the fray that having
that in a way that is understandable to
most people so that you can just almost
ignore it let them do what they're doing
empower the people who want to change
politics to effectively change politics
and get on with creating the science and
the creativity and the technology and
everything that's actually gonna help
improve our our planet and our lives so
be done that I can check that off we've
we've solved both itself while we're
talking yes exactly
someone create the AI that does that we
come up with ideas we discuss it by the
time we're done
just made yeah that'd be great there's a
project I mean that's not the idea Cafe
but the idea like anyone could have a
conversation and somehow we filtered out
how like it's not gonna make itself by
the end of an hour but yeah filtering
out what the important features are like
what we're doing that the two of us but
having it be hundreds of people saying
the features then the top ones are taken
out so that you were like yep these are
the ones we want to vote on these the
ones ever talked about by every room
these ones that are really important and
then having people who actually know how
to actually make it up right like the
people who know how to do the graphics
doing the graphic that makes it look
good the people who know how to do the
functionality making the prototype and
then people being like oh yes that's
what I want right like even contests if
like three different prototypes and
mock-ups and like oh that's the one I
would use maybe people would use and
that part is super important when you're
trying to make things more
understandable and you're trying to take
a complex topic and sort of summarize it
in a way that makes sense yeah you'll
have to have kind of a contest where
it's saying hey here's you know like
somebody stance on on something there's
you know ten videos there's twenty
op-eds there's all this stuff how do you
summarize that into a point you have you
know five or ten people submit their
ideas and then you have to sort of build
through some voting and improvements and
but when you end up with a crowdsource
piece of information that individuals
wrote and then the group sort of agreed
on and possibly make tweaks to yeah and
having it be made better instead of
everyone making a mock-up doing all of
that putting all that time and money and
effort in and then it turns out people
don't want it or it's just like that
little tweak that would have made a
difference having it done in a way where
you know you're getting maybe not the
best out of it but you're getting an 80%
of the best out of the contest and
honestly even if it gets you to just
like most like the mostly best graphics
and the mostly best functionality and
the mostly best it means that you have
some and you're open to improving it
because it's portal source yeah I think
to your point you don't want to get
bogged down with trying to make it
perfect like that's why I've actually
released some of my really not very
pretty graphics
you know bad is better than nothing as
long as it still was still correct and
still you know towards the point some
people still interacted it with it that
was that that was yeah and part of it
was kind of hoping that somebody was
gonna be like hey did
ugly I just made a better version for
you I made it pretty people would be
like I like the idea but you obviously
the graphic will help yes it is better
than nothing I think we have our new
slogan for one of the projects that is
better than nothing and start with bad
and improve yeah yes functionality and
the tools to put something out there and
have it actually that it goes to
hundreds or thousands of people who know
right they're the people who are like
listen I'm interested in politics and
I'm a graphic artist and they get it in
there like is this a project you'd want
to work on yes or no right and you get
even if there's one person who wants to
work on it that's amazing and that's
more like creating the tools to make
life function isn't about dealing with
all necessarily all of the interpersonal
stuff like how do we read how do we redo
it entire economic systems that people
were willing to work for free give them
the tool to allow them to work for free
and they'll put in an hour here and an
hour there if you want them to do 40
hours probably not but write a graphic
design that takes them an hour and it's
for purpose instead of for profit
there's enough human Drive there to tap
into oh I mean there isn't you pay them
like okay no one is interested now I
know it like there's a dozen different
things I needed done for this project
and I have to pay for three of them
that's much better than paying for
dozens of them yeah yeah honestly
purports up for some of this I've tried
to pay people I've used up working stuff
like that and a part of it is sorry that
just did what was I just saying I don't
know yeah I don't think your far enough
into the thought first
said I agree governments is not gonna
solve this it's like yeah I wanted to
pop up on the screen because anytime
anyone agrees with me I'm like yes what
a great point it agrees with me
so do y'all want to go over commitments
before the next meeting and stuff yeah
who wants to start I can start it yes so
I'm quite busy this upcoming way because
I'm going to a conference so I think my
next step is probably just to like pick
one thing and send it to Dennis and give
him the week to see if he can make a
look nicer I might sort of not sure if I
want to send him three and to ask him to
pick one or if I just pick one like to
survive they're depicted just take one
yeah yeah also send me your contact
information so people can get a hold of
you all right are you gonna join us next
week Bentley are you gonna make this an
ongoing goals for yeah let's plan on
next week okay yeah okay you don't want
to commit for the rest of your life a
little bit of time like if you're coming
next weekend even if people pop in and
pop out like let's say you don't come in
three weeks
it's did you get the thing done within
that three weeks right so all right it's
more more open because they'll be like
but yeah I don't know if I'm gonna be
spending much more time on you know I'll
be working on on da cafe a little bit
and stuff like that but I may not be
making any progress on raising score for
a while just because of other life today
things that are happening so if I don't
have much to like share or to promise I
I may skip out but this coming week I'm
gonna for like idea cafe I'm gonna look
up technology and then I'm just for a
reason score I'm going to get the now
working prototype out to the guy who
wants to use it and gather his feedback
so I actually completed most of what I
was
don't get what I was gonna list I did it
on this morning so I think that's just
it for this week which you can totally
say no to what exactly what I told a
drill
send me your contact information so
people can get ahold of you for reasons
scores specifically I know it's been
late Davis calm or something is your
website but just send it to me and then
I'll put it in the this part that's the
doodly-doo yeah I'm doing what I said
personally which is the yoga meditation
not smoking pod going on periscope daily
for 30 minutes and as well as I'm doing
those five conversations this will be my
first week so I'm not going to take on
too much more than that but putting in
your guyses can't like our contact
information and sitting with organizing
crowd democracy's YouTube channel making
the little little checkmark tabs to put
things into and possibly if I feel
what's the word incentive the drive to
do one of the videos picking one of the
videos from the list to explain the
technology and how its powerfully helps
us create a new economic system that
changes the world naturally and
efficiently and basically just AI does
it for us we all sleep Oh quite but yeah
so yes that is what I am taking on
joining five conversations doing my
personal work and so not much at all
basic no no but the one thing it's like
a constant now like I'm like it's been
three weeks of not smoking pot and doing
meditation and yoga so it becomes more
effortless and then I feel like I can
kind of add more things like attending
five conversations is doable that's what
I've been saying for a long time it's
like that's what I can do the universe
delivered five conversations ongoing we
have a few comments that we could could
talk about or we can go and cut this at
40 minutes and then come back next week
with the things property type for social
profit
Ernesto Jonas is agreeing with you again
so you can pop up that one I was
thinking the one for the down but okay
but no we could do Anthony's one of the
possible configurations you know and
that's exactly our nester knows from
being part of both of ours is that is it
creating the parallel one that isn't
choose game a game be your all in all
out but like hey do you want to play an
hour in game B what can you do that's
cooperative
what do you how do you want to connect
with people it's not an all-or-nothing
and like bring your skills and even if
you're making money in the game a bring
a little bit of that money bring a
little bit of what you learned there
like we're all brought up in game a
anyway so the more successful you are
and the more you're willing to be to
help bring that success to game be the
better and the lead the less successful
you are a game and the more you're
willing to like just lots of capitalism
faster and stronger also also good I'm
that one that one
how's it go up the old interviewer who
asked me what their opinion is that is
kind of Oh also not to Nick very
surprising that answered the door yeah I
don't answer my door anymore the
interesting thing is I feel like you
actually could go door to door more
effectively now like there's times where
I have a tech project like there's this
the next door one and you do kind of
have to within 30 days get a certain
number of people in your neighborhood to
sign up and I'm like that would actually
work now like to be like hey sign up for
this technology in the if you if it's
giving them a real benefit I'm not no
interested to see how or technology sign
up simply because I would assume the
people that would sign up for although
people that wouldn't answer their doors
yeah this one in particular though is
kind of like creating a community out of
your neighborhood right so it's like if
you're not someone who wants to talk to
your neighbor at all yeah you probably
don't want to answer your door you
probably don't want to sign up for that
and you need like ten people in the
entire neighborhood not everyone to sign
up so it's I'm gonna find out did it
it runs nearby me myself posted
somewhere where or somebody was saying
like the boomers would be like why don't
the Millennials ever actually answered
their doors we aren't expecting someone
and they're like I think I understand
why there are so many serial killers in
the 70s now just randomly opening your
door for anybody we were to live free do
i order something out that my side of my
answer in that yeah that's there's so
many things getting delivered that I do
I'm like wait oh yeah there's a truck
there's a van all you got just pull up a
white van it's like some brown coveralls
in your set yep do you have a package
that absolutely come on in I don't
remember
yes all right our sense of humor all
right I'm gonna say bye to YouTube and
we will see you next week yeah or turn
an idea cafe for the game P thing on
Tuesday at 11:30 thank you
now that I 5 it's hard to keep them
straight right