[Music]
you
[Music]
welcome back to awakening from the
meaning crisis this is episode 30 so
last time we decided to dig into the
central issue of realizing what's
relevant and we are following a
methodological principle of not using or
presupposing relevance a capacity to
realize relevance in any process
purported cognitive process or brain
process that we're going to use to try
and explain that ability I gave you a
series of arguments that we can't use
representations to explain relevance
because representations crucially
presuppose it and then we took a look at
some very interesting empirical evidence
that really comports very well with that
the issue the evidence surrounding fence
ting and your ability to do to do an
active demonstrative reference the
salience tagging just making stand out
the hereness and the nowness of
something we then took a look at the and
we we we drew a few conclusions about
the meaning that we're talking about in
meaning in life right that connectedness
that connectedness is ultimately not
generated by representations again I'm
going to keep saying this I'm not
denying that representations and belief
and that level can't alter or transform
what we find relevant we're talking
about the explanation of the phenomena
not how it is causally affected by other
aspects of cognition we then took a look
at a syntactic level the computational
level and saw arguments that neither
inference nor rules can be used to
explain the generation of relevance
precisely because they also presuppose
it we looked at trying to deal with
relevance in terms of some sort of
internal module dedicated to it and that
won't work it's a monkey door and
relevance realization needs to be scale
invariant or at least multi scale Euler
it has
be happening simultaneously in a local
and global way and that again points
towards something else we noted about
any theory it asked to account for the
self-organization of relevance that is
demonstrated in the phenomena of insight
so we then saw that a theory has to use
explanatory ideas that point to
processes that are at least in the
original sense internal to their
relevance realization the relevance
realizing system I tried to get clear
about how not to misunderstand that what
I meant was the goals of the the goals
that govern relevance realization
initially have to be constitutive goals
they cannot be goals built upon
representing the environment in a
particular way instead they have to be
the constitutive goals that are part of
an autopoietic system a system that is
self organized because it has the goal
of preserving and protecting and
promoting its own self organization that
draws deep connections between relevance
realization and life and relevance
realization and being an autopoietic
thing and of course as I've already
mentioned right relevance realization
processes have to be multiscale later
they have to be self-organizing and they
have to be capable of developmental self
transcendence self correction insight
etc we noted along the way right about
how this links up with an argument about
how the propositional depends on the
procedural which then depends on the
prospective 'el which then depends is
grounded in the participatory but we hit
a roadblock when I want to now zero in
on I had been treating them as identical
but I'm going to then make a very
important theoretical distinction
between a theory of relevance and a
theory of relevance realization because
what I want to argue is that there
cannot be a theory
of relevance at least a scientific
theory of relevance and since we're
playing in the arena of science
scientific explanations I'm not going to
keep doing that qualification I'm just
going to say there cannot be a theory of
relevance scientific theory of relevance
why not well this has to do with an
issue that was originally brought up by
chappie and Kukla in an article a
commentary and behavioral brain sciences
in Dan Chevy and I have published work
together we're collaborating right now
on a work on telepresence I recommend
you to take a look at the work of Dan
Jaffe but they made a point and I think
this point is it's very well taken it's
a point that goes back to Jas mill but
you can also see an updated version of
it in the work of the important
philosopher on philosopher of science
wilfred Quine so this has to do with how
science works now of course the
philosophy of science tackles all kinds
of controversial claims about what is
science and how science works but I take
it that one thing that is agreed upon in
science is that science works through
inductive generalization or it tries to
generate inductive generalizations what
I mean by that science you study a bunch
of things here and then you make
predictions and claims that that will be
the case for all of that type of thing
so you know here I study a bunch of you
know he's a hunk of gold here's a hunk
of gold here's a hunk of gold I come up
with a write a set of features or
properties does that generalize to all
the instances of gold and if it does
then I come up with an inductive
generalization I want to get the
broadest possible inductive
generalizations that I can if that's how
science works it's trying to give us a
powerful way of
loudly predicting the world it's doing
other things very importantly it's also
trying to give us a way of explaining
the world I'm not claiming this is I've
tried to make it clear this is not meant
to be an exhaustive account of science
it's meant to point to a central
practice within science but a
constitutive practice nevertheless if
you can't generate inductive
generalizations in your purported
endeavor then you don't have a science
this is why pseudoscience is like
astrology fail but cisely because they
cannot do inductive generalizations okay
you say okay great
so what jeaious know pointed out is that
means that we need what's called
systemic import and this is so relevant
to what we were talking about last time
in fact even using the word import is is
really relevant what that means is
science has to form categories because
that's what I'm trying to do right I'm
gathering a bunch of things and saying
they belong
they're the same type of thing they're
all instances of gold they all belong to
the category of gold science has to form
categories that support powerful meaning
as broad as possible inductive
generalizations to be able to do that is
to have systematic import now what does
what do I need think about reverse
engineering this in order if you have
reliable you know that's what powerful
means reliable and broad inductive
generalizations in order to have those
what do I need to be the case here
well I need I neither to be important
properties for the that category one
thing is I need the categories to be the
category members to importantly be
homogeneous
there's a sense in which all the members
of the category have to share properties
that's that's me indicating they're all
sharing properties all right and it's
because they share properties that I can
make the inductive generalization that
other instances will also have those
important properties that's exactly what
I need because if the members are
heterogeneous there's no set of
properties I can then expand in the
generalization they have to be
homogeneous now this gets us towards
something very important right this gets
us towards a bad idea from Quine because
there's a lot of discussion of about
this word right now in the culture and I
think the discussion sort of is too
polarized and this has to go again with
an issue made by Vic and Stein but I
want to put Vic and Stein and Quine
together on this very important modern
philosopher because Vic and Stein and
this is what some of the critics of our
sense say right because if you remember
according to Aristotle and we talked
about this when we talked about eros
tall an essence is a set of necessary
and sufficient conditions and what Vic
and Stein pointed out and remember we
did this with the example of again that
many of many of our categories don't
have essences there is no set of
necessary and sufficient conditions that
will pick out all and only games there's
no set of necessary and sufficient
conditions that will pick out all in
only tables so many of our categories
don't have essences that was the
constraints point now Vic and Fenton I
don't think you could ever pin him to
the claim that no categories have
essences and that's what some people I
think have concluded that no categories
have essence essences everything is this
nominal description but that's not right
because of course
non-controversial II for example
triangles have essences that's why
Aristotle thought many things did right
you know if it has three straight sides
right three angles it's enclosed it's a
triangle those that's an essence to a
triangle
now that's mathematical here's what
Quine argued at least I think this is an
interpretation of coin that is
philosophically defensible science these
are the things like triangle these are
deductive essences these are the
essences that we can deduce but what
science discovers are inductive
generalizations and if they're powerful
enough science gives us the essence of
something the essence of gold is the set
of properties that will apply to all
instances of gold all in only instances
of gold that homogeneous set that can
generalize is what an inductive essence
is now what that means is we shouldn't a
couple of ways of talking in the media
shouldn't or the general culture should
should not be so uncritically accepted
right essentialism isn't bad for things
that have essences why would it be
essentialism is the is the mistake of
treating a category as as if it has an
essence it is a mistake for things like
games and tables precisely because they
don't have an essence it is not a
mistake for things like gold because
gold has an essence inductively or
triangle because triangles have a
deductive essence that trick it's it is
too simplistic to say everything has an
essence or everything doesn't have an
essence now it cuts both ways it cuts
both ways right there are many things
that don't have essences that's what's
right about the critique of a sense
but it is wrong to conclude that there
is nuttin it's wrong to say that they
can Stein argument point it is not an
argument because it's not a deductive
argument that concludes that there are
no essence its it only points that many
categories don't have essences so that
means it is possible to do a science
when we do what when we categorize
things in such a way that we get this
because if we get this then we have the
essential properties of the thing now
the reverse is the case that's what I
mean by cuts both ways we can't have a
scientific explanation of everything we
can't have a scientific explanation of
everything if the category is not
homogeneous if it does not support
powerful inductive generalizations if it
does not have an inductive essence we
cannot have a science about it it
doesn't mean those things don't exist it
means we cannot scientifically
investigate them so for example I can't
have a science of white things now are
there things that are white of course
there are this blackboard is white this
pen at least part of it is white this
part right this piece of paper is white
to say there are white things in this
room is to say something true notice
that there are truths that are stable
but the category I am using this is Jas
Mills example white things does not
support any inductive generalizations
other than the thing is white now don't
give me what we can have a theory about
light and whiteness we're not talking
about a theory about light we're talking
about a theory about white things
knowing that this is white what does it
tell me right so I study this white
thing okay what do I learn about it
other than own nothing other than its
white is there any other important
No Wow no uh-uh
well you they're both flat but this is
vertical this is horizontal you see it
doesn't generalize it doesn't generalize
so it is correct to say that there are
many categories that we form for which
we could not generate a scientific
theory or explanation
precisely because those categories are
not homogeneous they don't have in
essence now notice what that doesn't
mean the fact that I can't have a
scientific theory of it does not mean
that white things are made out of ghosts
or dead elves or ectoplasmic goo it
licenses no metaphysical weirdness it
just says that category functions in the
sense that I can make true statements
about its membership but it does not
function insofar as it supports right
through systematic import powerful
inductive generalizations what else do I
need
well let's compare right the white
things as jazz mill dental horses
it's a and we depend on the fact that
horses seem to have an essence now
whether or not they ultimately like do
some sort of species levels something
you know really argued about in biology
and I'm not trying to be negligent of
that but I'm also not going to try and
resolve that what did Mel mean by his
example of a horse well what do you
meant by if I learn a lot about this
horse right it will generalize to other
horses it will generalize so horses are
in really important ways from a genius
that's why we can have veterinary
medicine and things like that I can
learn about it in terms of horses that
have already been studied and it will
generalize well to horses that have not
themselves yet been studied that's fine
what else and this is a I don't mean
this to be a pun I need the category
membership to be stable so that doesn't
mean to be horses and stables right
what's like what's in the category the
kind of things that are in the category
should be stable it shouldn't be
constantly shifting or changing because
if this and this was appointment of me a
long time ago by Plato if what's in here
is constantly shifting now I don't mean
the particular members I mean what kind
of thing is in here is constantly
shifting right then of course I can't do
inductive generalizations because I will
get into equivocation I will give get
into a quick a tion so that where
gravity originally met having to do with
drawing down into the grave as we
mentioned it had to do with sort of a
important seriousness and then right but
now we use that term to describe a
physical mode of attraction and
interaction and if if I don't notice the
change in what goes in to my
categorizations I'm not making a good
inductive generalization I'm engaged in
equivocation and as I've tried to show
you equivocation right is a
we make invalid often ridiculous
arguments so it needs to be stable
we need the properties of the objects to
in some sense be intrinsic or at least
internal inherent this also comes from
an argument by John Searle many objects
have properties that are not intrinsic
to the object but come from the objects
relationship to us for example
because and there are attributed
properties so a clear example so a
non-controversial example is something
being money now here's again is money
real well a lot of my life is bent
around money so in that sense it seems
to be real but does anything
intrinsically possess the property of
being money if I take out some coin a
piece of paper is it intrinsically money
no it's only money because we all
attribute it as being money we all treat
it as money and that's what make it
makes it money if we all decide to not
treat it as money it ceases to exist as
money we can't do that with gold notice
what I'm saying we we could all decide
that gold is no longer valuable no
longer analogous to money but we can't
all decide that not the gold no longer
possesses its mass atomic number we
can't do that all right now the thing
you have to remember is that many things
that we think are intrinsic are actually
attributed this being a bottle is
attributed because what it means to call
it a bottle is the way it is relating to
me and my usage of it if there had never
been human beings and this popped into
existence because of some quantum event
near a black hole or something it isn't
a bottle it's an object with a
particular mass a particular structure
but it's not a bottle because being a
bottle is something that it gets in its
relationship to me now again did I just
show you that everything's an illusion
no again the fact that there are many
things that are genuinely relational
genuinely attribute
it doesn't mean that right I've shown
you that everything's false I've just
shown you that you can't do science
unless the members of your property or
homogeneous stable intrinsic or at least
inherent because that's what you need to
have powerful inductive generalization
okay let's see something that fails this
all of these tests things that happen on
Tuesday okay events that happened on
Tuesday Tuesday events okay are there
events that happen on Tuesday yeah
and if there's even events that can
happen on multiple Tuesday's we
categorize things in terms of the days
we categorize events in terms of the
days now
are all the events on a Tuesday
homogeneous no are all the vets on
Tuesdays many different Tuesday's
homogeneous no they're very they're very
very different in widely varying is it
stable the things that happen on
Tuesdays it's it's same of a Tuesday no
that's Groundhog Day or some kind of
horrible Nietzsche and hell okay and
what about Tuesday nests being Tuesday
is that inherent I mean is there Tuesday
in the room when it's Tuesday I mean it
can't be because there was a time when
there we didn't even have calendars
right notice how hard it is to realize
that there's no for Tuesday news so you
know we you know can I make two
statements last Tuesday I went to a
movie is it true
yes can I do a science of events that
happen on Tuesday no I can't because it
doesn't satisfy these criteria does that
mean that Tuesday is made out of right
ectoplasmic goo tuesday events actually
take place in a different government on
no does it none of that none of that
okay you have to be careful on and this
is what we learn from Vic and Stein have
to be very careful about how the grammar
of our thought how we're regulating our
cognition now what I want to try and
show you is that relevance does not have
systematic import relevance relevant
events are like Tuesday events here let
me show you the things that I find
relevant other than me finding them
relevant what do they share in common I
might find this pen relevant I might
find my knee relevant I might find this
air relevant I might find right the fact
that it's a particular day in may
relevant do you see what I'm showing you
the class of things we find relevant is
not homogeneous other than we find in
them relevant there is nothing that they
share it's exactly like the class of
white things
what about stable so when I find
something relevant do I always find it
relevant this is relevant to me now will
it forever be relevant to me I will care
care oh it is relevant no things are not
stable e relevant relevant one minute
irrelevant the next you may say oh
there's things that are always relevant
to you always alright don't know very
hard to find them
and it's what if maybe maybe oxygen
maybe but that's only relevant to me if
I want to keep living a person who
commits suicide and some people commit
suicide this way they suffocate
themselves to death because that was
more important to them than oxygen it's
not stable it's relevant and here's
where I think we'll get into some
difficulties I suppose with some people
but it's relevant like internal or
intrinsic to the object is there a way
of like oh like if there never been
human beings or sentient beings it would
it could this have relevance doesn't
seem that that's at all a plausible
intuition relevance always seems to be
relevant to some one or some thing and
that of course I think is going to be
bound up that relevance ultimately has
to be relevant to and autopoietic thing
only things that have needs only things
that are self organized because so that
they have the constitutive goal of
preserving their self organization
that's what it is to need I need food
because I am self organized to preserve
my own self organization which means I
need food food literally matters to me
literally matters to me it's hard to see
how things could be relevant unless they
were in relationship to an autopoietic
thing relevance is not something for
which we can have a scientific theory I
want you to notice what's come along the
way relevance is not intrinsic to
something there can be no essence to
relevance
nothing is essentially relevant
that's the whole point about talking
about the problem of essentialism and
relevance is not stable it's constantly
changing ok so what do we do well first
of all we add to our theory so a set of
criteria we need for a good theory our
theory of relevance realization can't be
a theory of relevance detection I've
given you a sustained argument for that
it is not this is not how relevance
works relevance realizes it shouldn't
it's not that it's not this has
relevance and I detect its relevance now
you might say well maybe relevance
realization is just projective I'm gonna
reply to that too I think that's also
inadequate in order to see how it's
inadequate and in order to get out of
the bind we seem to be getting in I want
to open up the distinction between
relevant a theory of relevance and a
theory relevance realization with an
analogy and it's going to turn out to be
a very I hope helpful analogy and this
will also I think to help us to see why
relevance is not something we merely
project on the world this is why I have
a sustained criticism against both the
empiricist we just detect it and the
Romantics we just project it so let's
get into that
what's the analogy that will help
develop me a develop an argument to show
why we needed to merely detect it
morally merely project it and get us out
of the barn that we can't have a theory
of relevance okay notice a very
important and I think this is one of the
central insights of Darwin right and we
talked about Darwin when we talked about
Aristotle and dynamical systems so
if you need to please go back and look
again at video six like I don't want to
repeat all those arguments right now we
built them
so that we can use them now see before
Darwin's time the people studying the
natural world were often clergymen
Darwin himself was thinking about going
into clergy and that's because people
thought if they studied the natural
world they could understand right the
essence of how things were designed
because if we could get at the essence
of how things were designed how things
were sort of fitted to their environment
then of course that would give us some
deep insight into the mind of God that's
why clergymen are you know collecting
species and doing all this but I think
one of the insights and it's not given
enough attention in the analysis of the
brilliance of Darwin's theory is to
realize that things don't have an
essential design there is no essential
design so consider the notion of
evolutionary fitness now there's a
problem there's there's a technical
definition of fitness which means the
capacity to survive long enough in order
to be capable of reproduction that right
will allow that gene pool or species all
of these are kind of controversial terms
to to propagate and and exist so if we
want to use that technology ssin of
fitness then I need or I'll be talking
about fitness and what I mean by fitted
missus what is it about the organism
that makes it fit what is it about the
organism that allows it to survive long
enough to reproduce okay and what I want
to argue is there's no essential design
on Fitness some things are fitted in
this sense precisely because they are
big some because they are small some
because they are hard
because they saw some because they're
long lived some because the short lived
some because they proliferate greatly
others because they take care of of a
few young right some are fast some are
slow some are singular cellular some are
multi like nothing nothing because the
answer for that of course is deep and
profound because the environment is so
complex and differentiated and
dynamically changing that Nicias ways in
which you can fit into the environment
in order to right promote your survival
autopoietic are varied and changing see
this is Darwin's insight there is no
essence to design there is no essence to
fitted miss if you try and come up with
a theory of how organisms have their
design I'm using this in quotation marks
in terms of trying to determine or
derive it from the essence of design you
are doomed because it doesn't exist that
that's but what what Darwin realizes he
didn't need such a theory he needed a
theory about how what's relevant in this
biological sense but a theory about how
an organism is fitted how it is
constantly being designed redefined by a
dynamic process see fitted Ness is
always redefining itself reconstituting
itself it is a something that is
constantly within a process of
self-organization because there is no
essence there is no final design on
fitted news fitted myths has to
constantly be redesigning itself in a
self-organizing fashion so it can
constantly pick up on the way
a in which the world is constantly
varying and dynamically changing there
is no essence to fit in this but I don't
need a theory of fitness all I need is a
theory of how fitted Mis is constantly
being realized in a self-organizing
fashion that's exactly what the theory
of evolution is do you remember there's
a feedback cycle in reproduction there's
a virtual engine selection variation and
that virtual engine constantly shapes
regulates how the reproductive cycle
feeds back onto itself and there is no
and of course this is why some religious
people get very angry about this process
but notice this is exactly what we need
right there's no intelligent designer to
this this is a process that is
completely self-organizing the fitted
nosov organisms constantly evolves out
of and is constantly evolving towards
other instances of fitted nystagmus has
no essence it is not a stable phenomena
I should not try and give a definition
or a theory of fitness what I have is a
theory of the evolution of fitted nests
and again even when I say that you have
to you're tempted to think what bird a
key means is there was no fitted miss
and then there was evolution and it
resulted in fitness that is not what
we're Vicki saying where Vicki is saying
fitted nests and the evolution of fitted
miss the same thing
so what Darwin proposed of course it was
the first dynamical Systems theory of
how fitted nests evolves so that Fitness
is ongoing that's the theory of
evolution by natural selection now that
tells us something that we need first of
all this is a self-organizing process it
is non homunculus it can generate
intelligence without itself being an
intelligent process it's doing a lot of
what we need it's doing a lot of what we
need here's the analogy I want to
propose to you let's make relevance
analogous to biological fitness in fact
let's call relevance cognitive
interactional what I mean by that both
in your cognition and how that cognition
is expressing itself in problem-solving
cognitive interactional fitness and I
don't need a theory of this what I need
is a theory of how this evolves okay how
it evolves
what if my ability to formulate problems
form categories pick up on conveyance
make inferences all the stuff what about
that ability because what I'm doing what
am i what do I need I need something
that constrains the search space that
constrains how I pay attention
I need systematic constraints and what
are they doing the systematic
constraints have to regulate a feedback
loop well what's the feedback loop the
feedback loop is my sensory motor
feedback loop right I'm sensing but I'm
also acting and my acting is integral to
my sensing and my sensing is integral to
my moving and so my moving and my
sensing are doing this a sensorimotor
loop right I interact with the world and
then that changes how I sense it and
then I enter so there's a sensory motor
loop what if what if there is a virtual
engine broadly construed that is
regulating that sensory motor loop so
that it is constantly evolving it's
cognitive interactional fitted 'no stew
its environment it doesn't have to come
to any final a essential way of framing
the environment but what it's constantly
doing is evolving its fitted miss its
cognitive not just its biological
fitness although I'm going to argue as
many people do that there's an important
continuity between those two it's
constantly evolving it's cognitive
fitted 'no stew the environment then
what i need is not a theory of relevance
i need a theory of relevance realization
how relevance is becoming effective
right how it is altering shaping the
sensorimotor loop I need a dynamical
system for the self-organizing evolution
of cognitive interactional fitted miss
and if I could come up
with that then I would have an account
of relevance realization that was non
homunculus
we'd be consonant and continuous with of
how the organ the embodied organ you
know the embodied brain the vault that
is responsible for intelligence itself
evolved it would plug in very nicely to
what we need well what do we need well
we need a set of properties if you
remember we need a set of properties
that are subs semantics
sub syntactic that ultimately have to
ground out in right establishing the
agent arena participation they have to
be right the processes have to be
self-organizing they have to be multi
scale they have to originally be ground
out in autopoietic on autopoietic system
well what kind of properties are we
talking about then well we're talking
about and this again is too deeply
analogous to the Darwinian picture we're
talking about bio economical properties
and what do I mean by that
think again of your biology as economic
this is again part of Darwin's great
insight now you know don't be confused
here when a lot of times when people
hear economic they hear financial
economy that's not what an economy is an
economy is a self-organization a
self-organizing system that is
constantly dealing with the distribution
of goods and services the the allocation
and use of resources often in order to
further maintain and develop that
economy so your body is a bio economy
you have valuable resources of time
metabolic energy processing power think
about how we say we pay attention by the
way processing power and you write what
what what you do as an auto poetic thing
is you are organized such that the
distribution of those resources so
the constitutive gold it will serve
other goals of course but it serves the
constitutive goal of preserving the
Bioeconomy itself and the thing about
economies right of course is their self
organizing economic properties are right
your bio they're part of they come out
of their biology right they're not
semantic or syntactic properties now we
use semantic and syntactic terms to talk
about them blah blah blah let's not keep
making the confusion okay they are multi
scale C economies work locally and
globally simultaneously bottom-up
top-down so Bonnell economic properties
are great and that's good because that
that comports well with the analogy
because Darwin's theory is ultimately a
bio economic theory so can we think
about what kind of norms are at work in
a bio economy okay so here right where
we're dealing with norms ultimately of
truth right here we're dealing probably
with norms of validity at least formal
validity in some way when we're here
we're not dealing with these kinds of
logical semantics norms economies are
governed by logistical norms or at least
regulated by logistical norms I want to
try and use the word governing for
selective constraints and generating for
enabling constraints I apologize if I
sometimes flip economies are regulated
by logistical norms Logistics is the
study of the proper disposition and use
of your resources so if you're doing a
logistical analysis for the military
you're trying to figure out I have my
limited resources and food and you know
ammo and personnel and time and space
how can I best use them to achieve the
goals I need to achieve so what are
logistical norms well logistical norms
are things like efficiency right and
resiliency
efficiency and resiliency now resiliency
it will we'll talk about more in each
detail a way of thinking about these is
resiliency is basically long term
broadly applying efficiency but instead
of using efficiency and efficiency which
is confusing we'll talk about efficiency
and resiliency so what if that's right
let's go step by step is very right
what if relevance realization is this
ongoing evolution of our cognitive
interactional fitted Ness that there is
some virtual engine that is regulating
the sensory motor loop and it's
regulating it by regulating the
Bioeconomy and it's regulating the
Bioeconomy in terms of logistical norms
like efficiency and resilience okay now
all of this of course right can be
described scientifically mathematically
etc because of course darwin's theory is
a scientific theory right we we can do
calculations on these things etc one
more time the fact that I use science to
talk about it does not mean that it is
that it exemplifies propositional
properties my properties of my theory
and the properties that my theory is
about are not the same thing what kind
of relationship how do we put this
notion of self-organization in this
notion of the logistical norms governing
the Bioeconomy together okay so one way
of doing this is to think about a multi
scalar way in which your bio economy is
organized to function a multi scalar way
many scales of analysis there's a way in
which your bio economy is organized to
function ok let's take your autonomic
nervous system as an example this is not
exhaustive in fact my point is you will
find this strategy this design at many
levels of analysis
in your biology I'm only using this as
an example so your autonomous nervous
system okay so this is that you're
nervous this is your part of your
nervous system that is responsible for
your level of arousal right that doesn't
mean sexual arousal the Ruhr also means
how and notice how this is logistical
how much your metabolic resources are
being converted into the possibility of
action interaction so you have a very
low level of arousal when you're falling
asleep you have a very high level
overall so when you're running away from
a tiger okay now think about this you
need your level of a ramp there is no
final perfect design on your level of
arousal there is nothing you should
there's there isn't a level that you
should always shoot for you shouldn't
maximize your level of arousal but
always ah that's not good I'm never
gonna sleep I'm never gonna heal right
if I'm just like always okay that's it
going to sleep that's not good and the
Canadian solution well I'll always have
a middling level of arousal that's not
good either because I can't fall asleep
and I can't run away from the tiger so
what what is your autonomic nervous
system - well your autonomic nervous
system is divided into two components
right there is your sympathetic and your
parasympathetic
so yes your sympathetic system is right
it's designed it's really biased it's
designed towards interpreting the world
in a way it's biased notice what I said
remember the things that make us
adaptive also make us susceptible to
self-deception it's biased all right
because right you can't can look at all
of the evidence it's biased into looking
for an interpreting evidence that I mean
evidence non anthropomorphic lis that
should you should raise your level of
arousal you're sympathetic your
parasympathetic system is bias the other
way right these are both heuristic ways
of processing they work in terms of
biasing the processing of data okay so
the parasympathetic system is constantly
trying to find evidence that you should
reduce your level of arousal so they're
opposed in their goal but here's the
thing
they are also interdependent in their
function
all right so the sympathetic nervous
system is always trying to arouse you
this is this hand pulling up and that
parasympathetic system is always trying
to pull you down and as the environment
changes that tug-of-war shifts around
your level of arousal right the opponent
processing because when you have two
systems that are opposed but integrated
you have opponent processing the
opponent processing means that your
level of arousal is constantly evolving
constantly evolving to fit the
environment is it perfect no nothing can
be I'd have to any problem-solving
machine in order to be perfect would
have to explore the complete problem
space that's combinatorial explosive it
can't but what is this well you've seen
this before opponent processing is a
powerful way to get optimization and
when we talked about optimization when
we talked about play-doh you're
optimizing between systems that are
working and different goals but are
integrated in their function and that
way the system constantly self organizes
and it and thereby evolves it's fitted
'no student so the way we can get this I
would argue is by thinking about how the
brain and I would I'm going to argue
very importantly the embodied embedded
brain uses opponent processing in a
multi scalar way in order to regulate
your Bioeconomy your autopoietic
Bioeconomy so that it is constantly
optimizing your cognitive interactional
fitted nurse to the environment
let's think about it this way let's
think if we can get a virtual engine out
of efficiency and resiliency because
here's the thing about them they are in
an opponent relationship they pursue
pursuit
the problem with language a it's like
Nietzsche said if you were not getting
rid of God because we still believe in
grammar right the problem with language
is it makes everything sound like an
agent it makes everything sound like it
has intentionality makes everything
sound like it has intelligence and of
course that's not the case so bear with
me about this all right I have to speak
anthropomorphic leave just because
that's the way language makes me speak
but right let's use a financial analogy
to understand the trade-off relationship
between efficiency and resiliency not
all economies are financial because not
the the resource that's being disposed
of in an economy is not necessarily
money it might be time etc okay I'm
using a financial analogy or at least a
commercial analogy perhaps as a better
way of putting it
in order to try and get some
understanding of how these are in a
tradeoff relationship so you have you
have a business one of the things you
might do is you might try to make your
business more efficient because ceteris
paribus if your business is more
efficient than that person's business
you're going to out-compete them you're
going to survive and they're going to
die off obviously the analogy to
evolution so what do I do what I do is I
try to maximize the ratio between right
profit and expenditure cost how do I do
that well we did it we keep thinking of
it as the magical solution but we've
been doing it since Ronald Reagan at
least we do massive downsizing we fire
as many people as we can in our business
and that way well
we have right is we have the most profit
for the least labor cost that's surely
the answer right so notice what
efficiency is doing
notice how efficiency is a selective
constraint the problem is if you are cut
to the bone if you reduced all the afar
if you've got all the efficiencies and
this is the magic word the people often
invoke without forgetting that's without
remembering and forgetting the
relationship the opponent relationship
to resiliency see if I cut my business
to the bone like that what happens if
one person's sick nobody can pick up the
slack because everyone is working to the
max what happens if there's an
unexpected change in the environment a
new threat or a new opportunity nobody
can take it on because everybody is we
work to the limit I'll have no resources
by which I can repair restructure
redesign myself I don't have any
precursors to new ways of organizing
because there is nothing that isn't
being fully used notice also if there's
no slack in my system and this is now
happening with the way AI is
accelerating things error propagates
massively and quickly if there's no
redundancy there's no slack in the
system there's no place there's no
wiggle room and error just floods the
system you see if I make the system too
efficient you lose resiliency I lose the
capacity to differentiate restructure
redesign repair accept new functions out
of existing functions slow down how
error propagates through the system
efficiency and resiliency
in a tradeoff relationship now what and
resiliency is trying to do is enable you
to encounter new things enable you to
deal with unexpected situations of
damage or threat or opportunity it's
enabling these are in a tradeoff
relationship as I gained one I learn
lose the other what if I set up a
virtual engine in the brain that makes
use of this trade-off relationship it
sets up a virtual engine between the
selective constraints of efficiency and
the enabling constraints of resiliency
and that virtual engine bio economically
logistically shapes my sensory motor
loop with the environment so it's
constantly evolving its fitted miss
we'll take a look at that possibility
and some suggestions on how that might
be realized in the brain in the next
lecture thank you very much for your
time and attention
[Music]
you
[Music]
you
you
you