[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
hey folks welcome to the Dark Horse
podcast this is the fourth in a series
of live streams with dr. Heather hiring
sitting to my right we are going to
shoot for an hour today that is an hour
of us discussing topics that are arising
and answering your super chat questions
so try to get those questions in early
and we will try to get to all of the
good ones in some kind of proper order
alright so I believe we have no
Corrections this week is that right it's
hard to believe it's hard to believe
yeah yeah because we said a lot of stuff
they said a lot of stuff I'm sure there
were minor minor things as always when
we're talking about a developing
situation with new news that's emerging
daily there are things that we will
believe to be true that turned out not
to be true but I don't think that there
were things that we said that are an
absolute need of correction right now
yeah and usually we get really good
feedback where people point us to things
and I must say one of the delightful
parts of this horrifying situation is
that you and I have gotten to interact
with our audience a bit the way we did
with the classes when we taught at
Evergreen and the interaction is great
as with Evergreen we are constantly
learning things that we didn't know by
virtue of the fact of a very engaged
audience who is fanning out across all
of the things one could be looking at
and they bring us useful information all
the time so in fact comments coming in
fact I got a text from a former student
yesterday the day before I think I read
it to you saying that it reminded him of
his time with us both in the classroom
and in the field so that was nice yeah
it's good it's nice to to have that back
in our lives all right so I think we
should probably start by talking about
the situation in Guayaquil Ecuador now
for those of you who don't know why kill
Ecuador is Ecuador's most populous city
and it's not the capital the capital is
Quito and Quito is high in the Andes
Guayaquil is on the coast on the west
coast of South America close to the
coast it's it's on yeah it's on the gwil
River I guess I don't remember but it's
not it's not exactly on the coast but it
sits in the humid lowlands humid
lowlands and it is a major port city so
somehow maybe a bit like Portland things
are coming up the river and docking in
Guayaquil but in any case Guayaquil
broke into the news late this week as an
absolutely horrifying situation began to
emerge with respect to the fragile
health care system in Guayaquil and the
system that deals with the dead became
overwhelmed and bodies are now lying in
the street some families have ended up
living with their own dead many of them
have died of kovat 19 but irrespective
of what people died from there's no
mechanism for dealing with the number of
bodies that are emerging and so people
are keeping them inside as long as they
can often these families are living
without air-conditioning and then at
some point the smell of the decaying
relative has forced people to drag these
bodies of people they loved outside and
so there are many many instances of by
bodies just simply lying in public many
of them not in a casket just simply
lying in the open and it's a tragic and
certainly psychologically devastating
situation for the citizens of Guayaquil
so
I we have spent a lot of time in Ecuador
I have not been to Guayaquil you have
been there I was I went through there in
2014 with my study abroad class my first
study abroad in Ecuador just just went
through I had to stop to get our bus
cleaned out and you know I wasn't
impressed with it as a city it wasn't
some place that I wanted to live whereas
there are a lot of places in Ecuador
that I do feel like I would I would love
to to spend a lot of time there but it
was as every place that I've been in
Ecuador a bustling vibrant culturally
deep rich and historic place and seeing
these images you know we all we all will
relate most to those places that we have
a personal relationship with and so
while yes I've been to Guayaquil it's
more that this was happening this is
happening in Ecuador where we have both
spent considerable time it's a country
that we love and seeing seeing these
signs of utter horror in Ecuador brought
home what might start to be happening
throughout Latin America throughout the
rest of the developing world in a way
that probably will not manifest in the
in the weird countries and developed
countries only because we have a
slightly thicker margin we aren't quite
on such a razor-thin margin with regard
to our healthcare well I actually this
is all making me wonder a bit so when
you first ran across a tweet from a
friend of ours on Twitter mentioning the
situation in Guayaquil the images were
almost beyond belief such that you and I
both felt very nervous about saying
anything because what if somehow anyway
we were both quite concerned that maybe
there was something about the story that
couldn't be right and then it turned out
an hour or two before the LA Times had
published a story that reflected the
very same pattern so we knew that it was
it was real but in understanding the
story it a couple things emerged one
some of you will remember that in our
last livestream I mentioned a particular
concern about the role that homelessness
is going to play and we in the United
States if you're not an American maybe
you don't know but we in the United
States have a an absolutely terrible
problem with homelessness in every urban
center I can think of and it's become a
part of the landscape it was always
there to some extent but the degree to
which there are homeless encampments all
around Portland LA every especially on
the west coast which don't have such
harsh winters right so they'll survive
people who are homeless can survive for
quite some time but I raise the question
in the last live stream about what
happens you know I don't think we think
very much about how it is that homeless
people function in their daily lives
mostly the you know if you become
preoccupied with how the homeless are
living it takes over your mind and so
anyway we all become more practiced and
we should and ignoring the problem but
what it means is that we don't really
have a deep understanding of for example
how it is that these people eat right
what is it that they are eating and as I
thought about that question more and
more I realized that probably the places
that they are are largely chosen because
they have proximity to places where
people throw away lots of food like near
you know food courts and fast food
restaurants and things like that and
I've been watching those places shut
down and wondering if there is not a
brewing crisis you know amongst homeless
people of starvation and if it hasn't
been you know going for a couple weeks
now I don't know if that's true but
certainly it could it could be true and
my question really is the the situation
in Guayaquil reveals a pattern that
we've seen with respect to other things
non-human things which is that there are
many things which can fluctuate in their
availability or their commonality up to
some point at which they cross a
threshold at which point you noticed if
something has happened so for example I
don't remember in
my lifetime when toilet paper or beans
or rice or any of the things that people
have been hoarding have been unavailable
in a store and in the US we've we've
traveled places we've and we've lived
classes where these basics were not
available sometimes ever and some but
but in the u.s. or in in Europe we've
never seen this before
and likewise I'm a huge fan of isopropyl
alcohol I usually have a lot of it on
hand to clean with because it's
non-toxic we have an evolutionary
history with the molecules in question
and so it's I consider it a very good
cleaning product but we didn't have very
much when this started and suddenly it
was unavailable everywhere so you want
to say something about what you bought
in its dead
well I've branched out I've gotten some
Everclear is very high proof grain
alcohol 190-proof reminiscent of bad
college days yeah so anyway that is
available relatively inexpensively and
you know would function as a
disinfectant if if it needed to be I've
also gotten OxiClean which turns into
hydrogen peroxide when I said it to
water we bought some hydrogen peroxide
but anyway they're you know we've been
forced to branch out because a seemingly
indefinitely large supply of isopropyl
alcohol dwindled all of a sudden as
kovat 19 emerged anyway my point would
be the fluctuations in the supply chain
have to be a constant fact but if your
interface with that supply chain is at
the store you don't notice that anything
at all has happened even if the rate of
use tripled of one of these things you
wouldn't know because the store shelf is
full at the point that you reach a
threshold that the supply chain cannot
keep up suddenly the shelf is empty
suddenly people understand the value of
the thing and then it's you know the
emptiness spreads across the city as
people hoard what little bit remains and
that's a long-winded explanation for
saying the same thing is true for the
capacity to deal with the dead right
people die at different rates
and the number of bodies produced in any
given month may vary quite a bit but we
don't notice that there is a maximum
capacity at which a city can deal with
the dead until we exceed that capacity
and then we exceed the capacity of the
morgues with refrigerators and suddenly
bodies are lying in the street and so
anyway Guayaquil has revealed that there
is a threshold yeah and it's not just
healthcare it's death care right it's
its body care it's it's the lack of
morgues and ability to transport bodies
that is why we can see what we can know
presumably what's going on in the
hospitals there is awful as well and we
in the US are hearing about what's going
on in our hospitals but we so far did
not have any scenes of horror from the
streets of dead bodies in the streets
that just that proved to be a particular
kind of visceral visual that I at least
didn't hadn't prepared for I didn't see
it coming I think there's another factor
playing in here which is this is a
largely Catholic country and Ecuador is
Ecuador and the prohibition against
cremation amongst Catholics in other
words the Christian need for the body to
remain intact at burial for the purpose
of later resurrection that is getting in
the way I presume of a rational program
of stepping up cremations that might be
dealing with this that's conjecture on
my part but all of the pieces seem to
fit well there also I mean there may be
a supply problem in terms of crematoria
precisely because there has been so
little demand in the past that's true
although I know that the the local
government has announced glass products
yes has announced that it is going to
find a solution to the burial problem
that it is going to bury people
individually and I must say on the one
hand that strikes me as good news that
they're talking about solution making on
the other hand this might not be the
time to adhere to the these traditions
at this level and
you know there are two solutions really
one people could move to cremation and
the the country could you know it's not
too hard to put together a crematorium
that could accommodate these bodies or
the bodies could be buried together and
it strikes me that this comes down to a
question of you know maybe in light of
the situation the Pope might step in and
make an announcement about you know your
God doesn't want you to suffer from
bodies in the street that's not the
intent of these traditions and by saying
something that freed people I mean
people are already burning bodies in the
street okay so these are desperate
people and to the extent that they could
be given some kind of religious license
to bend these traditions for these
terrible circumstances it would make a
great deal of sense well it reminds me a
bit of the quote of a question we got in
the last Super chat with regard to don't
you have concerns possibly about a
fast-tracked not fully safety tested
vaccine and the answer is yes and
desperate times call for desperate
measures sometimes right so in this case
you know you're not arguing I know
you're not arguing were neither of us is
arguing that there is not value in a
long-standing tradition to have a way of
dealing with a body after death such
that you can go such that you know for
sure that the person that you love has
died and that you have a way of visiting
them and informing them in the future of
whatever it is you need to inform them
right and you know not all cultures do
this but many many cultures every every
culture I believe has some kind of death
ritual and a vast majority of cultures
that are known in on this planet have
some kind of way of interacting with
effectively the spirit of the body
afterwards so in this case this is not
to say what the hell why are they so
focused on wanting to bury their bodies
of their loved ones individually we can
understand why that is useful and
helpful and and has been adaptive but in
this case it may actually cause more
kinks in the system and may cause more
of a log jam which which there's simply
no opportunity to get out of there's no
opportunity and the situation that we're
facing a global pandemic spreading at
this rate this is novel so whatever we
can say the traditions that stretch back
thousands of years are not equipped for
the modern world and it's time to begin
to alter the rules so that you know
we're gonna traumatize people to an
extreme extent the you know bodies in
the street is a that's a very dramatic
thing to have children encountering for
example I saw one film of you know a
body that had been there six days and a
line to get in the pharmacy that went
effectively right by it and you know
this is just so devastating but one of
the other things I saw in many of these
videos is that people in Guayaquil are
wearing masks
that you and I can't buy at any price
now that tells you this this also raises
questions about why is it that in this
country masks were not stored in great
numbers for this contingency they're
obviously very inexpensive relative to
the cost of not having them and the
thing I really am having a hard time
wrapping my mind around is that we
cannot bootstrap a mechanism to produce
them rapidly we should be able should be
able to produce those things on a dime
and frankly the country that you and I
grew up in could have our country has
now you know become so heavily based
around a service economy in which all of
the products are manufactured elsewhere
that we have made ourselves extremely
vulnerable and anyway we when we get out
of this whatever that looks like one of
the things that we should be thinking
about is how this could have been worse
what we could have done that would have
made it vastly better and not having
everything driven by a concern with
economic efficiency to the point that
every supply chain is you know is a
coefficient away from breakdown such
that it can all happen simultaneously
yeah with a read of masks anecdotally I
will say I was just at the grocery store
shopping for our younger son's birthday
tomorrow and for the first time it had
been about a week since I'd been at the
market
and still not a majority of people in
masks but a significant fraction a
significant minority whereas in the past
three or four weeks I've been the only
or maybe one of two people in the entire
store and now there are about half of
the employees and a significant minority
of the other patrons they were masked of
some and in some way so that that is
interesting that that is finally
spreading I agree in fact I was at a
hardware store yesterday sourcing a
necessary plumbing part and one of the
employees recognized me because
apparently I had become you know the
Bandit who haunted the hardware store as
a result of the bandana and he some
coming in my bandana and he's like
you're back um so anyway yes I am now
seeing people wearing masks I saw
somebody wearing a full-face one of
these masks like welders
it wasn't dark but it you know it was
one of these things that covers the
whole face so anyway people are now
beginning to innovate which is good but
nonetheless the fact that we have no
capacity to manufacture these things on
a dime is amazing yeah you have more
that you want to say about guajillo
should we move into this question of how
we how we assess the information we're
getting which is which is related which
is related well why don't we go there
yeah suck I don't we don't have the
screen visible you want it can you show
that tweet that we were talking about
from the sky yeah yo it says that it's
the link that says yo yo posted the
first video
okay so we do not have the screen
visible I'm gonna trust that you're
gonna get it done Thank You kiddo so
really one of one of the things that
this this pandemic and societal response
to it has revealed is how and not just
how poor it is you want to keep it up
okay
not just how poor information is but how
unprepared
most people are including the people who
are delivering us the information to
assess the quality of information so
almost no one seems to be sort of in
real-time thinking huh well let's see
it's health workers for whom these masks
are generally made but we're being told
that they have no efficacy how could
that possibly be true right like this is
the obvious one right when you know the
WHO and the World Health Organization
and the Surgeon General are telling us
things that are patently the opposite of
what of what these masks are for in the
first place so so this is this is on
Twitter this is posted by this it's an
anonymous account but this is a person
with whom both Brett and I have
interacted over a couple of years and I
trust that this is a real person who has
proven himself to be I think it Peruvian
born and raised and also someone with a
deep understanding of evolutionary
biology is how we sort of end up in each
other's spheres on Twitter and so he
posted this this video which is the one
that Brett was referring to and I saw it
last night oh holy hell this is really
bad what you know do you I just
responded in line and said do you have
anything else do you have any other
services or information
and pretty quickly someone else not him
posted this LA Times article and I've
since seen a very good article in the
Miami Herald you know so we've got these
multiple points now that are effectively
verifying you know the LA Times the
Miami Herald our big masthead
purrs and not that they can't be wrong
obviously all these big papers have been
wrong sometimes but big papers with a
lot of depth their research teams and
reputations to uphold are unlikely to be
totally wrong right about about this the
shared structure will information about
factual information so that doesn't mean
though that necessarily all aspects of
this video for instance are true and
someone in fact responded in line to
this tweet by saying you know what I saw
part of this video a few days ago and it
was tagged as being in Spain and so you
know don't don't believe what you see
and yo-yo responded to this by saying
mmm look at the architecture listen to
the accents this is Latin America it's
not Spain now as soon as he said that I
thought yep that's right and you know my
our Spanish is terrible by comparison to
Susy on native Spanish speaker who grew
up in in South America but that claim
right there told me okay yes this is
this is almost certainly coming out of
where it claims to be coming out of it
now we've got these independent these
these different data points two articles
both with first-person accounts start
the same first-person accounts this is
all feeling like like it's real and this
is part of how we are needing to assess
our information
bit by bit so you can you can take it
down now thanks Gil so let me just go
through a couple of other pieces of
information that we've gotten over the
last couple of weeks
just as the schools were closing down
here in Portland we'd already been
quarantine and you know close to
quarantine for a bit I read an account
of a hospital in Seattle that was
already under such duress
they were so slammed that they weren't
giving ventilators to anyone who either
had any underlying conditions or had a
BMI over 25 or was over 40 years of age
that's shocking and it's totally untrue
as it turns out it's completely not true
but at the point I saw this I had no way
to verify it there was there was just as
one claim
and I probably stupidly mentioned it at
the dinner table and we talked about it
with with our kids with our you know 13
or 15 year old boys and I'm sure that
didn't help the the level of fear and
concern that you know we were all
experiencing why did anyone spread that
why why is someone fear-mongering right
now there's plenty of legitimate fear to
go around it's a it's a totally awful
thing to be doing it's you know at least
borderline sociopathic if not full-on
sociopath you do that by comparison
there is can you put up the letter from
f scott Fitzgerald Zach compare this to
the equally false letter from F scott
Fitzgerald written during the Spanish
flu there's been going around also
completely false this is not written by
F scott Fitzgerald 102 years ago this
was written by someone a couple weeks
ago but it's charming and it has this
literary giant writing about something
that is so like what we are going
through right now that we can we can be
heartened by we can take hope he takes a
dig at Hemingway there's a reference to
the need to stockpile various kinds of
alcohols and it just it it feels like it
gives hope it's it's false and the
author of the letter has talked about it
and you know there was no ill intent and
in fact I think it's other than people
being a little embarrassed if they
shared it thinking it was true I think
it actually does does a service to
humanity ultimately so there's there's
these at least these two different kinds
of misinformation going around and then
just one more example that I wanted to
mention and here zach is this the
screenshot it at the top of the second
page I gave you the screenshotted
article that was posted then removed
from the site of a scientific journal so
this this again was a tweet that I would
not have seen but for the fact that
someone in respond replying to it tagged
me and said what do you what do you
think of this and it argues it's yes so
if you can go into the screenshots
themselves let's so this is presumably
and just hold off for a second sacked
this is the first page of the preprint
that was supposedly up on this
scientific site until was taken down
next page this is the first full page of
text next page and then it's a very
short article but it's got a whole list
of references and it argues for
something we were talking about our last
livestream which is this sort of you
know it's not incidental that this
happened in Wuhan but that doesn't mean
that it was an intentional bioweapon it
could have escaped from a lab that was
doing legitimate work and viruses and
that's what this paper is is claiming
but there's something about this paper
that doesn't ring true to me and you
know the idea that it went up and then
it was pulled why was it full I don't
know the formatting is really
unstandardized people and weird it's
like it's it reads like what a native
English speaker would imagine a native
Chinese speaker would sound like as they
translate themselves into English it
doesn't sound quite right to me now and
I may be wrong like maybe this is a
legit paper that really was pulled and
here these these found it and it's a
piece of information that allows us to
you know to really think carefully about
whether or not this is an escaped virus
but regardless regardless of whether or
not this paper is legit or not it has
all these references at the bottom which
are legit and so you can use that to
pursue more information and so one more
thing before I stop with this the
references in the paper include
something that was referenced in our
super chat which is this one more link
here Zack the meta cherry at all 2015
paper and that's all I have written here
so I'm gonna have to look at the screen
it was I'm getting a signal dad I'm not
sure what the signals mean great that's
too far away for me to see though so
this is this is an article from five
years ago as a totally legitimate
article from five years ago
saying look there's there's a real
problem with coronaviruses that are
probably latent in bats and we need to
be thinking more about what the risks
are so this we've seen this from a
number of places now this is this was a
real risk so the the moral there is I
don't know if this 2020 paper that that
supposedly got pulled down from a site a
couple months ago did or did not exist
was created for the purposes of I don't
know what but it has a legitimate list
of references which are actual real
papers that exist in the scientific
literature so how are we assessing
information right now you have to follow
a lot of different threads and often do
backup for yourself alright this raises
two issues one of which I realize is a
correction I wanted to deliver that we
missed up top okay we said in a earlier
live stream that it was likely that
something like the hunting of deer in
North America yes was safe
several people responded to us reminding
us of wasting disease which is a prion
disease that is now ravaging the deer
population and prion diseases are very
interesting these are transmissible
communicable diseases that do not have a
DNA or RNA component they are basically
a miss folding of a protein that
triggers the miss folding of other like
proteins and that is the cause or prion
diseases are the cause of of mad cow
disease and kuru so these are prior
examples so anyway it may indeed be very
dangerous yeah at the moment to be
eating deer or certain parts of deer and
so our our sense that deer we're
probably safe is is off enough that that
bears mentioning here but when we were
talking about this you predicted to me
you hypothesize that the fact that deer
have now become dangerous to eat is
almost certainly going to be the result
of something that humans have done
the relationship between humans and deer
that it has not been dangerous for
humans to hunt and eat deer for the mmm
call it 18 thousand years or so that
humans have indeed been hunting deer and
eating them in North America yep
okay um the second thing I wanted to
address has to do with the fact so you
were talking about the evaluation of
sources yeah and that is basically you
know is the paper real does it say what
is being claimed about it there's a
deeper problem which has to do with the
quality of data and we've talked about
this a number of times but one of the
things that is causing this situation to
be far worse than it otherwise would be
is that we can't actually say for sure
what has taken place because the data
itself is so low-quality it's in many
ways extremely noisy but worse than that
it contains systematic biases that may
come from the fact that different
countries report things differently
record them differently that the
political interests of leaders and
countries that they represent may cause
them to bias the data in one way or
another which is blinding us to what is
actually taking place and I raised this
because many of you will have heard an
important story where an admiral who had
been told to keep his aircraft carrier
at sea docked in Guam chastising his
superiors now he did this in a letter
that I believe was supposed to be
private and it was then leaked and he
has now been relieved of duty but I
wanted to make the following very
difficult and uncomfortable point I
can't say one way or the other what the
situation on an aircraft carrier is and
what the wisdom of keeping it at sea
would have been I'm sympathetic to what
I read in this letter that sailors were
being put in grave danger for reasons
that might make sense during wartime but
didn't make sense during peacetime
that said the point at which that
aircraft carrier docked in Guam and
started offloading
the crew was a lost opportunity of
immense proportions at the very least
that crew should have been thoroughly
documented samples of their blood should
have been taken as they left the ship
before they interacted with anybody even
if the tests don't exist now there are
ways to preserve blood so that you
should be able to do retroactively both
antigen both molecular testing for
current infection and serology testing
for past infection yeah in fact all
three tests could be done on blood that
had been stored even if the tests aren't
available at the moment also very likely
people should have been asked to
document their everything they could
remember about who they had interacted
with what rooms they had been in the
data would surely be flawed but if it
was noisy rather than biased in any
given direction this would give us some
ability to assess how the disease had
moved through the hip and indeed there
was something more than a hundred
sailors were sick with kovat 19 at the
point of docking so that information the
idea that there had been an isolated
population that had been infected with
kovat 19 and it was circulating on the
ship provided a you know something very
close to a natural experiment and I'm
not suggesting anybody needed to be left
in danger in order to preserve it but at
the point that that isolation was broken
and you know it's an aircraft carrier
maybe helicopters had gone to and from
our airplanes could have so maybe it
wasn't perfectly isolated but it's
probably as close as we would as close
an example as we would have available to
us and the opportunity that was lost at
the point that it docked and they just
started going ashore is potentially a
mess ya know it's it's it's a tremendous
loss and this distinction that you've
made that I think we've made here before
but it bears repeating over and over and
over again that okay the data wouldn't
be perfect data are never perfect but
the data wouldn't be clean but the error
in them would be would beat noise would
be random error whereas the error in the
data for instance around Koba 19 cases
across almost every country with the
possible exception of Iceland I think
they may have done total a hundred
percent testing I'm not sure about that
is systematic error there is systematic
under counting of cases in every single
country and there's no you can't swamp
you can't just take more and more and
more data and get rid of systematic
error that's not the way systematic
error works random error can be fixed
with more data collection but systematic
error cannot yeah it's a really vital
point that we've taught in our classes
many times but it has a potentially life
and death implication in this
circumstance all right well maybe we
should move to super chattered you well
I have one more topic I wanted to raise
it's not specifically kovat related
although I can't help but see it as
connected there are other things going
about there's some of them yes did you
catch Whoopi Goldberg taking Bernie
Sanders to task and suggesting that he
needed to step out of the Democratic
race I didn't is there there's a
presidential election going on there is
a presidential election in which we will
elect a president so that is happening
AB ulis but anyway you did not catch
this no so for those of you who didn't
see it Whoopi Goldberg and was
interviewing Bernie Sanders and
essentially argued that he had a
patriotic duty to step out of the
presidential race you have any thoughts
yeah I don't care to voice not really
not all right well I want to say I was
stunned by this I actually think she's
half right I think he needs to step out
of the race but it's the wrong he Joe
Biden needs to step out of the race
because obviously you know the man is
losing his marbles and in the era of
kovat 19 the idea that we would elect
somebody who has I think clearly a
condition that is known to get only
worse and not better and would
potentially put him in charge of this
crisis as it continues or the next
crisis that emerges this is an insane
mistake well if I may quote you when we
when we were talking
month and two months and three months
ago about Biden and what a vote for
Biden would mean not that either of us
were imagining voting for Biden what you
said was given that he seems
increasingly incompetent and he wasn't
always but given that he seems
increasingly incompetent but for Biden
is a vote for party rule this this was
your language and I think that's right
and not even just party rule this is a
vote for DNC rule a completely non
transparent non elected entity that has
demonstrated time and time again it's
wanton disregard for the well-being of
the American people and indeed the world
this entity is not fit to rule and the
idea that it is now going to cause the
Democratic Party to rally around Joe
Biden who I wouldn't be voting for Joe
Biden even if he was fully in possession
of his faculties but in his current
state they've actually delivered the one
thing they could deliver that in my
opinion would make an argument for
Donald Trump viable right the idea that
you would put somebody who's losing his
ability to think in a position where he
would have to manage these crises that
is an argument for Donald Trump now I'm
not going to vote for Donald Trump but
why would the Democratic you're also not
going to vote for Joe Biden I won't be
voting for Joe Biden I can't vote for
Joe Biden it is unpatriotic I didn't
like Joe Biden to begin with but it is
unpatriotic to vote for somebody who
cannot possibly be caused to manage a
crisis because he doesn't have the
capacity to do it so I will say we have
been thanked a few times in various
comments for not going political with
these livestreams you have totally
broken that at this point I don't think
I have hold on hold on I will say that
2016 just laid bare what the DNC was
capable of and the fact that they don't
appear to have learned anything in 2020
is extraordinary yes let me say in my
defense I do not view what I have said
here as the least bit political I view
it as the opposite of political this is
my own patriotism coming out and my
patriotism says that well above party is
my duty to my country and my duty to my
country forces me to challenge the idea
of putting somebody who is losing his
ability to think in a position to manage
crises that we all need it to be managed
my patriotism to the US and to the world
requires me to point out that we have
arrived at a place where these parties
cannot be trusted and at some level I
think mutiny is the only option if this
is the direction they insist on going do
you want me to follow that up by asking
what you mean by mutiny or should we go
to super chat no I didn't meet me is
self-explanatory okay you can talk about
what various mutinies might be available
to us at some other time maybe next time
yeah all right all right so super chat
all right our single people so this is
our single people living alone more or
less at risk our single people living in
we knew it would seem that single people
living alone to the extent that they are
self isolating they control more of the
variables in their environment all right
then yeah um anytime you anytime someone
whom you live with walks in the door and
you don't know fully where they've
better health careful they've been you
are being exposed to risk that you can't
control so I think in general single
people living alone are less at risk at
least one caveat being if someone were
to become sick suddenly and not have an
ability to get help that is that is a
concern of course that is a concern and
you know there's also this looming
question about psychological well-being
yeah and I have the sense that this is
still early days that the isolation does
not show signs of becoming less
necessary at the moment
and therefore it may last quite a bit
longer but you know thank goodness for
the internet and what it allows us to do
in these cases where we have to be
physically isolated how marvelous is it
that there is a way that we can actually
be the next best thing to right in front
of other people and having these social
gatherings without the danger in fact I
know my parents have initiated a
tradition amongst their friend group
where they meet every night and they
have a cocktail hour where everybody is
at home and that is one example and I've
and no one has to drive afterwards no
one has to drive that's true yeah so
that's great we also know somebody
pretty well who has put together a
virtual piano bar anyway we will say
more about that later but you know
crises are terrible but they often
reveal depths of character and I'm
watching a number of people innovate
things both social and practical and it
it does restore one's faith in humanity
among other things I would say for
single people as for people living with
others though getting getting out into
nature if you possibly can will be
helpful for the psychological effects as
well
if woth next question if water is
transparent why do things get darker
when they get wet that is a very good
question yet I have a guess and I
reserve the right to start next live
stream with the correction okay but
there is a lot to be said for thinking
about reflectivity and for example I
used to torture my classes with the
question if whiteness is the reflection
of all colors of light and be a social
justice story no no I'm not talking
about that kind of way I'm talking about
the color white I guess whiteness is the
reflection of all colors of light and
mirrors reflect all
of light why aren't mirrors white so
anyway it's gap turns out to be a an
interesting little puzzle but I think
this has something to do it to to do
with it too
so I guess one one thing I was looking
at you and your shirt when I read the as
I was thinking about the question and I
was thinking well the shirt make it
darker because it is now denser and it
is absent
I think it's going to have to do with
the fact that the light is bouncing off
the surface of the water in concentrated
places which is then denying the light
to other places so if you imagine the
ripples on the surface of the water so
it effectively core gates the surface
rather than having it be a smooth
reflective sheen again let me do reserve
some time in the next livestream to walk
this back when that turns out not to be
the answer but yes I think that the
concentration of light if you think
about a curved water surface a ripple
the curved water surface is going to
send the light depending upon where the
light is coming from it is going to
angle of incidence equals angle of
reflection and so the light will end up
as a stripe of light and if you imagine
like a brick and you pour water on and
it gets darker it gets darker but you
will see places that have the light
reflecting off them so I think it's
going to be same number of photons but
they're concentrated in some places and
denied to others okay
why I got asked that I have no idea
because they can't because they can't do
you think viruses co-evolved with
species in order to avoid certain
species to mix or predate on one another
and can real it relate that to the
advantage of being an omnivorous species
[Music]
not sure what this means don't know what
it means neither of us can parse it it
feels like there's a misunderstanding
you have something evolutionary in there
but I can't I at least can't parse it
enough to figure out what I you know
here's where here's where this is not
like the classroom or the campfire where
if we could I'll bet if we could
ask you directly and have a little back
and forth we could figure out what the
question was and address it but I just
can't make sense of it as it is yep all
right hi Brett good to see you
how will the Omega principle drive human
responses to Co vat19 and the associated
loss of life and economic fallout in 30
seconds well the Omega principle
we needed an analogy for the
relationship between genes and culture
that expressed the same obligate nature
that one finds in the relationship
between the diameter and the
circumference of a circle which we call
pi so my claim is that culture evolves
more rapidly than genes that's
uncontroversial anybody who understands
cultural evolution would agree but that
culture is inherently subordinate to the
objectives of the genes in other words
culture is not as Dawkins presented meme
theory in The Selfish Gene it is not an
independent new evolving realm it is a
subordinate realm in which the culture
does the genes bidding subordinate and
specifically downstream yeah it's
subordinate because it's downstream the
genes are in a position to shut down
culture and anyway I'm not defending
this I don't like it one bit I would
much prefer that our culture was
independent of our genes and I've
advocated that we've essentially free
ourselves from the obligation to pass
our genes into the future in the
obsessive way that our genomes would
have us do it because I think it's
pointless and results in a great deal of
tragedy but nonetheless that's the Omega
principle how do I think the Omega
principle will drive the human response
to covert 19 and The Associated loss of
life and economic fallout well there's
one way in which it will automatically
happen to the extent that humanity is a
long-lived
phenomenon that we continue deeply into
the future we will face more of these
crises and those of us who come up with
coherent cultural responses will have an
advantage in doing so and those cultural
responses will be passed down by the
populations that have that have deployed
them now there is a a frightening
possibility built into that question
which is we do not want a situation in
which we figure out how to deal with
kovin 19 and we deploy it and deny it to
our aunt Agatha's what we would like is
to banish something like
in nineteen by getting the world to
collaborate in a way that our individual
populations might might prefer we didn't
we're at a genetic level they would be
better off if we didn't in other words
let your enemies suffer from kovat
nineteen while you protect yourself as
an obvious if diabolical strategy so I
very much hope we should be viewing this
as a planetary threat not a cultural
threat we should be viewing it as a
planetary threat kovat nineteen is the
wake-up call and the question is how can
we restructure the way we interact on
planet earth so that this doesn't happen
to us again and likely worse all right
could you look into or ask colleagues
about this paper uncanny similarity of
unique inserts in the 2019 novel
coronavirus Pike protein to HIV one
gp120 and gag yes I've actually run you
know this before I know that it exists
and I don't know what its meaning is but
I will say yeah is in light of the
correction I delivered at the beginning
of the last live stream it is a very
curious claim that HIV the correction
being the that koban that SARS co2 is
not a retro not a retrovirus HIV is
clearly a retrovirus and the idea that
you would find components of HIV
conspicuously in kovat 19 raises all
kinds of questions now I must say my
guess would be the result is erroneous
or it doesn't mean what we think it
means but who knows I will also say in
learning something about non retrovirus
RNA viruses the third category of them
actually does involve a mechanism for
genetic exchange the flus influenza is
able to exchange components so there's a
kind of analog to exchange components
between virus instances yes now you can
have two different lineages of flu and
they can exchange components which is
why you have this like h1 and one it's
like it's a it's a Lego set that you can
mix and match parts so anyway I don't
think the
that capacity exists between something
like a HIV retrovirus and coronaviruses
but you would have to have something
like that in order for true components
of HIV to show up in a coronavirus
context without human meddling yeah good
next question from the steel man podcast
we get question from steel man podcast
each time I think has anyone applied the
observations of suppossed keys forced
troop to humans that is these are
baboons in Africa that is mapping the
role of tuberculosis ridden meat in
calling the aggressive baboons to the
rural war has played in culling our most
aggressive members fascinating yeah I
wouldn't say that war culls our most
aggressive members I do think it has
been deployed as a kind of culling force
and I've talked about this elsewhere
that basically lineage level selection
results in populations that have reached
a limit to the resources available to
them engage in behaviors that alleviate
those limits from the point of view of
the population in question and one of
them certainly coming up with a reason
to make war on some population that
can't defend itself but for instance
absent the draft the people who who
enroll aren't inherently the most
aggressive they may be more desperate
than the average people who don't enlist
and so it's it's a calling of people who
don't have as much opportunity in
society not necessarily people who are
more aggressive or who start out more
aggressive yes in fact I think our
society neatly separates these things
we're the most aggressive people are the
people who know that they can get away
with it and don't pay the price of
having to personally fight right okay
have their where can i buy your book
Thanks antipode seasons with the
something-something wildlife and
cultures of Madagascar it's out of print
I'm sure it's available places still on
the web our agent is trying to get the
rights back so maybe it'll go back and
to print at some point after our next
book comes out but I imagine it's
available
there somewhere but I unfortunately
don't know exactly where at this point
thank you for asking we had a store of
PPE that's personal protective equipment
I think it's what the acronym stands for
that was depleted during the Obama years
so we're talking about we the the
country here I presume after creating a
pandemic response team why wasn't the
first order of business restocking our
supply of PPE just goes to show even the
best minds in the field can miss the
obvious yeah so I would say yes but I'm
even more disturbed that we don't have a
manufacturing capacity that can be
caused to produce that which is needed
the personal protective equipment is one
thing that one can obviously need but
the list of things one might suddenly
need are indefinitely large and the fact
that these things are all being produced
in one region of the world become a
nation of buyers rather than makers
right and it is an incredible
vulnerability and it's needless the fact
is as the manufacturing capacity of the
US was being offshored it was known it
was actively discussed that this was
dangerous to us as a nation and so I
think those those discussions have been
forgotten but nonetheless people
understood this was dangerous it now
clearly is dangerous let's undo it yeah
and and really so this this one should
be obvious now to most people how many
more of those how many more things have
been allowed to lapse that we actually
need not to lapse that's what we need to
be thinking about thanks for doing these
how confident do you feel that this
crisis will spur national reinvestment
in the sciences on the 5 to 10 year
scale can scientifically leverage this
and how you you start well lost the
question I would say the part of the
problem is that our scientific
institutions are not healthy and this
has been a difficult point for you and
me to make because somehow any issue
that break
down to two sides to the extent you want
to introduce any nuance at all you are
seen to be the enemy so as champions of
science for us to say actually our
scientific institutions aren't healthy
they're not trustworthy and they need to
be fixed is taken as an attack on
science but I mean part of the problem I
think and I think you started here you
implied it is that higher ed is broken
and the easiest target when talking
about what's broken in higher ed is not
the sciences it's obvious to almost
everyone who's outside of the the so
called grievance studies fields that
those fields are ridiculous right the
day that they are doing great damage and
that they have no business being in
higher ed and if you contrast them
simply with the sciences and it's not a
fair contrast because you know where did
the arts show up which are you know
important and necessary as well and the
legitimate humanities and legitimate
social sciences but if it's sciences
versus grievant Studies obviously you're
going to pick Sciences but what if we
you know if we start talking about P
hacking in the replica and the
replication crisis and you know every
end the fact that NSF and NIH are
effectively funding most scientists in
the in the u.s. anyway and so it's new
you aren't actually allowed to ask the
questions you want inherently and you
aren't encouraged particularly to do low
tech research because then your
university doesn't get the 40 to 80
percent overhead from the grants and you
on and on and on and on it's not a
healthy scene so will the science
departments want to make hay out of this
sure and should we have more better
science absolutely a hundred percent how
to turn this how to make the science
healthy and robust and rigorous though
is tough well I don't think it's tough
we're a long way from the system
functioning and most of the people who
inhabit our scientific system wouldn't
know what to do which is part of the
problem so that's that's the tough part
is it's going to take time to repopulate
the system with people who have the
correct instincts you know I mean a lot
of people in the system could switch if
the incentives changed
and they were actually being rewarded
for challenging things rather than for
doing brick in the wall science and
keeping their mouths quiet but and and
being a bit authoritarian as well you
know well I've once once I have a PhD in
a science you're supposed to trust me
because now I'm wearing a lab coat and
I'm a scientist like no that's that's
exactly the opposite of what science is
you're not supposed to trust someone on
the base of their scientist you're
supposed to at some point after they
have demonstrated over and over and over
again that they are doing good science
begin to say okay I will listen to that
person more than I'll listen to this
other person because I've seen that they
actually know what the scientific
process is and that they are constantly
trying to falsify their own most
precious assumptions and that is not
what most scientists do you know in fact
you see this quite clearly over and over
in climate change space right where too
many climate change scientists most of
whom are presumably rigorous and careful
will say we you know don't question the
models you know no one can understand
them but us of course we have to
question the models of course and of
course there will be some bad science
that's coming out of that just like
there's bad science coming out of every
single field there's bad science there's
bad X coming out of every Y that's just
the way of the world I think the thing
people should do is imagine that the
systems that they are capable of
observing you know politics journalism
these sorts of things they can see how
sick they are
now imagine science is just as sick
right that's a really frightening
thought but it for those of us who have
seen it from the inside there's a lot
that is wrong and many of us have been
trying to raise the alarm and just to no
avail so anyway it's a big problem and
it must be addressed because it's making
us incredibly vulnerable yep one hour
okay well we said we were gonna stop at
one hour
let us what do we do I think we should
finish up with the questions we've got
finish the questions we've got okay so
we're gonna go we're gonna finish the
questions we've got we're gonna try to
do it quickly and I'm gonna let you read
so that they never realize I'm Dyslexic
they'll never know they'll never know
that they're right now
the uncanny paper was uninvited and
swiftly retracted from the preprint
server where it appeared this is the
paper I think that I was talking about
that screenshotted article so that's
just a comment oh wait did I know okay
we got that one could an infected person
get long-term negative effects I'm going
to start over could an infected person
get long-term negative effects from
covin 19 even if no noticeable symptoms
were present quite possible we don't
know and it's not just that we don't
know the world does not know the answer
to this so but there is nothing to
suggest that it is impossible that
asymptomatic carrier could not end up
with long-term effects so there are
things we can say yeah one of the things
that is true in general of something
like a respiratory virus is that what
happens is you get infected you get a
lesion some colony of cells that has
been overtaken by the virus that then
starts malfunctioning and spilling out
virus that creates essentially a wound
and that wound is a large part of the
pathology that you are experiencing the
reason you may have a lingering cough
after something is that you've got a lot
of these wounds and it takes a long time
for them to heal so your nerves are
being stimulated badly so it is likely
that the less symptomatic you are the
lasting damage you've sustained but it
is not certain that the damage is zero
that you know there are a lot of places
in your body that aren't innervated for
example because you would have no
ability to act on the information that
they were harmed so you just don't have
nerves there and you wouldn't you
wouldn't necessarily know and this is
just a mechanism we know we don't know
all of the ways that this disease may be
affecting us just like we don't know all
the ways that any of these diseases that
we think we have nailed are affecting us
but if we can continue to beat the same
drum that we've been on from the
beginning of our live stream series the
necessity of good data to being able to
answer a question like this if your
tests aren't high-quality so you can't
even say for sure or who has had the
disease or who hasn't had the disease
and you're not testing enough people so
the same problem exists
and we can't figure out whether you know
an asymptomatic person has lost some of
the capacity of their lungs and has had
their potential lifespan shortened right
we're not long term or you know if if we
got widespread serology testing now we
might know in 40 years whether or not
even those who are asymptomatic carriers
of kovat 19 had on average shortened
lifespans by three years totally making
this up it's not a prediction but
there's no way to know that without a
better data now and be a lot of decades
to pass yep
can the virus survive for significantly
longer if on plastic packaging in a
freezer almost no doubt they're feeling
longer compared to what how do you read
that either not on plastic packaging or
outside the freezer
you think it'll you think it'll survive
for longer in the freezer than outside
of the freezer I mean the thing is
there's a reason that freezers play the
role they do it's just they slow down
every chemical process and they also
kill some things I mean they kill you
know the reason they can kill these
things cells that break apart as a
result of the fact that the water in
them expands but for something as inert
as a virus I can't say the possibility
of it is zero but I think the chances
that you can preserve this virus in the
freezer are high presumably somebody
presumably that as well understood
amongst people who study over 19 and
coronaviruses I mean they all have this
same sort of is it a lipid coat you know
and so yeah I may think to be safe soap
is soap is magic and you know it's also
actually magic is actually chemistry but
washing anything that you're gonna put
in the freezer that's wrapped in plastic
plastic and soap first it cost you
almost nothing it doesn't put the stuff
inside the plastic at risk and then you
know when you pull it out that it's but
it's clear yeah and if the stuff went in
since the Cova 19 epidemic and it hasn't
been washed just treated since before do
you mean no if it went in since yeah oh
it couldn't have virus on it and nobody
washed it before it went in treated a
suspect the
you win a package that arrives at the
door yeah stay safe I think they say no
it's not how we roll safety third as I
was saying to my students right there
you go have you seen the FBI reports
from last September of Chinese nationals
flying into the US with unclaimed vials
containing viral strains no I have not
have you nope no I haven't encountered
it how should the worldwide fragility we
are now witnessing influence our
relationship with new technologies a
gray goo yeah extinction event comes to
mind I love the stream stay safe guys
read more about this in our book when it
comes out there is clearly something
about the precautionary principle that
drives people crazy but those of us who
have thought deeply about the
overwhelming novelty of the technology
that we are encountering know that some
version no sorry sorry interrupt but not
just the overwhelming extent of novelty
but the overwhelming rate at which
novelty is evolving yes the novel rate
of novelty is a lethal threat to
humanity which means that we have to
navigate a path we cannot be paralyzed
by some sort of sense that the
organization of the sand in any
particular vacant lot is you know can't
be altered but the principle I've used
is one of reversibility yes you should
not engage in anything that you could
not reverse if absolutely necessary can
you make a golf course yes but could you
reverse a golf course if you had to yes
so the point is the danger of the golf
course is limited by the fact that if it
had to be undone it could be so this is
a problem there are lots of things that
we can't undo and those are the ones
that we should worry most about the
release of a novel pathogen is something
you can't undo the release of a species
into a habitat where it invades is
something you can't undo so the danger
of these things is immense relative to
things that you think are safe could
turn out not to be and if absolutely
necessary humanity could roll them back
good someone says he can he's willing of
his brain picked
the topic of him having served on two
different US aircraft carriers and as
close he followed the story of the USS
Teddy Roosevelt cool someone else
pitching yang gang awesome Zack the next
one down we got one that we can read but
then there's a next one that we can only
see the bottom part of the line and with
Eric 23a yep there yeah perfect if you
had to be quarantined with Biden or
Trump which would you choose
Oh Biden for sure I think falling into
dementia would be much easier to deal
with and then Trump for me you're gonna
find it more interesting
yeah well it's vastly more interesting
at the moment yeah I really I just feel
like I could have silence with ya that
question is from Melanie no okay big
fans of both of you do either of you use
the term atheist to describe yourself
why or why not
I tend to yes I don't and the reason I
don't is that I am although I don't
believe anything supernatural is going
on in the universe the affirmative
connotations of atheism have become so
aggressive and frankly so illogical with
respect to the obvious truth that
religion long-standing religions that
are expensive must have paid their way
by benefiting the populations that
believed in them that I don't want to be
associated with that crowd I would much
rather navigate a new relationship in
which we deal with the I would argue
major incompatibility between ancient
religious beliefs and our modern
circumstances which they are incapable
of addressing and but also the fact that
these things have historically played
many roles some of them terrible but
also some of them were key ingredients
to human success and until we
acknowledge that as part of a improved
atheism then I'm whatever that third
category is yeah so I guess in answer to
why since there doesn't seem to be a
word
or this this other category that Britt
is searching for and I think you know I
am too and many of us are I still I
still own the term even though I don't
tend to say it to people might say no I
don't I don't have faith I don't believe
hoping for another hand hold and smile
and wanting to support you this is this
is the same person who asked her one
last time I mean sure why not all right
even a kiss
my question was my question was related
to exotic meat consumption okay so this
is Zack if you can scroll up to the last
one from this yeah okay do you think
good thank you
do you think viruses co-evolved with
species in order to avoid certain
species to mix or per date on one
another can we relate that to the
advantage of being on river species and
go back down and he said the question
was related to exotic meat consumption I
can't I still can't quite make sense of
it I'm sorry I get it either
yeah sorry any validity to Susan
Blackmore stream of theory I don't know
Susan Blackmore stream theory do you I
feel like I should and really a little
more would help me remember what it is
we're talking about yep would it be wood
wood mmm would have been most likely for
viruses to get into the future by never
killing the host depends how they've
transmitted but almost always yes yeah
classic evolutionary answer it depends
on the context but usually yes do the
ends justify the means is the road to
hell paved with good and fact intentions
can we ever improve our politics if we
always accept the lesser of two evils
and answer the last question can we ever
improve our politics if we always accept
the lesser of two evils no I don't think
we can no in fact the less I've argued
before that the lesser evil paradigm is
effectively a trap
that has been built to keep us in the
confines established by the parties that
said escaping it has important cost that
should not be taken lightly
I am reasonably sure that the road to
hell is not paved with good intentions
it's paved with Advertiser mmm oh for
sure billboards
yeah probably video billboards yeah
totally yeah
it's certainly lined with a video it's
lined yeah as well yeah what came first
a virus or a cell it's gotta be a cell
got to be a cell got to be a cell given
failures at the state and federal level
did to say anything about central or
devolved power also universal health
care systems such as in Europe seem I
hit harder than the US generally Psalms
New York
do you agree implications I don't think
we know yet it's very hard to imagine
that universal health care systems are
hit harder as a result of them being
universal health care systems it may be
that they're correlated with societies
that have some other vulnerability but
clearly it's all smaller much smaller
than what's going on in the u.s. in
terms of economy yeah but I don't think
we have the data to know this I just
think the fact is if you get covered 19
you're almost certain to be downstream
of somebody who didn't have proper
health care if you're in the US because
so many people have not had access so
anyway it you know that health care is a
very important thing for us to engineer
on the far side of this catastrophe yeah
there were failures at every level here
you know including the fact in the u.s.
of many people not having access to good
health care please assign mods for the
chatter have Zack Maude Zack can't he's
too busy doing all this other stuff but
we're thinking about it we are thinking
there's a there's a downside to mods
which is that you somehow end up taking
responsibility for those you have chosen
and anyway this has been raised to us as
a potential hazard but if if you the
audience will be good about accepting
that we will pick good people we will do
so honorably and hopefully they will do
an excellent job and then then mods are
probably the way to go yeah we can't we
don't see the chat so we don't know how
it's going but
I've heard that it sometimes goes off
the rail says these things do to more do
you have anything do you have any
thoughts on the rat city experiments so
far I don't know what those are
do you think there are negative
implications and mammals with high
population densities seems like this
dovetails with both pandemic and sjw
issues do you know what the rat city
experiments are I do but I do not know
them well enough that I feel like
speculating about them I do think
novelty is dangerous that you know the
rat city experiments if I've got the
right set of experiments in mind
involved the production of basically
colonies that were wrapped colonies
rad-con so anyway yes high population
densities are carry various dangers the
conditions that you set up in the
experiment matter a lot but I don't
think there's there's much to say beyond
that okay and final question is it true
that a mask would worn for 15 minutes or
so becomes useless and protecting the
person due to moisture from breath no
can't imagine it can't not not how it
works I mean one thing this depends even
if even if they were truth to that in
some climate in some other climate
you're gonna reach an equilibrium where
the thing never saturates I would say so
your point here is even if it were true
but a saturated mask wouldn't be
effective yeah
the rate at which would become saturated
would depend on environmental conditions
and therefore there couldn't be a number
like 15 minutes that would be the right
number but we are separately saying as
well that neither of us thinks that
saturation of a mask is going to render
it render it useless and in fact this
result that I said in passing last time
about masks that have have a membrane
the saline membrane in them are actually
far more effective yeah that basically
when the virus hits the salt the
combination of the salt the virus and
the water basically causes the salt
denature isn't quite the right word but
denature the virus yep or bind it up in
any way it binds it yeah so I would just
say there's something wrong with a claim
like that I don't know where you're
hearing that claim but even if the mask
saturated and that caused it not to be
permeable to air and so air was going
around it even forcing a viral particle
to take a circuitous path means it's
likely to land on your cheek rather than
go into your lungs so there's no way
that useless is the right the right
conclusion that's right does it decrease
in its usefulness maybe I think with
something like a bandana you don't have
this because there's such a large
surface area I don't detect the thing
actually filling up with moisture at all
and that was something like a bend down
as you said and I think our first live
stream when you introduced the fact that
you are wearing them you do wash them
every single time after you have gone
out into the world absolutely
I tried go into the world I'd drop it
and I pick up a new one and I have
enough of them that I can keep that
going indefinitely so it's I think I'm
gonna do another little video on these
methods but the bottom line is don't be
helpless and when somebody hands you a
nonsensical claim like the mask becomes
worthless after some number of minutes
think carefully about whether it could
possibly be right and if it sounds like
nonsense it almost certainly is yeah I
think we're there all right we'll be
back next Tuesday so we're gonna be
doing these for now twice a week
Tuesdays and Fridays 3:30 p.m. Pacific
will drop to once a week at some point
surely but so long as we're in lockdown
the plan is to keep on going I would
also say I know that there are
complaints from people in Europe that
these live streams are late enough in
our day that they're already in bed we
would love to move them earlier to avoid
that the problem at the moment is that
our kids are in
school and so in order to have Zach do
the important role that he's playing
here we've had to push it to the end of
the school day for him if you cannot
watch these streams live they are being
made available on the Dark Horse podcast
you can listen to the audio only version
on your favorite podcast app where you
can watch them after the fact on YouTube
and we greatly appreciate it if you do
and if you circulate them hit like and
subscribe all those various things and
we will see you next time all right
be well
you