collective insights as a voyage through
topics and technology is revolutionizing
human wellbeing groundbreaking
approaches for a better world and a
better life await you
welcome to collective insights
collective insights in the work we do at
neuro hacker collective is made possible
from the support of our community and
the sales of our product qualia qualia
is a comprehensive mental enhancement
supplement designed to improve focus
mood and flow State learn more about
qualia at neuro hacker calm and use
coupon code collective insights 24 $20
off your first order hey everyone
welcome to the neuro hacker collective
podcast collective insights my name is
Daniel here with Jordan Greenhalgh today
this is a particularly fun and exciting
interview for me because Jordan happens
to be the co-founder of neuro hacker
collective so we've been working
together on this for some time now and
before neuro hacker that led to us doing
this together he and I were and are
still working on other projects in the
civilization design space future of
governance future of sense-making future
of macroeconomics future of
infrastructure how do we do this
civilization thing better and so I've
been looking forward to actually getting
to do this interview for a long time
he's delighted to do it now just very
short background on Jordans we have some
reference much of the technology that we
all experience every day in terms of
streaming video streaming audio Jordan
played a major role in that being
available he multiple tech entrepreneur
in the decentralization of centralized
industry space so he was on the founding
team of mp3.com it was one of the first
plays to decentralize kind of the music
industry and then last business venture
was a he was the founder of DivX which
was the first company that really
decentralized and a lot of what
Hollywood and media were doing by making
video streaming and so now we have
YouTube and Vimeo based on that first
move in the space and then after
realizing that decentralizing industries
with tech wasn't enough to actually
build better systems by itself he kind
of retired when the Santa Fe Institute
join the team there became a part of the
Board of Trustees and spent a number of
years studying complex systems already
had a strong background in history and
law and sci-fi and futurism philosophy
and it started really thinking about how
do we build a viable future complex
systems started a project there called
game B which is if game a of current
civilization model is end of life what
does game d look like and that's when he
and I met and started working in that
space and so then when we started neural
hacker I was actually delightedly
surprised it was something he wanted to
get into because he hadn't been working
in the medicine biotech space so I think
we'll start there but first Jordan
thanks for being on the podcast
yeah thanks Dana it's fun it's uh it was
amusing coming into the office and
knowing that you and I who actually been
a lot of time talking to each other and
out talking to each other publicly in
this vehicle yeah and you're sitting in
the seat that I'm normally sitting in
when recording these there's a sign
behind us okay so why did you why were
you interested in getting involved with
something that's working in the health
wellness neuropsych medicine space at
all because it's different enough than
things like information tech why was why
does that seem like a meaningful thing
okay so you you mentioned the notion and
the distinction between game a and game
B and I had spent a substantial amount
of time taking a look at both of these
things kind of from the point of view of
game design and incentive structures as
you mentioned decentralized versus
centralized technology and how that
changes people's behaviors and attitudes
and decisions and capabilities but what
became increasingly clear was that
whether you're playing gaming or game B
you're playing these games with and
hopefully four people and a sizable
amount of what actually happens in the
game is a consequence of the people
who
our playing and the for example the
level of well-being their level of
capacity are they suffering are they in
pain are they sick are they limited by
particular kinds of beliefs framework
for ideas and so and then as it turns
out game a is in many ways
simultaneously designed to not have that
much dependence on the well-being
capacity of discrete individual humans
it's you know the bureaucracy it's a fit
into this particular Square and all the
rest of you can go away and as long as
you could do your job okay it works
alright we're it's game be as it turns
out is substantially more dependent on
what we've called sovereignty the
sovereignty of the individuals who are
playing the game and then just kind of
go one more step I think largely as a
consequence if the fact that game a
doesn't care that much
I thought the well-being of individual
human beings were part of it it doesn't
need them to be well-rounded and capable
it also tends to produce quite
significant limitations and constraints
in human capacity so we end up in a
situation where even if were reasonably
effective in building out a lot of the
other elements of game be say for
example an alternative economic model if
the human beings who are coming out of
game Bay and game a sorry don't have the
ability to play game B for whatever
reason then it's a non-starter so that
was the the impetus for me at least to
begin looking in the space and then of
course that's where you'd spent the
substantial fraction of your life
so you said if the people don't actually
have the well-being and the sovereignty
okay those were kind of key terms to be
able to play a different game and that
in in game a people's ability to be
productive within a narrow niche matters
and that's kind of all the matters their
ability to be a healthy whole sovereign
outside of that narrow niche and since
the narrow niche usually doesn't require
them self assessing what needs done
out of the narrow boundaries we can
actually squish people into kind of
narrow AI is or robots right right and
so this is very different I mean this is
almost like the intersection of
Education and personal development and
health altogether right and well yes yes
I think that's right I think that it's
funny in fact the fact that we've
partitioned those into three different
domains is part of the problem so speak
to the future of that why what's
different than saying the future of
medicine when we say the future of
well-being science okay so for reasons I
think both good and bad for example and
we can do this in education or personal
development medicine has its innate it's
part of the analytical methodology right
so it's taken a whole bunch of stuff and
decided this is not part of medicine and
we just focus on these subdomains so the
you know the health of the physical body
and in particular the lack of named
sickness of the physical body is the
domain under investigation and that's
that's kind of major move number one and
I note by the way that psychiatry for
example is a branch of medicine that
takes into consideration the presence of
certain kinds of named maladies in the
mind but of course it also does it
through the channel of the body as the
primary mechanism and then intriguingly
for reasons that we probably don't have
time to go into these kinds of moves in
game they also tend not only not only
analytically narrowing to very specific
prescribe domains they also tended to
grab particular tools and use those
tools to the exclusion of other tools so
what happens in medicine then is that we
get a combination of a handful of tools
that are diagnostic and a minute of in
nature pharmacology being a primary in
surgery being another primary one that
then what happens is you get this nice
trade-off that to the extent that there
is a named problem in the body a disease
for which these tools work medicine is
check good to go and can generally
actually provide pretty high
Solutions but to the degree to which
there is either a intradomain problem
something that's happening between say
medicine and education or trans domain
problems something that doesn't actually
currently have a domain at all to
subscribe to it or something that has
characteristics that are not
particularly amenable to these tools
then we find ourselves in a situation
where the the approach of contemporary
medicine ends up being limited and
oftentimes even counterproductive and so
you know we can unpack that and create
examples of that sort of thing over and
over
I mean diabetes is a case that medicine
itself has already identified within the
medical tool kit diabetes shows up first
and foremost as something that can be
resolved through the intervention of
insulin and at the medical level that's
actually pretty good solution but what
we see of course is the diabetes is a
complex phenomenon that includes
everything from what kind of choices
individuals make in what kinds of foods
they eat what kinds of health and
fitness regimen sleep regimen what kinds
of other kinds of behaviors that engage
in who the social environment they put
themselves in etc etc etc and all of
these are problems the medicine has
defined as out of scope out of domain
and so then you might kick it up and say
whether the health care industry
noticeably rebranded its the healthcare
industry has endeavored to figure out
how to address the larger combinatorial
of causes associated with diabetes and
it's actually self-conscious of the fact
that it is a rather poor job you know
health behavior change is a thing that's
been around now for decades and is more
less identified in healthcare as just a
hard problem that hasn't been solved
particularly effectively and of course
diabetes is a an easy one but there are
much larger ones that we can actually
grab they're even less amenable to
medicine yet nonetheless are
fundamentally identified as things
around well-being human capacity okay so
I'm fishing here but why is behavior
change so hard when we look at a bigger
picture say we take diabetes why is
behavior change
off of eating too much sugar too many
carbohydrates not enough nutrient filled
food and exercise within our larger
macro systems and not just within
medicine but like everything that's
conditioning that why is that so hard
and a related question of you said we
wouldn't have time to go into it fully
but the medicine ends up narrowing to
just having certain tools right so then
why does it have these tools and not
other tools obviously we're getting into
like economics and you know incentive
and but that's worth speaking to yeah
and then it actually harkens back to
this notion of different games because
at least part of the answer there's many
different aspects to this question but
at least part of the answer is
identified by the name attractor or
basin of Attraction so and I'm actually
gonna shift from medicine for a moment
so we can kind of see the whole
perspective let's take a look at
education so it's you know relatively
well understood that the American
educational system is has challenges and
one of the things that many people who
try to do reforms in education notice is
that they have an experience a little
bit like trying to push a heavy ball up
a hill where they get it's a 3/4 of the
way up but then smoothing that goes the
ball rolls all the way back down hill
and that the reason for that there's
actually a basin of Attraction of a lot
of different kinds of forces for example
in education you have the linkage
between what's called credential ization
let's just say for example you go to
school to get into college you go to
college to get a good degree you get a
good degree which you say you get a good
credential so that you can get a good
job she actually had this binding
between the labor market and the
education market that actually makes it
so the things that you do in education
if they actually show up is not
improving people's job prospects won't
work like though they'll just be eroded
away that the ruling downhill of the
ball in education and we can actually
denta fie other kinds of domains that
reinforce each other in this fashion so
what ends up happening is that in many
ways game a is has evolved over time to
be one gigantic self-reinforcing basin
of Attraction and so past certain minor
limits
if you push really really hard against
something in one sub-domain again no
coming oh my back in medicine you can
made a lot of a lot of traction in
getting people to take insulin but you
know if you're not dealing with things
like say for example the media and
advertising industry that is hitting
everybody's brain constantly saying eat
junk food or the junk food industry that
is modifying the content of food so as
to maximally hijack the way that our
brain interprets what is a good choice
Chris John Harris calls this the
hijacking the evolution window you and I
talked about in terms of hyper normal
stimuli then you're you're screwed right
you end up with a whole bunch of human
beings who are taking insulin but are in
fact you know eating food that's bad for
their bodies and being unable to make
those choices so it's one of these weird
things where you actually have to be
able to grasp the complexity of the
whole problem and then as a single
movement get the entire system begin to
shift varies you know and very suddenly
by the way notice which pieces are
pulling which pieces are pushing modify
here and there until in fact you've
engineered or developed in fact some
sense nudged the system into a new place
then one isn't that a new place that new
place is in fact stable and it'll hold
in that location you're no longer
worried about the ball rolling down the
hill there's actually you know to kind
of loop back why I moved from where I
was into the domain of well-being which
was that I had identified that what we
were actually making really good
progress in places like say blotching in
moving economic systems and in
decentralized media and software and
moving same media systems I have this
wasn't the time aware of anything that
was meaningfully being done in this
intimated well-being
and these things are all connected and
so we actually have to be really
thinking about all of it at once and how
they all fit together if we want to make
this transition from A to B happen okay
so you hit on a really core topic that I
just want to kind of highlight and for
people who haven't thought about this
much it sounds profoundly cynical but it
also is inescapable is
from the business supply side addiction
is profitable so if someone is addicted
to the stuff that I sell I'm gonna sell
more of it than if they have the ability
to say no and not take it often and so
whether we're talking about food if I'm
selling more addictive stuff then people
are gonna eat it more often and if I
make more money by how many times people
buy my thing maximize lifetime revenue
of a customer then I have a financial
incentive to optimize towards maximum
addictiveness and so interestingly right
where I'm gonna figure out how to market
in the most compelling way is because
behavior change actually isn't hard
they're they were pretty good at getting
people to eat the shitty food right
right and then the the fun thing is I
mean the fun terrible thing is then that
actually predisposes them needing the
medicine and the medicine companies also
make more money when you need more
medicine and as the people get sicker
from eating more food that they're
addicted to and then get addicted to
meaning dependent upon the the the
diabetes medicine or the statin or
whatever it is that came from that food
GDP goes up in both cases right yeah I
think there's actually two or there's a
bunch of stuff in there but let me see
if I can tease two things out so someone
is the the fact that because of some of
the kind of the deep characteristics of
gaming which one of my collaborators Jim
had identified as money on money return
and so if you look at game a the the
primary way to win game a is to increase
the rate at which your money is making
more money and I say that because if you
look at the kind of the slope of game a
over the past 50 years or so maybe 80
years what you'll notice is that there's
a gradual and continuous slide from
towards that direction and so let's say
for example to put a very poor exactly
in the beginning the rule might be
something like do the right thing and
then the second rule might be something
like make as much profit
you can't but winds up happening is it
somebody who plays by that rule compared
to somebody who say plays by the rule of
make as much profit as you can
oh and also do the right thing all right
that minor shift of orientation means
that the person who plays with the
second rule is going to actually make
more money and by virtue of doing that
is more likely to be able to say get
more access more power they'll go up the
ladder they'll have more choice making
and of course they'll have more money
with which to make more investments but
it's not a very long step from making as
much profit as you can and try to do the
right thing to make as much profit as
you can and say do it is legal that was
actually a move that move actually
happened and then you got something on
the lines of do it is arguably legal and
then it's not too far to say well do
what you can get away with then maybe do
what you where getting caught is less
expensive than not getting caught or
more than profits you make by virtue of
doing what you're doing and then even to
the point of where the costs of of
bribery corruption greenwashing
manipulation et cetera is less expensive
than the benefits of playing the other
way right and so it's like a it is in
fact a race to the bottom at downward
slope but the problem is that at each
step the underlying intrinsics of what
kinds of behaviors are rewarded in game
a leads to movement down that slope
being actually showing up as a winning
strategy and of course then we end up
with what I think many of us observe
today where a person who runs a
pharmaceutical company who does not in
fact jack up prices to the highest they
can possibly get away with is in fact a
loser
and will end up either being bought out
by somebody who's playing more
aggressively being thrown out by their
shareholders or board directors etc etc
and so this is a it's not a necessary
characteristic of the way the human
beings operate in the world but it turns
out to have been one of the
characteristics of of game a which had
lots of virtues we should be quite clear
like the way the game was designed and
the fact that it ended up winning
in the 20th century should have lots
lots of positives so what we're
observing now is is not the game a was
sort of always a terrible thing rather
that there's certain characteristics of
that style of play that ends up in a bad
place and so now the effort to say okay
is there how do we while we still have a
reasonably safe place to do this in
figure out how to actually transition to
some other kind of game which hopefully
is in fact one that doesn't naturally
end up in a bad place by doing what it
does
ie we engineer the basis of attraction
properly of the whole system dynamics
upfront at least we endeavour to Detroit
at least be mindful of it the thoughtful
of of what are the likely places where
this thing ends up as it gets to
maturity what are the the underlying
characteristics of what winning players
look like for individuals and groups so
that is actually called niche
construction so we wouldn't in fact want
to construct the niche so that as people
in attempt to figure out how to do the
best they can in that niche their
choices their local choices will always
tend to actually an heir to the global
best answer so for anyone who's
listening to the podcast a lot you will
hear that two of the three major areas
that neural hacker
focuses on in hoping to do things in the
health and wellness space working to do
things in health moment space it
couldn't be done in the primary medicine
space right now are one that the
financial incentives in the current
system are wrong and so he was obviously
just speaking to that which is if
someone who is preventing illness ends
up meaning that you don't sell your
product and treating curing illness
quickly means that you can only charge
as much as you have for a short time but
managing the symptoms of illness for a
very long time is very profitable
that's a perverse incentive system if
treating the side effect of a drug that
you give someone involves them having to
buy another drug
also make and it's called an upsell that
is also a problem so we focused on is
there a way that we can actually get out
of the financial incentive trap that
most of medicine research is in and then
also that the epistemology is wrong
meaning it narrows too much let's call
this an Aimable disease and let's find
one synthetic molecule or you know one
surgery that will be able to correct
some symptomatic part of it as opposed
to looking at the more complex set of
dynamics and how can we work with the
complexity that's generating them so
just appreciating that as Jordans
talking about this he's naming some of
the core principles of what neural
hackers endeavoring to do I wanted to
say when you said money on money return
so that brings up the thought of
financial services and people start
mistaking production and extraction as
you know one of the dynamics and
financial services can not meaningfully
increase the production of the types of
goods and services that increase the
quality of life of everyone while still
extracting a lot sure this is one of the
main things that has made blockchain so
exciting to so many people in the last
few years is not just to decentralize
anything but largely to decentralize
financial services for this reason and
so this is an area that you've worked in
a lot and you are also talking about how
do we get the incentive structures right
for things like diabetes I'm curious as
you think about the role that things
like blockchain could have in changing
the financial structures and the
incentive structures in medicine health
wellness education some thoughts to
share on that Wow okay so that's there's
a lot you see there's a handful that I
can put put together that would be
interesting useful in this context so
all right so this there's a couple of
core characteristics of the notion of
finance in general and I think it's
actually interesting to drill down on
that because money isn't actually
anywhere near as obvious or easy as it's
as people kind of think because around
all the time that we think okay well
money as a is an object used to be in
fact a physical object like a coin or
piece of paper that I get for doing
stuff and I give to go have them do do
stuff for me alright so okay it's
prosaic it's simple it's well understood
but what's really interesting to think
about is that is that you know money
represents the ability of human beings
to abstract it represents the ability to
take something which is a sign of
something and replace it for the thing
itself
alright so instead of having a an apple
what I can do is I can have I don't know
apples cost his day to two dollars and
then that is two dollars represents an
abstraction the potential for me to get
an apple if and when I wanted every
course is extraordinarily powerful which
is what finance is about but the problem
is is that you've now got this
interesting gap you've got the gap
between the thing itself the value and
the indicator the sign of the value and
what happens is that it's not long
before somebody realizes that you can
actually make this show up like crazy
without having any meaningful impact on
this and that is what I would just
characterize financial services as being
at the insight that if you're attempting
to optimize for money completely
regardless of the degree to which the
money is related at all to an
optimization of value I should point out
by the way that there's a a meaningful
amount of tomfoolery in economics where
economics tells a story that there is
something kind of a revocable about
money and value that they are directly
and always connected and I think it's
important to recognize that that's not
the case so they can be and so this is
why money is useful very useful but they
also can be separated of course we see
this for example just to the simple
notion of debasing of currency if I can
counterfeit a bunch of money I have
generated lots and lots and lots of the
sign but I haven't generated the value
and I think in many ways it ends up
happening is the financial services ends
up showing a whole outlaw showing up a
whole lot like counterfeiting now they
produce lots and lots of things that
generate lots of valid signs lots of
money but in fact little or no value
in spite of the the protestations the
economic profession now
another piece and I mmm tripe stew to go
to pieces and they shift Dubois changes
to create the kind of parallax effect is
that another thing that happens with
money is that in money is an allocation
that's the kinds of choice making that
we're investing in in our economy so we
should just say that every dollar you
have is in many ways a vote in what the
economy does all right so if I really
really want to have nothing but red
Ferraris and you really want to have
nothing but say corn and I have all the
money then the economy is going to
produce red Ferraris and not corn and so
what ends up happening is is that the
way that finance allocates money also it
shows up as a way that our society
allocates choice making at least in the
economic domain and different there's no
specific reason to believe that the
people who are most capable of playing
the game of finance are also the most
capable of making good choices in what
the economy should be produced and in
fact there's very good reason to believe
that's not the case now shifting over to
blockchain think about what what those
two characteristics that I just
articulated show up and blockchain and
then we'll kind of move to the third
which is I think the most important on
the one hand because blockchain is the
kind of thing that actually doesn't make
a whole lot of sense to people who
haven't done things like study
cryptography or have a deep deep sense
of technology and technology trends the
people who showed up as being the
earliest winners in the blockchain space
are a different population than the
people who have been winning the finance
game for the last 80 years so now of
course the finance folks are scrambling
like crazy to figure out how to
reestablish their dominance in the
blockchain space but at least right now
even though blockchain is unfortunately
rather characterized by concentrated
wealth it's also characterized by
concentrated wealth from the hands of a
different set of choice majors who at
least so far have a higher degree of
capacity to perceive real problems and
compose real solutions to put it a
little bit prejudicially these are the
engineers from the movie Apollo 13 who
know to solve problems and that's
actually a much better place to put your
choice making than in the hands of
people who've optimized for manipulating
and counterfeiting money and then
secondarily there's a big difference
between money as we currently understand
it and the the way that the blockchain
shows up that I actually remember
thinking way back when it was first
starting there was a quote that I read
about from a Roman Emperor who was
telling his son why was okay for the
emperor to take taxes from the the the
the people who did sanitation sewage and
he said gold hath no smell meaning
there's no choice ability to it there's
not any real direct connection between
fiat currency and records and of course
what it does is it creates a great niche
for for exploiting that fact
all right so if person a shows up with a
million dollars in their pocket and
person B shows up with a hundred
thousand dollars in their pocket person
a gets a much more power in the economy
than person B in spite of the fact that
person a maybe for example or criminal
alright somebody who stole that money
you don't really know it has no smell
you has no village of trace where as
blockchain in fact is all about the
durable records you know it is in fact
the whole point is that is a ledger
decentralized ledger that is as
resilient as we can currently conceived
against modifications of the records
themselves and this I think is both true
to technical level added an ethos level
but there's something about the ethos of
the blockchain community that thinks
about keeping good records as being
important oh by the way to be sure a
large number of folks in the blockchain
community also very very much want to be
off and particularly the government's
radar but I think that's actually
subsidiary to the underlying foundation
of the technology that it actually does
enable us to have more I think Dan
Jeffery is actually a really wonderful
blog post about the the blockchain and
as being the emergence of the third
major new immersion to the kind of
which it calls triple ledger accounting
and that's actually worth deeply deeply
looking into so so then you get to the
last piece which is frankly I think
right now still very esoteric but I
think worth trying to scratch the
surface on which has to do with the way
that the blockchain enables us to use
money as a variable in a software system
s code and what that does is allow us to
actually be thoughtful about designing
motivational and by the way game
theoretic choice making infrastructure
so as to solve this problem we talked
about earlier the problem how do you
actually move high variable complex
systems from one basin of Attraction
into another basin retraction and we can
actually do this right now with a very
simple example which is Bitcoin itself
right as the first major instantiation
of blockchain Bitcoin was able to solve
a problem that up until that point had
been completely unsolved so you can
imagine for example let's say PayPal
PayPal was a pretty successful company
and it had if you look at the roster of
folks were associate with PayPal it mean
there may not be a better pedigree I
mean in terms of the scope of what
PayPal endeavoured to do in their case
was to create a new form of money or
digital money it still has not yet done
anything other than what you can
consider to be failed so PayPal had some
of the best people civilization could
muster at a pretty good timing and
failed whereas as Bitcoin more or less
designed by say three or four people in
its original state seems to have
succeeded there is actually an
accelerating community of people who are
using this thing and constantly solving
problems and fixing and building it out
and the way they did that was my
understanding that they were actually
dealing with a complex system and so
they designed a technical architecture
that had a motivational infrastructure
so that individuals coming from wherever
they came from would look at it choose
as individuals to make choices that were
in their best interests because
the way the system was designed those
individual local choices would always
aggregate to something that is in the
global interests of the system itself
and I mean we can double click on that
try to get some more detail but I think
now's a good time to pause but the point
is that that's an example of how this
new kind of fiscal software I think some
the folks of the beer coming up
socio-technical platforms actually
enables us to crack the code on
designing complex systems to actually be
able to move things out of basins of
attraction into hopefully higher levels
of overall capacity right so with
blockchain 2 of the really interesting
things are the uncorruptible or harder
to corrupt ledger but then also the
crypto economics and those are two
different things the crypto economics is
the ability to have a more nuanced and
complex incentive structure because
rather than just dollars that are going
to be associated kind of the same across
the whole market as a decentralized
incentive you can have different types
of tokens for different types of things
and etc so if we relate this back to say
some of the issues we were looking at
with the financial incentive that you
know went down the game theoretic Hill
that you were talking about that started
with do good things and be profitable to
be profitable and maybe do good things
to get away with it how could this type
of crypto economic dynamic play out in
say Pharma or in hospitals or in citizen
science or anything like that in a way
that could actually change the
motivational dynamics that would lead to
better healthcare right so as as you
know there was an announcement I think
today it may have been yesterday where
some hospitals are proposing that they
may begin the process of endeavor decree
an alternative scientific and economic
model for producing pharmaceuticals and
this is a response to the fact that
pharmaceuticals are
Oh too expensive so and I think actually
the technology the blockchain technology
and the concept of a decentralized
autonomous organization is in fact
exactly the right solution to this
problem and in fact if I configure it
with a message just the hospitals are
doing it this would maybe be the best
thing they could possibly do so first I
mean shift a little bit to the software
domain and then come back to the pharma
domain because I know the software
domain better but it's I think it's a
direct mapping so one of the things for
example that you'll see in one of the
blockchain core blockchain
infrastructure players called etherium
is that in etherium what they've
actually created their own private
software language called solidity it's
kind of like JavaScript or C or C++
meaning it's a language that software
guys can write in and what they write
will show up as something that the
etherium system knows how to understand
and can do things with now all code
written in etherium is in some sense
intrinsically open source meaning that
if I write a very powerful object in
aetherium you can't actually write
something which calls that object for
free it's just there now of course I can
make it not for free but the point is
that it's in the system so it ends up
happening is you get this process where
as more and more core infrastructure is
built and made available the next layer
of innovators don't need to reinvent the
wheel they don't need to rebuild that
core infrastructure to get to work on
top of that core infrastructure in fact
where the primary problem is is finding
the tools that you need out of this
giant increasingly large pool of tools
to be able to profile the problem that
you want to solve but this is very Rama
flying right the idea of standing on the
shoulders of giants begins to happen
very quickly
when it's all sitting there as software
all sitting in a blockchain registry
which means that all the records are
well kept and the path of who did what
is actually fully traceable so you know
I who did this so I could just find it
it's just literally living there in the
blockchain because that's what the
blockchain does and the case of
aetherium you can actually write
contracts in software like pieces of
software that the process if-then
statements that can trade money back and
forth so Daniel can write a piece of
you can submit that code of to a theorem
and says if you want to access that code
here's the API call to make that will
send me a very small amount of eath and
in exchange you can use the code and
they're actually building an internal
economy that incentivizes software
developers to be able to fully build the
most valuable and most shareable
software that are a benefit to the
entire community and before we
incentivize the motivated rewarded for
so doing which of course should create a
massive shift in the velocity of how
software is developed now of course if
you do exactly the same thing in the
category of Pharma you can create a
mechanism whereby for example data all
the data lives in a shared an
appropriately permissioned open database
that has etherium contracts giving
permission to access that data where
experiments and all the results of
experiments even in media stressed so
you don't actually go through an entire
experimental protocol publish it scrub
it so it looks good and then hopefully
get into a journal you can actually just
have them be in an open environment
because the people who are doing the
work have an incentive that is not tied
to for example publish or perish or have
an incentive that is not tied to
creating patents but they have an
incentive to moving forward the state of
the art in science and you can create
neat little aetherium contracts that
actually reward people for say very high
quality experimental design just submit
a high quality framework and put bam be
rewarded for it everybody uses that
framework you get paid for this
open-source framework that you've
generated and of course the same thing
happens for data you know if I come in
and I'm saying hey well I can't really
contribute meaningfully to the science I
can't come to me immediately to the
software but I can engage in
experimental protocols I'm willing to
submit myself and put my data into this
large school and maybe what I do is I
was just a Senate for a sleep study and
so I I wear a or ring and I have an app
and it's tracking my sleep and I just
every day submit some additional data
and the key is that my data gets put
into this shared database and all the
variables associate with my data are now
available for other people to research
and I'm also in a pool so I get a
message okay would you like to
participate in this particular sleep
study for this particular practice
here's the reward and we've already
researched your data to indicate
you already qualified for our protocol
the protocol literally in software has
the ability to make a ping out to the
database to identify particular
individuals and make the offer on its
own it's kind of like a lot of the
thinking that's going on in the IOT
space Internet of Things space happening
in the internet of wellness space I'm
gonna end up happening then as you have
a an increasingly autocatalytic and
increasingly architecture based meaning
that most of the hard work has already
been built as a platform that people who
just access a resource and all the
innovation work is actually be done at
the surface of the sphere and as we know
the volume of the sphere increases to
the cube all right so you actually got
massive return on the investment it's
being done at the outside so instead of
having lots and lots of little spheres
that are all sort of communicating with
each other over the market everything's
happening on the inside of that sphere
I've set all the values happening inside
of the sphere that's being shared as a
commons resource out into the broader
population that's the sort of thing that
I think is frankly well within the scope
of do ability now and they would take
meaningful effort but if you're looking
at the size of the amount of money
that's currently being frankly wasted in
the interface between hospitals and
pharma you know on the order to say god
probably wouldn't even be that much you
know the order of hundreds of millions
of dollars a year would be vastly more
than enough to completely resource the
infrastructure that I'm talking about
and almost immediately frankly you'd get
some returns in three or four years you
could probably be replacing twenty or
thirty percent of what's going on in
pharma and in seven years will end up
happening actually is that you'll be
shifting you know basically be
decoupling financial services from the
science of medicine and so it'll end up
happening is that the scientists will be
radically liberated to focus on what
they do and by the way the engineers and
technologists too because there's
obviously a lot of building of
instruments in tech this fundamentally
required to do this but the resource
flow will no longer be gated by what
would effectively as a gigantic
financial services business sitting on
top of which should in fact be a science
and technology project so it sounds like
the key
thing that you shared in there is the
increase in sharing and transparency and
thus collaboration and thus collective
intelligence and collective capacity
where the current incentive structure
incentivizes owning and hoarding IP and
making sure nobody else uses the things
that you discovered because you're gonna
make your money on patents and not
sharing what you're learning until it's
published because the whole thing is
published know that really what you're
talking about is the ability to change
the information ecology the incentives
that change the information ecology from
ones that incentivize hoarding
information and making it hard for other
people to use they have to pay for
license and even dis informing - one
that maximizes informing sharing
collaborations yeah so and I think
there's actually two key pieces to that
the first we talked about a little bit
which is the ability to keep records or
as our friend Michael Bastyr talks about
it the ability to actually deliver
justice which he defines as making sure
that the loops are closed the value
created needs to be value returned and
that externalities need to be returned
to the critters of externalities right
and if you have injustice if you have
bad records in a system if you don't
have the ability to determine who
created how much value and who created
how much externality and thereby return
it then you get a system that the drifts
quite rapidly I mean where a lot of
strategies are about stealing credit and
avoiding responsibility so that's one
piece or so one piece is just radically
increasing the quality of the records
that are being kept and therefore
closing more and more loops which is say
creating more and more justice and then
the other side of the equation actually
has to go to stuff like as you say more
justice you also mean more incentive to
actually do the right things rather than
the wrong things
yeah and intrinsically it's just very
simply that's not it's not that people
have to become sort of more pro bono
it's just that the good things they do
will be noticed and rewarded and the bad
things they do will be noticed and
punished done right it's pretty simple
like that's straightforward as long as
you can provide that framework where
people have clean boundaries and good
choices or rewarding bad
choices are punished they will begin to
move in that direction the beginning to
move in direction on mass and the other
has to do with the notion of the theory
of the firm and it will go ahead three
of the firm so you and I've had the
benefit of having Michael Vassar spend a
lot of time explaining this model to us
I think a lot of people think that what
that markets do what you just said that
we live within capitalism capitalism is
based on market theory and the markets
are supposed to reward the things that
are good and not reward the things that
are bad and therefore you get a natural
evolutionary dynamics of good stuff and
it's kind of like how evolution itself
works
sure well why is that not true so let's
just assume that someone's listening to
this thinking that markets already do
that why is that not currently the case
well I think a big part of it has to do
with this is this notion of gold has no
smell
meaning that again you know person a
shows up in the in the market with ten
apples and person B shows up in the
market with five apples the fact that
person a stole those apples from person
B is since of the market in may have no
capacity to perceive at all and in fact
we don't even think about that as a
market transaction that's called justice
that's what happened so what we says
okay well person B then needs to find
some way to sue or otherwise rebalance
the underlying infrastructure so we
would think about then is that the
market is consisting of a whole bunch of
little circles that are communicating
with each other through transactions and
it doesn't actually have any information
outside of that information flow so it
has in an inability to perceive all the
different ways that somebody might
actually falsify the stuff that the
market actually needs to be able to make
good choices meaning that if you think
about what the game the startup do the
right thing and it slides all the way
down if everybody who's playing the
market game is self-enforcing to do the
right thing
you know social norms would really
really work and anybody who plays in
anything but the most virtuous way is
selected against through the sort of to
the normative channel then the mark
so we'll actually tend to do a pretty
good job well there's more to it than
that and there's a whole bunch of other
stuff to think about that but that's one
that we can focus on right here and but
that's the sense markets actually have
very little ability to perceive that
kind of a thing in fact they outsource
that to other areas social norms laws
etc that's the channel you gain are you
game that channel and so you show up as
a really great market player you're a
bank you've got a giant building
with marble columns and a actually
completely covered in marble and impress
the people wearing fancy suits that all
signal certain things that the market
can perceive but you know the gap
between signal and the thing being
signified is something the market has
effectively no capacity to perceive at
all
and that then becomes the game when you
move more and more and more power and
choice making into the market you end up
basically creating a niche for gaming
what the market can't perceive and
simulating what the market perceives as
being a good answer and then then you're
on that slide right do it is most
profitable highest money for money
return the market sees that as positive
signal and you're you know you're you're
riding the sleigh down this down the
hill is there more on that damn sure
that means lots more you want to keep
exploring that space no I think I think
it's good I think it's important for me
I think most people today have some
sense of how much greenwashing and
various forms of we are saying we're
doing a good thing as part of the
marketing budget more than the actual
product budget really doing a good thing
proliferate and I don't think most
people think the amount of money that's
been made in derivatives as market
corresponds to real goods and services
that benefit the lives of most people um
but I mean we could we can actually say
this extremely simply if people who are
in control of the money supply printed
all the money and gave it to themselves
the market would have absolutely no idea
and no way of responding to that fact
right I mean it's it's like it's like
the brain
heroin by itself the way the brain
responds simulated neurotransmitters it
has a really hard time being able to
tell the difference internally and the
only way you can respond to the notion
of mass counterfeiting of money is
through a completely different channel
not known as the market now of course
you could try to invent ways to simulate
that okay well alright I will do is we
will create agencies they were calling
anti-counterfeit agencies that we will
pay to enforce the Fadel okay cool now
we're doing is we're trying to create
market mechanisms to instantiate other
kinds of social functions and that's a
second-order solution which we be very
mindful it a second-order of not first
word it actually requires us to be
thinking about this different modality
and then using market mechanisms to do
it but you end up and then is a
regression and then of course you have
the scenario where the lobbyists that
are making the laws are getting paid for
by somebody and that means they're
getting paid for by the groups that have
enough money to pay for them to then
work on creating legislation in their
own interest and the campaign budgets
for the politicians and the etc except
right and then this again gets back to
that notion of justice injustice and
record-keeping that you if you actually
happen to have well there's a limit to
this but if you happen to have something
that was just really really good
record-keeping and you have really
high-quality to measure who's doing what
to whom and what are the various
interests everything else then the
ability for particularly decentralized
system to make good choices a marketing
system is relatively high the less
high-quality your record-keeping the
left-side quality your ability to
perceive reality and have a history a
real history of what's going on the less
effective those kinds of mechanisms are
going to be and then of course there's
the actual limit which is that's where
blockchain is actually valuable and
that's where wearing why blockchain is a
very interesting solution and then the
other piece is just the the limits of
understanding meaning that past a
certain amount of information velocity
you just get lost in the fire hose no
matter how accurate your records are you
know I can as let's assume there's a
hundred percent chance that was an
adequate amount of investigation you'd
be able to know that I just cheated you
but that so much craziness is going on
constantly that I'm also quite
able to just make a bet that I can cheat
you and the likelihood that you're going
to be able to traverse the information
flow within the time that it's worth to
you and with the attention that you have
to close the loop on me you know that
that's gonna keep being made so we
learned of happening this baby
we basically invert it into the defraud
equivalent of high of the SP training
trading which mean in fact just be to
try may not be it the equivalent a speed
training may just be fraud but the point
is that I can defraud you so quickly and
it's such a low cost that you can't
actually close the loop and therefore
again I found another solution to the
problem let's get back really quickly to
the notion of coast and I think is
actually quite interesting in the in the
concept of thinking about what this how
this shows up in places like medicine in
pharma so Coast who is a economist at
University of Chicago where things like
markets make good choices was was the
theology was wondering well okay if if
individual economic actors make good
choices in fact make better choices than
centralized entities do then why the
 do we have companies what's going
on here why do these things show up and
of course he said all the reason for
that is because another thing going on
called transaction costs and that market
transactions have have higher
transaction costs than the transaction
cost to sit inside some kind of pre
associated envelope alright so if if you
and I agree that we're gonna split the
returns on our activities 50/50 so we
don't have to make any more negotiations
past that first negotiation now we're a
partnership and we can now both just
sort of throw into making that thing
work oh very quickly we don't have to re
think about it we just are very creative
at the edge whereas if every single time
either one of us does something we're
constantly having to renegotiate some
kind of transaction the cost of
negotiation and by the way the cost of
monitoring and the cost of interpreting
and enforcing good for the roof so what
ends up happening is the market then
collapses into a series of firms that
are defined by a boundary where on the
inside of the boundary you've got a
whole bunch of agreements that solves
the transaction cost problem and a lot
people to coordinate in very
high-velocity low-cost way and then
those firms then do the market
transactions back and forth between each
other now that obviously works it built
the 20th century and keep it earlier but
it runs into into battery condition
problems where for example information
inside one of these envelopes can't
easily translate and connect to the
information outside one of these
envelopes so for example it's a you had
Apple and Google and inside Apple there
were three engineers who had developed
something really interesting and
important and inside Google there were
three engineers who develop something
really interesting and important and in
both cases the missing piece was the
opposite in innovation where if they're
able to connect those dots something a
hundred times more powerful would emerge
but because they're inside those
envelopes not only is there no obvious
way to make that connection happen it's
in fact actively inhibited in fact
possibly even illegal for them to cross
those boundaries and this is sort of the
point
in in the in the blockchain environment
and we may be in a circumstance where
through automation of of contracts smart
contracts safer in aetherium we can
radically reduce transaction costs
likely be a factor of a thousand and as
a consequence collapse most of the
economic utility is associated with
large scale and long enduring firms and
therefore get a whole lot more of the
surface area this innovation exposed to
a broader shareable environment and by
the way also do it in a way that enables
as you said earlier sharing to make
sense meaning on the one hand
record-keeping is better so the
innovators themselves were able to have
high confidence that the their value
will actually loop back and connect and
then the other hand you have ways of
wiring and incentive structures we could
do things like actually consider the
Commons as a Commons and build into code
rather than build into se norms or law
ways of enforced in the comments again
strategies of the Commons and things
like that so there's a few companies
that are working on trying to make some
ride sharing program like uber on a
blockchain so that you decentralized the
central come
the uber the lift as a company which is
going to be extracting a lot of profit
from the system driving the price of the
transport up for everybody or the amount
that the drivers can be paid down and so
if you were to decentralize that you'd
have a scenario where it would be more
value to everyone with less central
extraction then you say well we still
have to be able to pay for the thing
well that's where an ICO or something
comes in that you can pay for it without
needing a thousand X return on an
initial venture capital financial
service type thing mm-hmm
so that could be done with pharma
obviously there's a lot of science to do
to develop a new drug and/or develop a
new surgery or develop a new diagnostic
procedure there's like real cost that's
involved but the real cost that's
involved doesn't end up equaling the
total cost of the thing afterwards
because of all of the profit that that
central company has to make and the
financial services that are involved
what's I mean you can actually economics
are pretty easy retail is carrying the
full burden I mean at the end of the day
the consumer is carrying the entire
burden of the entire supply chain
including investors and so to the degree
to which you can you can empower the
consumer to create the capital structure
that generates the innovation they're
ultimately consuming either they show up
is the investor in which case they just
get the return of their own consumption
or prices go down either one is sort of
equivalent and probably in between
because some consumers will not have
been capital providers and so right now
for example and when we were talking
about hospitals Kerry moves to the
retail cost of providing medical care
and so there already have plenty of
money and they're pouring lots of dough
into Pharma so this just becomes a way
for them to reduce the amount of money
they're putting into something they're
already spending they just basically it
shows up as spending less money more
effectively which if anything any of the
stories that we tell about capitalism
are even vaguely true then they should
be doing that if you can spend less
money to be more effective this is what
you should do now there are a heap of
conditions that we don't yet have good
drugs developed for because there is no
profitable way to develop them the cost
that it's going to take because there's
either not enough people that have that
or because rather than treating a
symptom forever we'd be curing something
and we just can't charge enough for a
one-time treatment to make back the the
billion or half a billion it cost to go
through phase 3 clinical trials and the
current landscape right cetera so if we
bring that if we bring the cost of
actually being able to produce it down
we also open up a now profitable market
to work on discovery of the heaps of
solutions that currently just don't get
researched sure well I think that it
goes down to the notion of oh cool I'm
gonna pivot this a little bit yeah
what I'm gonna do is I'm gonna shift the
language and shift it from scarcity to
abundance and in abundance actually to
talk about two things so the first is
what we've been largely talking about
which is what is the economics of
abundance I think it's a very nice
conceptual model to say that almost all
I mean to almost to the limit of all of
the thinking about economics that has
been done thus far has been scarcity
economics and we're right now in the
process of the obsolescence of that
entire approach which I'm gonna get to
in a second but this begs the question
of okay what does abundance economics
look like which has to do with things
like okay well how do i appropriately
incentivize innovative people to create
solutions to gigantic problems but where
scarcity and therefore profit based upon
scarcity is not available as the right
solution and this is what you just as
categorical you just articulated
and specifically when you make money or
incentive of any kind solving a problem
the perverse incentive there the
scarcity base incentive can be that
you're now invested in that problem
ongoing so that you manage it right the
military-industrial complex the supplier
complex as opposed to how do we actually
didn't get to the abundance side of make
money just ops of leaving the problem
rather than on going to managing yeah in
fact you can even make it like how
having the highest leverage on
increasing collective well-being it
would be the thing that you're looking
to accomplish and which of course if you
would imagine taking the most innovative
people and just fully and
powering them to focus on that's that
problem that that question if you
imagine how much more effective we would
be I came in probably a hundred times
more effective almost immediately within
weeks actually if you just pivot that
direction so in that context I'm gonna I
want to explore a little bit a branch to
the right and when we can come back to
this branch here if we'd like which has
to do with the other side of abundance
and this is something that I was just
talking about with some folks yesterday
so it's top of mind and that has to do
with everybody being obsolete or most
people being obsolete and what I mean by
that is absolutely not that people are
obsolete obviously not what I mean is
that the stuff that people have been
doing to keep themselves busy goes away
and what's interesting about that is
that because of a lot of the
characteristics of how we've gone about
meeting our needs and have been trained
to be valuable and useful in game a we
actually quite addicted to being busy
which is the problem
all right that's that's actually the
issue of abundance so this is why for
example the universal basic income is
simultaneously a good idea in a terrible
idea on the good idea front at least it
makes sure that people don't starve to
death before we figure out a way to do
something differently and that's useful
on the bad idea front a whole bunch of
people addicted to being busy who can no
longer be busy is in fact a moral
ethical and ultimately actually
political and physical disaster and so
this actually ends up being one of the
core problems that needs to be addressed
and thought through and experimented
with and then delivered on which is how
do we rather rapidly actually train
people to kick their addiction to being
busy and relearn the capacity to
actually engage with the world and with
life authentically and without any
necessity of being busy at all that's it
seems like an odd thing to be like an
emergency crisis but I believe actually
that's the emerge
see crisis and it'll turn out that the
what are the biggest economic markets in
the the era of technological
unemployment is going to be helping
people relearn how to meet their needs
and be fulfilled without being busy
mm-hmm
okay all right you're bringing up the
topic of technological automation the
emerging technological automation with
robotics with AI etcetera obsoleting a
huge amount of jobs and saying people
you know are currently addicted to being
busy and other ways that people have
said that and could identify with it is
people have their identities wrapped up
and what they do to make money and that
a lot of fathers haven't had any wrapped
up and being a provider in a particular
way in the particular craft that they
came from or whatever and now that we
were gonna relate this back to you were
saying that game a optimized people for
filling a fairly narrow niche and didn't
really care about the rest of their
well-being and that narrow niche was
well filled by them staying busy doing
that thing mm-hmm and so then they of
course have not learned how to and that
education was coupled to that so
education worked on making them good at
identifying with being that narrow niche
FULFILLER right I am a lawyer I'm a
doctor I am a marketer I'm a whatever
right and so in as the macro economy
shifts an economy and education er are
bound together in this way because the
economy that is the environment that
people are having to be prepared for by
the educational system so if we get
something like universal basic income or
a common wealth system based on access
or something like that based on a way of
having technological automation not just
create a total failed capitalist state
this obviously requires a totally new
type of education mm-hmm and you're
saying how do we have
will not get you know heal their
addiction being busy so this is really
now again we're talking about the
intersection of personal development the
thing we call education vocational
development purpose medicine right which
is how do we create whole healthy beings
and you mentioned the term sovereignty
which is core so I if if you would you
were the first person talking about the
history of the u.s. education system hmm
and how it specifically evolved to make
beings that were well designed for the
Industrial Revolution era and I think
that's a valuable piece of history here
if you don't mind sharing it and then go
into from that what would the future of
Education look like that would address
this topic that you're bringing up and
also the future of really supporting the
types of whole human process needed so
education and well-being support and
sovereignty subordinate okay great so if
I lose track just let remind me there's
a third piece to this move so I'm gonna
just start out with the the first which
okay so back in the 19th century when we
were trying to really start to formalize
the approach that we were going to be
engaging in education they were among
the impact out there in fact many many
ways to do education that's the first
there's actually many ways when America
was we need to look closely at how we
were going to do it there were at least
two major models that existed that had
people who thought there were good ideas
and had been around for a while and
they're very effective they're actually
many more but there were at least two
they were under consideration one which
is the ultimate the one that we actually
adopted was the German model and the
characteristics of this model are the
ones that we Americans at least are all
familiar with which is the the notion
that there is a subject matter area say
math there is a person who is the
designated authoritative expert known as
the teacher or the professor their job
is to convey the lessons the content the
everybody else is in the role of being a
receiver of information the student
whose job is to learn that
information and then the the teacher
also has the job of demonstrating
information transfer or competency in
the subject matter
by creating various forms of tests
implementing those tests and then
iterating on that process right so it's
all it's closed so what ends up
happening is that a student will have
some number of teachers all more or less
identical in terms of that architecture
differentiated only by the content the
subject matter that they're they're
conveying and then at the output of that
you will have a set of evaluations we
should say how well you did on the tests
indicating how capable you are in the
underlying subject matter and when
notably with this intima doing this
creates a giant question mark well it's
a whole bunch of the facts but one of
the effects it has is a giant question
mark about the degree to which a
particular score matters because who
knows how good the underlying teacher or
professor was at a teaching or B testing
and so maybe I have an a from a small
college small College X and I've got a C
from super famous University Y it may
very well be that my C is in some sense
worth more than my to my a because the
professor in C was better had more to
tell more insight and Ted tested harder
so being average in that domain is maybe
much much better than being quick for
example in another Goodman this is a you
know a known issue in the German model
there are lots of other known issues but
then the other model that existed at the
same time existed this day is the Oxford
Cambridge model of England which
operates very differently and in that
environment first the student is
principally responsible for in fact
consuming information right so the
student does a lot of reading and maybe
do interviewing and learning the subject
matter they then have a tutor who has
domain expertise who understands the
subject matter and interacts with the
student to help the student puzzle
through certain problems points them in
different directions maybe helps them
think more clearly about where they're
getting turned around
the tutor is not responsible for
conveying the information per se that's
the student job and the tutor is not
responsible for evaluating the quality
of the students work that's a completely
separate function where you actually
have a impaneled group who crafts
generalized tests that are given to
everybody in a particular subject matter
many different groups tend to be
responsible for and then what ends up
happening is that if I have a you know
an a with the equivalent of an A in math
across the entire set of universities to
participate in the Oxford Cambridge
model then I should be at a standard
no matter what university I went to so a
very very good University might have
more people who show up at a but if I go
to a you know small podunk college I
still have an A then I'm considered to
be a peer to them in capability now the
reason why this is interesting by the
way is just to a third which is the
guilt model and the Guildhall you
actually have a even a different
approach and this is because in the
guilt model you're largely trying to
convey things that actually can't be
well done through information transfer
they're more associated with complex
skills practices you know classically
things like say carpentry or medicine
this is actually pretty guilty we're
then apprentices foodies who's somebody
who's quite skilled in the art the
person who's skilled in the art the
master gives them tasks that are
designed to be at their level of
capability but by virtue of doing them
they increase their level of capability
and the master basically just puts them
on a path of more and more and more
complex tasks and the individual student
just by doing stuff and every once a
while
interventions and hints and notes and
provocations builds their underlying
capacity until they themselves have
enough capacity to leave and go off and
take all program thing by the way there
are many many other approaches and so
the Samantha that's the history the
history is that we as Americans locked
into a particular model and then have
using our earlier language the basin of
Attraction now is completely locked in
meaning that I actually remember very
clearly when I was in first grade the
teacher was telling us that we had to be
work really hard on this particular
piece because I tell you what
great is no joke much harder and gotta
kind of get if you can't you want to do
well in second grade you got to do well
now and of course there's just a handoff
if you want to do well in fifth grade
you get a b-tree shirt together in 4th
grade if you want to do it all the way
up until finally well why am i doing
this at all well if you want to get a
good job right in the hand off from the
education vertical to the work vertical
now the couple of things come out and
the one that entire model was already
linked to the notion of getting a job or
getting a good job or being qualified
for a particular job and remember this
is true just to high school even
vocational school was college being
added on after World War two and as the
economy moved more and more into a
domain where information processing
capability and credential ization became
minimum requirements for having could
include a good job in the economy and so
it's it's reasonably good at conveying
what does it call dat France is it wrote
I think it's really good for conveying
information and people who process
through that model will end up doing a
pretty good job at crank turning give me
an input where I've been Matt I have
actually learned a particular process to
process that input and I will give you
with pretty high predictability a
predictable output which maps pretty
closely to industrial civilization the
idea was the education system and the
economic system of the era were
unsurprisingly similar to each other so
if I if I had an early Industrial
Revolution with you know the types of
production lines where I just needed
people to be able to do a certain job
that needed to be fully fungible I could
remove someone from that job but someone
else in and I needed X number of people
on the assembly line to do that thing
and then if they were off the assembly
line and they were a bookkeeper I needed
to know okay this person can do this
function called bookkeeping so I could
make an org chart and make a firm then
in that environment we're basically
using people like we're making robots to
do now using them for a very specific
defined process function so then the
goal is make them a good robot yeah and
I think this is this is probably the
best way of grasping it it's in any kind
of thing that you're doing that has
similar characteristics over and over
again they're always learning everything
about your learning system doesn't know
what it's learning so it's to just grab
grabbing patterns and learning how to
adapt to those patterns so you know if
you're going to kindergarten all the way
up just just make it high school you're
exposed to a wide variety of different
kinds of content are you doing English
you're doing history or doing social
studies you actually supposed to why
four different kinds of personalities
but what is exactly the same every
single time is this core architecture of
broadcast Authority and narrow focused
receptive student and that's what you
actually learn in this system is that
model if that's the key transfer doesn't
actually matter whether or not you take
the branch to become a biologist or the
branch to become a an English teacher
because everybody learned how to operate
in that disciplinary mode of having
somebody who's the boss who has the
magical answers conveys the
authoritative information that my job is
to figure out how to parse what portions
that authoritative information I'm going
to be tested on and then when I am
tested pattern recognize what is in fact
the valid answer from the pattern from
the information that I've stored and
give it back and that may be the by the
way saying the right thing you know just
not making the person angry with it
whatever it is it's that power
relationship that is actually being
taught in that infrastructure and that
is precisely the power relationship that
you're looking for an industrial
civilization because it doesn't matter
whether you're working on an assembly
line putting caps on bottles or you're
an accountant or you're a lawyer in
every one of those domains even though
the information is different the
architecture of how the hierarchy
operates is identical that's I think is
the key and the key thing to think about
and I guess the point here is that the
output of that is people who in fact
really rather dramatically lost their
sovereignty really rather dramatically
lost their individual capacity to for
example create their own identity
willy-nilly as they wish or to respond
to life without having to make use of
somebody else's pre-engineered scripts I
mean if you ever saw it there's a paper
Alfred North Whitehead wrote on the
problem of hyperspecialization it was
speaking to this model it was meaningful
to me and he said this the kids that
seemed smarter more talented we pushed
them into specialization younger and
then we pushed them further and further
into specialization so by the time they
finished their PhD it is on the most
narrow subfield of molecular biology or
string theory with it only a few other
people in the world know and so none of
the people that have a lot of cognitive
horsepower ever looking at the whole
which if the whole wants to not be
disturbed you would try and make it do
that right you would make them very
sharp gears inside the machine but not
something that was looking at me
designing redesigning the machine as a
whole so then the people who are left to
actually look at the whole and what's
wrong with it an externality are people
that didn't do that well in the system
as a whole and so now we're in a world
where we have to actually redesign the
entire system the whole game that
requires a different set of thinking
than how to optimize some tiny part of
it yeah and this is true in both
directions meaning that everybody has to
actually shift although I guess to be
sure there is differential value to
different people the shifting different
capacities there's the more you can get
people that have been selected for high
cognitive horsepower to have for example
more awareness of the whole more saving
a broader scope of empathy or a better
sense of how externalities actually work
one the more they'll be able to play
together they'll be able to collaborate
with each other which radically
increases their capabilities but then to
the less likely they are to use that
cognitive horsepower for Bad ends
because they'll just be aware of it we
know they'll notice it themselves and
then they'll engineer around okay so now
you're talking about that these people
who were actually the education system
was actually optimizing for deferring to
Authority and who being part of an
authoritarian structure even if you're
an authority within it you're also still
subordinate to other authorities that's
the whole deal and that people lost
their sovereignty
and now we're saying if you want to take
the people high intellectual capacity
and make them really sovereign they need
things like empathy and the ability to
work with other people would you define
sovereignty and now I think I think
that's something we've used quite a bit
and we need to actually be pretty clear
about what we mean because first if you
happen to be doing this from a very
old-school American history we don't
mean the same thing I think that
Jefferson meant and if you're sitting
around kind of in the contemporary
environment we definitely don't mean the
same thing that if the freemen movement
means it's kind of a term of art
actually but it's such a powerful
concept that I think we want to get a
good definition and get that definition
out into the world so the the basic
proposition is that sovereignty
represents your capacity to be an
effective agent in the world but of
course what was that mean so if you
think about what it means to be an age
in the world that has to do with on the
one hand your ability to have accurate
perceptions of what's going on in the
world but if you're if you can't
perceive what's happening you can't make
good choices you can't respond very
effectively and then second your ability
to make sense of those perceptions you
know so if you're overwhelmed by too
much input or you don't have the right
frameworks to take the information that
you see now this is say for example the
problem of the tsunami back in the in
Phuket where people could see they can
visibly see that the sea had receded but
they couldn't make sense of what was
going on so they couldn't then make good
choices and then and then third is then
the ability to take the ability to make
sense of what's going on and then take a
look at then what you could do the kinds
of actions you can take and connect
those two together into making good
choices the choices that are most likely
to simultaneously deliver on the results
that you desire and the least amount of
negative consequences in the amount of
externalities with the least amount of
effort
and then the last piece is in fact the
actuation piece which is which is then
the execution on those choices
so that they actually do deliver the
results you intend with the least amount
of unintended consequences Amitha least
amount of effort and so that whole that
entire construct is what we're defining
as sovereignty and what's important is
to actually recognize it's almost like a
spherical geometry to this thing meaning
that if you're over balanced any one of
these characteristics that lack of
balance you know you think about like it
takes the sphere out of round so you
might actually have say like a wheel
that's got a dent in it and so as its
rolling it keeps flopping this might be
for example somebody who lacks the
ability to make sense of let's make a
very simple example other people's
facial expressions alright so I can see
that your face is doing stuff but I
can't make sense of it so now what ends
up happening is that my capacity to take
information from my environment
converted into meaning and make good
choices it's got a big blind spot which
is going to show up for example and me
making weird choices around other
people's behavior because I can't
actually read their faces that's kind of
a simple example lots and lots of stamps
looking on this if you can't hear then I
can't make choices based upon the sounds
in my environment and you can do it on
any of the dimensions so the point is
that there's actually a very interesting
notion of the sphere as being the
appropriate shape and what you want to
do is you want to take a look at
somebody and make sure that they're in
in round but their spheres is as round
as it is it can be then you can start
thinking about how to expand this fear
and this actually loops us back all the
way to the beginning remember we talked
about how complex systems have all kinds
of different demanding AMEX is feeding
back in each other if you pull one piece
it'll tend to get pulled back into what
is the the the basin of attraction the
same thing is happening here with it
with a human being in their capacity
you've got all these different elements
that are very tightly wound into how
you're able to show up in the world and
there's only so much I can do to
increase for example your cognitive
intellect if I do also increase your
ability to perceive the world I don't
also increase your ability to act in the
world you know one of the interesting
things that happens to contemporary
humans is that we have a massively
increased individual capacity to
perceive because all this information
flowing in from the information
environment but our ability to act is
actually minuscule in comparison to our
ability to proceed you know we can see
that there are terrible things going on
all over the world we can't do anything
about it so our response then is to feel
preemptively defeated or preemptively
cynical or various things we've got a
fantasy notion of what would be to be
powerful all kinds of various motives
like that which are in fact capacity
increasing but then conversely human
beings as a species has an enormous
actuation capacity and we can blow
up like crazy but our sense making in
choice making capacity is rather
miniscule in comparison to our
collective actuation capacity so we can
talk about this fractal in individual
human beings if I probably even is a
lower-level individual human systems
individual human beings have this the
sovereignty which is which ideally is in
some kind of you know well-balanced
smooth round and then can be increased
as an individual and then individuals
cluster into groups in these different
groups have the same dynamics you can
imagine for example when you have a
brand-new basketball team of five people
who maybe they are all relatively
skilled players but they never play to
get there as a team their team
sovereignty is all wacky and can't
actually get things done but as that
team practices in practice and starts to
get real fluid with each other it's
perception sense-making choice making
actuation elements begin to flow through
nicely and then you actually have a
sovereignty as a team that begins to
increase and the same thing happens it's
just scale all the way up okay that's a
lot okay so one I want to restate the
essential point really clearly make sure
everyone gotten so sovereignty made up
of three things and the reason you're
saying a sphere is you're saying that
these three things are the three axes
that would make up a three dimensional
shape like a sphere so that they that
means they're orthogonal to each other
they're they actually represent the
vector space of being a human of
sovereignty and you said sensory input
information processing of that sensory
input to inform a choice and then
actually acting actuator output and that
there's a closed loop because then you
act in the world and you can in turn
sense the effects of the action and then
make sense of it in acting energy of
this closed loop hmm and that we have
just words that we've used before and we
use you know this is actually related
to the mission statement of neuro hacker
of sovereignty increasing this
definition of sovereignty that we think
of the sensory part of it the first part
of it as related to sentient right the
ability to actually have not just that
information is coming in that it's
landing in a being that's recognizing it
and experiencing it and that the second
part the ability to take all of that the
internal sensing right our own feelings
or proprioception are our past awareness
and learning plus what's happening in
the world around us from our eyes and
ears and information and make sense of
it is intelligence and then agency is
our ability to then act on that in the
world especially act in the presence of
pressures that might make it hard act
right increasing agent passing yeah so
the triplicate of sentient intelligence
and agency makes up this sphere now if
someone has very high agency meaning
they're very motivated they have a lot
of resilience but they're actually not
making good sense of the world they're
gonna make a lot of very powerful very
bad choices mm-hmm if someone is
actually sensing the world well and very
intelligent that has low agency then
they're gonna have a lot of good ideas
and be crippled to make them happen
right we can look at any of the
combinations of these and say only all
three ends up actually being adaptive
right now we should be careful under
certain circumstances they out-of-round
is right we talked about for example if
you're a fighter pilot in the middle of
dogfight big chunks of sensory capacity
and sense-making need to be not input
and you actually need to have a
different shape than in round right and
this is actually I mean we do the whole
complicated complex thing as well
that being in a pure in a high quality
sphere is maximally adapted under
uncertain conditions meaning in
environments where what the future is
going to look like is not exactly the
same as it looks right now and then in
that case it is for sure the case that
is fear is the best geometry and I think
we
but one way of saying it would be to the
fighter pilot obviously has to be in
taking information making sense of that
information and acting on it but the
information about how much they need to
go to the bathroom and lots of other
things they need to really suppress and
hyper pay attention to their visual cues
and their right whatever
but the adaptive capacity to be able to
pay attention to the right information
and to not pay attention to the wrong
information because then when that same
person is making love or tending to a
baby it's different things they need to
pay attention to with their limited
bandwidth I mean this is a it's always
round it's just different rounds based
on the environment yeah well I get to
this state switching between domains is
the problem and so it happens in the in
the game a is the training will build
whatever your roundness is in a given
domain but you don't have the individual
agency of the individual capacity to do
your own kind of state switching and
your own kind of designing of your own
Socrates I gave a domain so England I'm
having is go ahead most of the fighter
pilots and other you know people highly
trained and military coming back after
the war and being really mal adapted to
a non Moore environment right exactly so
then they've been pushed by external
extrinsic factors into a particular sub
specialization of was in fact very high
qualit quality sovereignty and a very
specific domain but if the cost of their
in fact actual intrinsic we might call
human sovereignty and I guess that's
kind of the point it's a really good
example all of us in some sense have
PTSD all of us in some very important
sense have actually undergone that
process of losing our intrinsic human
sovereignty to become who we want to be
and in any kind of context and have
become to a greater or lesser extent
very specialized and having been
separated from our core capacity sure
then what does what is education some
more sovereign beings look like yeah so
this was actually the third thing that I
wanted to talk about on the education
wreck is that it's it's interesting
actually I think quite lucky they were
actually coming into this
from two distinct directions so one
direction is the what happens to the
educational model the German model in a
pace of accelerating change and what I
mean by that is in a pace where for
example having asymmetric information
becomes less and less true having access
to information becomes more and more of
a commodity right it doesn't really
matter at all if I is actually really
good example remember this when I was
kind of in high school there was a time
when knowing the multiplication tables
in your head was extremely useful now is
not that time right though if I am
separated from a device that can
calculate long division
I've actually got bigger problems than
my inability to calculate long division
and so that's that's no longer a
functional capacity does it matter right
I can just import that capacity through
some kind of tool and do it a hell of a
lot better than I could ever have done
it by spending countless hours learning
how to do it internally and that's just
true generic so think about driving you
know driving around not only is like
haven't being able to read a map
becoming an obsolete skill but soon
driving it all is going to be an
obsolete skill etc etc etc so the output
the theme for which this authoritative
authoritarian training regime was ever
useful which was putting specialized
knowledge in the hands of specialized
people who could operate within a
hierarchical framework that entire thing
is becoming obsolete at Lightspeed
so one side of the equation is ok well
 if we want to go through the basic
art of called retraining or educating
anyone to be adaptive to the Future
environment what we have to do is we
have to unwind a lot of that and think
about ok well you're gonna be in not 10
careers in your lifetime but 10,000
careers in the next day all right
something like that where the only
possible approach is to maximize your
individual sovereignty right your
individual capacity for where you are to
perceive where you are and what is
needful now and if by the way it turns
out that you don't have the capacity to
address what was needful now how to
build that capacity right so learning
about how to learn and learning about
how to have the stick with it 'no stu be
able to commit to
do what you have to learn learning how
to have emotional resilience to deal
with circumstances where you're
overwhelming I'm like really deep
fundamental core capacities that are
completely absent from education as we
currently know it and or if they are
learned they're learned willy-nilly and
are fundamentally applicable under any
possible circumstance amendments of
happenings you have a a sovereign being
who then shows up in a given domain
rapidly pulls together the specific
domain specific skills they need to have
maybe even sub specializes but never
becomes the subspecialty always
maintains the integrity of their core
sovereignty this this was a key thing
never becomes it means something at an
identity level yes that's right yeah I
am NOT a fire pilot I do fly fighters
sometimes yeah I'm not a fireman I'm not
a banker I'm not X Y or Z that's
something that I do sometimes it's
something that I it's a game that I play
right it's moving into a state where you
are not the games you play you play
games you are not the games you play now
this was also key bit for most people in
gaming games already defined like you
know if you go play most games right you
go play soccer Monopoly the rules are
already set and the question is can you
get good at doing it right when you're
learning subjects in school the answers
are already set this clear right and
wrong can you get do a good job at
getting that right and then when you go
work at a company it's the same thing
right someone else is setting the
objectives of the company and so you
mostly have to have a very little bit of
sovereignty within whatever domain space
isn't fully specified but towards a goal
that someone else set and so you don't
have to self assess what needs done and
how to go about doing it you have to get
trained in a very specific capacity and
do that most people who've been trained
that way so intensely the idea of
assessing what needs done and how to go
about doing it without someone else
telling them how to do it is
overwhelming yeah it's really
challenging and I think this is showing
up more and more and more and so that's
going to show up particularly heavily on
the other side of the coin which is the
people who are in fact obsoleted or
their identity their skills the thing
that keeps them
z is rendered obsolete because in that
case they are going to feel overwhelmed
off in a lot of different dimensions and
it is in fact simply the case that
they're going to need to learn how to
come back and begin to self assess
because you know did the notion that
we're going to be able to
programmatically tell everybody what to
do is one not very reasonable and to
terrible if we could pull it off so it
ends up happening is we have to find a
way to unmask rebuild that core kernel
which is ok you know reclaim your
sovereignty reclaim your ability to make
the choices that are your responsibility
to make and take ownership for the
consequences of those choices back out
in the world which is it turns out by
the way in terms of like just games is
actually where fun lives you know it's
it's a very common experience among
people who play say video games computer
games that any game where you're playing
against a machine which is to say where
the game is ultimately finite it has a
very specific curve to it where when
you're first in it it actually feels
really fun because you're exploring
where it actually kind of feels real
after some little bit little bit you
begin to actually understand where it's
not real and begin to optimize for the
game aspects and then you actually have
an accelerating arc of have sort of like
a visceral response because now you're
winning you can actually win the game no
longer Nolan are you playing the game
you're now winning the game but at a
certain point you've become so good at
winning the game that you don't actually
get any kind of visceral feedback from
winning the game it's no longer
interesting because he's now gamed the
game and achieving certain kinds of
characteristics like getting scores
becomes of diminishing returns and this
by the way is true of any finite domain
right when you first enter into the
finite domain the act of exploring is
really interesting and fulfilling then
you've optimized you found out what the
shape of the domain is and what kinds of
things work or don't work so then the
act of optimizing has a visceral
response because that's where that's
where the rewards come but if you become
that thing that's optimizing then you're
now locked into a circumstance where at
some point you're going to go over the
top of the curve and now you're getting
diminishing returns and of course the
point is if you become
thing he's actually lost the ability to
move out and jump into other kinds of
games willy-nilly or play games that
don't have those characteristics at all
so when we think about optimizing humans
for sovereignty so that they could move
between doing fighter pilot or making
love or raising a baby or assessing a
totally foreign environment or whatever
right
there's obviously education that's
involved and you also started in terms
of how to learn new skills
right there's meta education
epistemology how do I assess when I need
a new skill how do I go about learning
new skills well you know there's all of
that but you also said one has to be
able to deal with the emotions that
arise in new environment so there's
emotional skills and personal skills and
then you know we also related the topic
of medicine and healthcare to this and
that we move from just a sick care model
to a sovereignty optimization where
people's physiology in their states and
their ability to address it is also part
of that so
and obviously with neuro hacker we're
starting to look at mind brain right
there's a goal there so what we talked
earlier about how things like economics
and like macro world things affect
people's health through advertising
dynamics that are sending the hyper
normal stimuli of sugar all the time
right through martini but then there's
this other side of do people's physical
health well-being affect macro dynamics
and if so how and how is that part of
the sovereignty optimization I'm sorry
understand that to me ask that again so
you mean all the lines of does the
population where everybody in the
population is depressed show up for
example in different politics yes okay
defines different consumption patterns
crime patterns whatever right I mean I
obviously the way that I asked that
question makes it pretty easy to answer
the answer is obviously yes and it's but
it like we can do it like all the way
down so let's say for example you're
somebody who
as a particular objective response to
anxiety where you eat food because the
the visceral activating of food causes
your body to have certain dumps of
endorphins and serotonin levels go up
and so therefore you your anxiety levels
ambiently feel like they go down and so
you more or less feel like you're back
into being okay so then you're gonna
have the characteristic of overeating
well interesting enough if lots and lots
of people have that characteristic then
you're gonna have an economy that is
going to be into optimized for those
kinds of choices which is bizarre like
you have both of a feedback loop on the
one hand people who have an addiction to
that particular approach to dealing with
anxiety are actually generating a real
economic signal of I want more things
that are subject to overeating and
therefore the food artifacts that do
actually satisfy that addiction well
like say potato chips and on the other
side you have a manipulation media and
advertising infrastructure that is
incentivized to push people into domains
that are likely to be triggered by that
particular addictive response because
that will maximize their ability to
generate profits on the products they've
already spent time investing in that's a
really bad feedback loop and then you
can imagine that in say for example
you're somebody who's in the industry
and you're present to the reality of
this feedback loop then you're going to
have to be engaging in your own personal
adaptive response which some people call
as if sociopathy meaning that if you're
present to the negative consequences is
the choice that you were locally
responsible for you either have to
choose to be delusional which is to say
to not take your own responsibility
seriously and imagine something new it
just isn't reality
suicidal meaning you have to actually
make choices that you think are in fact
good for the whole but are definitely
not good for you locally or associate
path meaning you have to be willing to
accept the fact that consequences of
your choices are good for you but not
good for the whole any one of which is
in fact a terrible thing in and and
what's interesting is that no given
individual agent acting on their own is
likely going to be able to resolve that
problem and the game dynamics are if you
do the thing that's good for the whole
and bad for you you lose and so over
time iteratively there are a few people
fear of your
who choose that and more and more people
who choose either the as of sociopathy
or the lie that's right yeah and so it
ends up happening now if you imagine
that at a neurological level you spend
to say ten hours a day in a space where
you're combining a variation as if
sociopathy and delusion you're actually
gonna have congenital neurological
changes which are going to show up in
all the rest of the ways that you show
up in life so you're going to have a
weird relationship with your spouse
you're going from weird relations with
your kids you're gonna make weird
choices in politics you're a risk I mean
it's just going to continue to go which
is not that different than saying for
example if you had an entire population
that was addicted to opium an entire
population that was sort of functionally
alcoholic which by the way is you know
the medieval medieval Europe could be
characterized as an entire population
who are functionally alcoholic and I
think pre like mid 19th century giant
parts of America had the same
characteristics so we can run this at a
neuro at a physiological level we can
run at a behavioral level I'm gonna run
it the feedback loops between them but
that's you know it's important to take
into account the fact that that's the
case and then think about what kind of
believers again keep coming back to the
same notion of when you see the whole
you see how all the pieces feed back on
each other it is in fact just necessary
chose to be thoughtful on how they
feedback on each other and how does one
begin to engage in this struggle process
which I don't think by the way is
actually sort of intrinsically harder
than other things that we do well it's
just not something we've actually
developed a lot of skillfulness in yet I
think that the practice of being able to
be perceptive of how many many various
systems operate and being able to be
skillful in shifting them in desired
ways is actually just something that we
need to build skill at I don't think
it's something that is obviously beyond
our capacities okay so I want to restate
and underline something that Jordan just
said for everyone listening because it's
so key he's talking about the feedback
loops here so wait is it the demand
drives supply or is it that supply
drives demand it's very much both and
it's really critical to get that of
course originally demand Drive supply
more people want something and supply
steps up but then you have a real source
of supply and you want to manufacture
you want to protect the demand because
otherwise your business goes out and
maybe manufacture more demand and that
looks like marketing that looks like
whatever - great manufactured demand so
supply is driving demand demand is
driving supply and you can get feedback
loops that move in the wrong direction
right move in the direction of society
as a whole getting worse and then
similarly we have dynamics where you
know this very much just addressed one
of the core differences between what the
rational left-right argument has largely
been about the is the individual do
individuals create the whole so you want
to optimize for the sovereignty of the
individuals or the individuals affected
by the whole so you want to make good
social systems that make good
individuals and it's very much both and
so you want to make good educational
systems good economic systems that
condition better people you also want to
make more sovereign people that lead to
better whole systems but when we start
thinking about these feedback loops and
the same is true with if someone is in
an economic system that's causing
certain kinds of stress and certain
kinds of behavior does that affect their
brain and their health yes but if we
also are - someone's what they're doing
with their diet and with their
physicality that's affecting their brain
and health and affect the decisions that
they make in the world yes it's very
much both and so mine brain interface is
a classic one like supply and demand
like individual and collective and to
really get the basins of attraction
right we have to not think about
either-or we have to think about the
synergies and the feedback loops yeah
this reminds me actually but what I
noticed and I hadn't expected to be the
case but I noticed that there was a
reasonably common misconception coming
back from from people about neuro hacker
which was because we had specifically
focused on the physiological you know
body mind a body brain pieced the
equation that somehow we were also
collapsing the entire space down to just
that one thing right so that we're
saying hey this is the the elixir of all
good things and just do this everything
will be okay
when in fact of quarters obviously that
can't be the case that every single
component of all behavioral
interpersonal social cognitive and many
many different kinds of biochemical
characteristics are all necessary to
achieve well-being you have to learn how
to eat right you have to learn how to
engage in the various kinds of
mindfulness and/or physical practices
that are appropriate to you to do well
you have to actually have self-awareness
to know how to answer the question of
what's appropriate to you I mean these
are all it's actually I think this
creates the highest frankly the highest
degree of optimism in the context of the
the Cisco for the problems we're trying
to deal with which is that the the court
answers to all the problems end of
actually being very similar meaning that
yep
you want to solve a problem around
health you want to solve permanent
education want to solve a problem on
economy myself emerald war first and
foremost always already bring it all the
way back down to core capacities because
you can't respond to any of them unless
you have them and if you do have them
your ability respond to all of them
basically just becomes fungible yeah
they're more or less domain and in
specific and then there was actually
something that came to me as you were
describing as you were talking a few
moments ago that I thought in the path
that I thought might be very interesting
to share and said in an evolutionary
language so you know in traditional
evolution you have you have an organism
and you have the the landscape or the
ecosystem which that organism is
existing and the basic idea is that the
the organism is is striving to be fifth
meaning had to compete for scarce
resources which may be its own body
against predators and be able to
reproduce and one of the interesting
things that exist in the organisms
portfolio of actions is a concept called
niche production and so if you happen to
be say really really good at thriving in
the swamp
if you have the capacity to turn more of
the world into swamp that's to your
local advantage but of course it turns
out there's a problem that if you become
so capable of constrain
controlling your environment that you
lose your individual adaptive capacity
then if and when something happens that
pushes the environment out of your
control so the swamp transitive desert
you're just dead alright so there's very
interesting balance between niche
construction and intrinsic adaptive
capacity but there's actually even a
higher-order synthesis between those two
which we may actually just be humans may
just be uniquely entering to the
possibility of proceeding and doing and
in fact may actually be necessary that
we do it which is if you can come to the
point where you can actually have full
responsibility for your individual
well-being and for the enduring
well-being of the niche in which you
live and now as as an organism you are
no longer evolving in a niche you and
your niche are in fact co-evolved such
that the integrity between the two is
fully maintained meaning that your niche
does better the better you do and you do
better the better your niche does that
has an endurance characteristic that
cannot be achieved through any other
evolutionary strategy mmhmm yep
and I think that is a great place to
leave this one on because we have went
long here and covered a lot of territory
from economics and then crypto economics
and blockchain to education healthcare
medicine sovereignty niche construction
versus intrinsic adaptiveness so I think
this will be a fun one for people to
figure out how to make sure notes of and
if anyone wants to see more of Jordans
thinking on these topics sometimes he
writes on medium and it's worth just
google Jordan medium Jordan Greenhalgh
and you'll see he's got actually some
really epic articles on sense banking
and politics and since making applied to
different domains like that and yeah
this was fun
this is good yeah it was but all right
thanks thank you for listening to
collective insights for the full show No
on this episode and for more great
interviews visit us at neuro hacker.com
slash collective insights if you liked
this episode please subscribe to the
podcasts and leave us a five star review
on iTunes
want to learn a better strategy for
mental well-being we designed a
beautifully illustrated 32 page guide
integrating care for your mind brain
body and environment into a balanced
approach for a better life download the
foundational guide to neural hacking at
neuro hacker comm backslash guide
[Music]
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]