howdy this is Jim rut and this is the
Jim rut show
[Music]
listeners have asked us to provide
pointers some of the resources we talked
about on the show we now have links to
books and articles referenced in recent
podcasts that are available on our
website
we also offer full transcripts go to gym
rut show calm
that's gym rut show calm today's guest
is Jason Brennan professor on the
mcdonoughs School of Business at
Georgetown University
hey Jim good to be here thanks for
having me yeah great to have you on
Jason is the author of a dozen books and
is one of the more entertaining Facebook
feeds at least if you are in a snowflake
and aren't easily triggered and I'm like
some of the guests I've had on I
actually read a couple of Jason's books
before I tracked him down and asked him
to be on the show
in fact we're mostly going to talk about
those two books against democracy and
cracks in the ivory tower the moral mess
of higher education and I must say one
of the reasons I would reach out to
Jason's not only were the books
inherently interesting but also his
style is definitely a bit of a bomb
thrower he says it's like he thinks
doesn't hold back and that's as our
regular listeners know what we like here
on the gym rut show before we get
started though on those two topics I
would like you to talk a little bit
about how you ended up at a business
school looking at your educational
background your publishing background
clearly a philosopher by training with
some work in political science what
brought you to the business school
certainly that was not the case in my
day when I went attended the Sloan
Business School we didn't have any
philosophers running around loose yeah
that's a good question
well my entire department here at the
McDonough School of Business is sort of
like the island of misfit toys and I
wish I had like a really nice story to
the effect of I realize that business
education is the way to go and I just
love business education but in reality
it's just pure greed business schools
pay a higher salary than liberal arts
colleges so at a certain point my my
wife was pregnant with our second kid we
wanted her to be able to basically quit
working and be a full-time mom and I
realized if I worked in a business
school we wouldn't have to worry about
money anymore so I turned down other
offers left my former University and
came here so yeah that's it I'm in a
political economy Department and a lot
of the people here are transplants from
the Social Sciences or from philosophy
and law and things like that find it's a
good place to be but ultimately it was a
desire to chase the money rather than
something more noble I like it a good
honest answer on why not what a concept
what a final thing before we hop into
the books is you've posted quite a
little bit on the bleeding heart
libertarian blog I thought it might be
useful provided just a little bit of
positioning kind of on your macro
perspective is that still something that
you more or less adhere to and how would
you describe what a bleeding-heart
libertarian is yeah good question
so I think in the middle of the 20th
century you had a lot of left-wing and
kind of socialist thinkers saying
something to the effect of well the
reason you should advocate socialism or
the reason you should advocate massive
redistribution is because it's really to
everybody's benefit and it imbues people
with the power to lead the lot their
lives they see fit and then you saw
certain libertarians pretty much taking
the bait and saying well it's true that
socialism does that or at least it aims
to but in reality we just we have these
rights against each other and we have to
respect those rights come what may
regardless of the consequences which
pretty much concedes the moral high
ground to people on the other side but I
thought it was really perplexing
response because there isn't evidence
that socialism works as intended and in
fact market oriented societies do a much
better job of delivering the goods to
the poor than the alternatives so I
think what bleeding-heart libertarianism
is is actually the mainline of classical
liberal thinking over the past few
hundred years if you start with John
Locke and Adam Smith and so on and you
look at what they were saying you know
and Adam Smith wrote The Wealth of
Nations he was revolutionising the way
that we think about prosperity by saying
that the measurement of prosperity is
not how big the king's army is or how
much money is in his Treasury but the
opportunity and welfare available to the
average person so I think what
bleeding-heart libertarians are saying
is freedom economic freedom civil
liberty and so on are important like as
a way of respecting people yes but also
they work they deliver the goods and it
matters that they deliver the goods
all right that sounds good I would like
to point out that not only did Adam
Smith write The Wealth of Nations but
about the same time soon thereafter he
publishes Theory of Moral Sentiments
which he backed away a little bit from
some of his arguments in The Wealth of
Nations and it's good to consider that
Adam Smith had other aspects other than
the way he's often portrayed by you know
sort of classic neoliberals mm-hmm I'd
also point out for our listeners and
we'll have a link up on our website on
this that I recently engaged in a letter
wiki exchange was a really cool new
website where thinkers on opposite sides
of issues can exchange some one-on-one
letters in public view and my
correspondent was max borders who's
written on libertarianism and what he
calls liberal anarchy and I took the
position why I am no longer a
libertarian and anyone interested in
those issues I would advise them to
check that out now let's hop into
against democracy I want you to take
early on in the book I thought was
actually quite nice was describing the
players and democracy is hobbits
hooligans and Vulcans could you define
those for our listeners absolutely so if
you've read the Lord of the Rings novels
or if you've seen the movies you might
recall that hobbits are these diminutive
people that live a kind of 18th or 19th
century British genteel light style like
rural lifestyle and they they don't care
much about what's going on in the
outside world there's a cosmic struggle
between the forces of good and evil but
they're not much interested in that they
just want to eat their breakfast and
their second breakfasts and their
elevenses and at lunch and a snack and a
second snack and dinner and smoke their
pipes and just sort of be on their way
and the political analog of that is a
person who is just somewhat
disinterested in politics and if we look
at the typical non voter in a modern
democracy the people that have the right
to vote but who choose not to in
voluntary voting systems what we find
about those people is the reason they
don't vote is because is overwhelmingly
because they don't think politics is
interesting and we also find some other
features about them they typically know
next to nothing about politics or in
fact they're often systematically
misinformed like they're not even
ignorant
worse than ignorant they get the facts
wrong they have very few political
opinions if you pull people and ask them
for an opinion they'll tell you on the
spot because people hate to say I don't
know but if you ask them that same
question a week later or two weeks later
which these studies have actually been
done they'll give you a completely
different response and they'll be
unaware that they've given you a
different response so they're just sort
of answering at random so they don't
have very many political opinions they
don't have a stable ideology they're
basically disinterested in in politics
overall and that's really roughly about
half the US population maybe even more a
recent book came out called neither
liberal nor conservative and they argued
on the basis of very strong evidence
that's been collected over 70 years that
really only about 16 out of 100
Americans has a stable set of political
opinions that persists over time and the
other 84 out of 100 are basically
agnostic so I might actually be
understating the amount of a hobbits
there are now think about hooligans
so think about soccer fans and countries
that actually care about soccer like I
was in Sao Paulo Brazil watching two
local teams that were rivals play each
other and they had to separate the fans
into opposite sides of the stadium put
up large metal barricades that had
police officers on either side they put
metal barricades around the stadium and
they separated fans so that you had to
basically walk about two kilometers to
get from one side of the stadium to the
other and that's because the fans would
fight each other they they rapidly hate
one another nothing about sports fans is
that they're often very well informed
but they're also extremely biased so if
you think about say Tom Brady being
accused of deflating footballs back a
few years ago people from the New
England area say that he wasn't actually
guilty and people from everywhere else
say that he was we all have access to
the same amount of information but we
interpret that information in a way that
flatters what we'd like to believe and
they're also sports fans often can
recount lots and lots of facts about the
games they can tell you what happened in
the World Series a couple years ago or
they can tell you what would happen in
the World Cup from 40 years ago but
again they're biased so the political
analog of that would be the typical
citizen who chooses to vote when we
study those people especially people who
vote persistently we find that they're
often significantly better informed they
do know at least some of the basic facts
but there
extremely biased they only look for new
sources that confirm their pre-existing
point of views they ignore it if they
new sources that disconfirm what they
believe they're also only likely to be
friends with or date or marry or work in
places where they're surrounded by
people with whom they agree and in fact
there's massive amounts of political
segregation in the u.s. four people are
basically sorting into ZIP codes on the
basis of whether it's a democratic or
republican zip code and they don't want
to live near people that disagree with
them they don't want to work with them
they're super biased towards the other
side where Diana mutts a political
scientist at the University of
Pennsylvania into this really cool study
where she went around asking people hey
you're a Democrat why would anyone be a
Republican and the most common answer
was oh that's simple they're stupid and
they're evil and the Republicans say the
same things about the Democrats so it
turns out that that's the most common
way of thinking and those people who say
that they're the ones that participate
the most in politics a small minority of
people are able to articulate the point
of view of the other side in a way that
the other side would agree with so
you're a Democrat but you explain to me
what Republicans think I show that to
Republicans they go yeah that's my view
those people hardly participate in
politics at all so rabid sports fans of
politics for the cool agains and that's
I in the book I thought it was roughly
about fifty percent of the population
though some new evidence has come out
that maybe there's more more hobbits and
fewer hooligans than I thought and so
Vulcans are supposed to be like ideally
rational people who they might have
beliefs but they only hold those beliefs
is strong usually evidence allows and as
soon as they get disconfirming evidence
they change their beliefs in light of
the new evidence it's one way of
thinking about democracy is some people
have this hypothesis that the average
person is a hobbit so to speak they
don't know much but if we just get them
to participate more in politics they
will turn into Vulcans and then we'll
deliberate with one another will come to
understand each other and we're all kind
of make a good vote together but the
evidence I think is very is basically
overwhelming that people are hobbits and
hooligans and the more they participate
in politics the more hooligan ish they
become there really are no Vulcans and
this is bad because a lot of our
theories about why we should have
democracy presuppose that we're going to
act like Vulcans when in fact were not
for hooligans ah a lot of it lots of
interesting
points there First Lord of the Rings I
have read it 38 times and I'm about to
set off on my 39th Wow
my number one touchstone for all kinds
of things from the simply narrative to
the highly moral it's really a book that
obviously bears rereading I read it far
more than anything else with respect to
non-voters I actually funded a research
effort at the journalism school at
Northwestern on non-voters in the 2012
elections where we surveyed a whole
bunch of people and came up with similar
lines of results to what you described
but I will will put a link up on the
website for people who want to read that
research but yeah definitely there are
an awful lot of people who are
disengaged now to dig into that a little
further your book catalogs along but
alas not very surprising list of ways
that voters are ignorant apathetic and
irrational could you share a few of
those some of the details yes of
basically since 1958 there been these
studies have been conducted by large
numbers of different peoples including
the government itself cataloging what
voters know so something they're saying
called the American national election
studies and what it tests it's done
every other year and what it tests
varies from year to year but in most
versions of this they give voters a
battery of questions like just basic
things like who's the president who's
the vice president who controls Congress
can you identify the unemployment rate
and so on the funny thing about this
test isn't in a very zr2 year but on
average what you find is it's a
multiple-choice test and when people
don't know the answer they guess and you
typically find that roughly the top 25
percent of voters get kind of like an
a-minus on the test the next sort of
middle 50% do sort of equivalent to
chance and the bottom 25% do worse than
chance so that means we they're like
actually doing worse than just random
guessing they're systematically mistaken
you know so like 1996 the bottom 25% of
voters were pretty convinced that Bob
Dole was more liberal than Bill Clinton
they didn't know which party was they
thought the Democrats were more
conservative than the Republicans people
overestimate things like the amount of
money that's spent on foreign aid in the
break
vote they overestimate the number of
citizens from the EU that live in the UK
it's only about 5% of the population but
the lis voters thought of something like
30% and the remain motors thought it was
about 20% if I remember correctly in
1964 during that version of that test
they asked people they knew whether the
USSR was part of NATO and a large
percentage people don't in a given year
most voters these are voters not just
non motors most voters don't know who
the representative is to Congress and
they don't know which party controls
Congress it's pretty much for almost any
fact you can think of the voters don't
know it other than who the president is
they usually get that and they usually
have about six months worth of memory in
terms of economic performance they know
whether the economy has been getting
better or worse over the last six months
but don't remember anything beyond that
and that's just on basic information the
kind of stuff that you could google
easily but sometimes knowing even the
basic facts isn't that helpful because I
mean imagine I have two political
candidates one who says I'm gonna try to
help the country by pushing for
protectionist economic measures and the
other says I'm going to try to help the
country by pushing for free trade even
if you know the difference between them
that doesn't tell you how to vote
because you need to know something about
economics in order to understand which
policy platform is more likely to
succeed but people they don't know that
stuff either it's been tested they don't
they don't know those things but it gets
worse because we're also extremely
biased in how we process information so
we have something called dis
confirmation bias which means that we
ignore evidence that goes against what
we already believe we have confirmation
bias which means we overemphasize
evidence that confirms what we believe
we have a kind of intergroup bias where
we see ourselves as members of a
political tribe and we tend to just go
along with whatever that group says so a
really nice book called democracy for
realist provides a lot of evidence for
this kind of behavior but the the story
that your sixth grade civics teacher
told you about democracy goes like this
people have a set of opinions and a set
of values they then learn how the world
works and they form a political ideology
that's supposed to express how you
realize those values in the world then
they look at the various political
parties and candidates on offer and they
pick the one that best corresponds to
their ideology they vote every
votes this way we get a kind of
compromise position and then our will is
expressed through democracy that's
almost certainly false like all of it is
false
rather for the typical voter it's more
like this you have a sense of your
identity like I'm a Boston Irish
Catholic person right and through
historical circumstance having nothing
to do with preferences or ideology or
even like the ability of a party to help
a certain group different groups get
attached to different parties kind of
through random random allocation
mechanisms and you kind of look in you
go okay I'm a Boston Irish person or I'm
an african-american from the south or
I'm the white evangelical or I'm a
college professor whatever you're
leading identity is you look at how
other people like you vote and you vote
the same way largely to sort of prove
that you're one of those people and then
for most people you just stop there you
don't even know what your party believes
you don't share the same values as the
party you don't believe in their
policies and you even know what the
policies are but then for some voters
what you end up doing is you find out
what your party believes and you
convince yourself that you agree with it
and we know that they're convincing
themselves they're really rationalizing
it because when the party changes they
will change their mind but they don't
know that they have so I'm not here to
pick on the Republicans the Democrats
are just as bad when it comes to this
but a nice example is what happened with
free trade and Republicans in the last
set of elections before the primaries
most Republicans who had an opinion
about trade said they were Pro free
trade Trump becomes the presumptive
nominee and then suddenly in about a one
month period polls show that Republicans
switch from being Pro free-trade to Pro
protectionism okay well maybe they
change their minds maybe Trump made a
good argument but you even asked them in
polls why did you change your mind why
did you switch and their answer was no
no I didn't switch I've always thought
that if you don't mind other good
example that one from history was the
Communist Party USA they famously hated
the Germans and then the Nazis right up
until the non-aggression pact between
the Russians and the Germans and
suddenly the Germans became their
buddies absolutely happens all the time
anyway continue yeah so to go along with
the sports analogy because I think the
psychology of political behavior is very
similar to the psychology of sports
fandom they're they're almost identical
really
think about Tom Brady again I'm from the
New England area and people from my area
they worship Tom Brady and they think
he's the greatest ball player of all
time I agree I think they're right I
think there's objective evidence of that
but imagine that Tom Brady gets on the
TV today and says you know what I'm sick
of playing for the Patriots I'm sick of
Belichick and I hate New England your
ball bunch of jerks I'm gonna move too
and work for the Jets instead well Tommy
down at the local pub who yesterday said
that tom was to go like he's gonna now
say that tom has always been overrated
that he was never that good he's always
being carried by the team and when you
ask him it like well didn't you disagree
with that last week he's gonna go none
I've always thought that and he'll he'll
be sincere he'll genuinely think that
he's always said that even though in
fact he's changed his mind
so the typical voter for the Democrats
Republicans who even knows what those
people are teased stand for they're
behaving that way it's not that you vote
Democrat because you're pro-choice it's
more like you're pro-choice because
you're a Democrat it's not that you are
against immigration because you're
you're Republican because you're against
immigration but rather you're against
immigration because you're a Republican
I think that's probably true for a whole
lot of particularly the more inside
baseball issues like for instance
protectionism and trade but there are
some certainly some hot-button issues
people seem to have strong and abiding
opinions about and I've actually caused
them to move parties rather than the
other way around think I'm thinking
about things like abortion and gun
control or two that hop out yeah even
then they're if you read that akin in
Bartels book they'll talk about those
issues and the idea of the single issue
voter and they provide a lot of evidence
that people like all the sudden groups
will just switch almost overnight they
go from being like they're evangelicals
and in a certain year they don't have
any concern for abortion at all it's not
an issue and then all of a sudden it
becomes a leading issue for them so one
way to think about how what political
beliefs do for us is think about
circumcision with Jews and there's lots
of other examples but that's just a case
of everyone knows why do you have this
ritual that you slice off a part of a
boy's penis at a certain age well what
you're doing is you're proving that you
are a member of the group it's an
expensive signal that proves sincerity
and it turns out that using these
expensive signals is a very good
way of like making groups cohere with
one another because it weeds out people
that aren't properly committed to the
group it shows that you can trust them
another example is why do we give
engagement rings when we're getting
married well if you go up if I say to my
wife you know hey we're driving in the
car and I'm like as we're dating I say
what you know should we get married she
doesn't know if I'm very sincere about
that but if I then come to her and I say
look I've wasted many thousands of
dollars on a useless trinket and I want
you to marry me she's like wow he wasted
all that money on nothing he must be
sincere it's a proof of my sincerity
so these signaling mechanisms they
abound all over the world and they're
very effective in getting groups to work
together there's good evidence that a
lot of our political beliefs serve the
function of being an expensive signal
you believe stuff and you try to show
that you believe it very strongly and
you mouth the words over and over again
in order to prove to other people in
your in your demographic group that
you're one of them and you're
trustworthy and therefore you can be a
good business partner you're a good
person to date you're a good person to
be friends with and so unfortunately
political views and religious views
often serve this kind of function of
social cohesion because we don't really
get tested on them at least not in this
life you know like if I if I switch
religions and I'm like I'm not gonna be
Catholic I'm gonna be Muslim that just
changes least while I'm alive that just
changes which people like me in which
people dislike me it doesn't change
anything else if I change my political
beliefs about I'm gonna switch from
being a bleeding-heart libertarian to a
die-hard communist it doesn't change
what happens in my day-to-day life other
than which people like me and on the
other hand though if I switch my beliefs
about whether there's a car coming
towards me as I cross the street I will
get punished by reality right then for
being wrong so certain beliefs about
philosophy and politics and religion
we're sort of free to use these to
express our membership in the group
because they have no actual bearing on
anything else in the real world yep I
think there's a lot to that or my friend
Robin Hansen was on the show and we
talked a lot about those kinds of
expensive signals and how they do
produce cohesion so clearly that's part
of it but what about the argument that
yeah true dad ignorance teamplay
irrationality but maybe they're random
distributed must cancel themselves out
leaving the Vulcans in control yeah
that's right so there's this idea called
the miracle of aggregation in the hope
is if people were just genuinely and
perfectly ignorant then you ask them to
pick between two things they would vote
randomly so imagine imagine like we're
doing a poll and you have a disease we
have to give you some sort of medicine
and for whatever reason we let this be
decided by the American populace
well we're offering you two drugs let's
just say a and B and then we have
everybody vote well the thought is the
typical citizen has no knowledge of
these drugs whatsoever so they're going
to guess at random and the more and more
people we throw on the more likely it is
that we get literally 50% going one way
and 50% the other because you know if
you're flipping a coin over and over
again you're gonna get 50/50 but then
the medical doctors who actually know
something will all pick the right
medicine and thus the group will behave
as if it's fully informed even though
only a small minority is fully informed
in theory as a mathematical theorem
that's perfectly good the problem is it
just doesn't apply to the real world for
a number of reasons one is people
actually don't pick randomly when
they're ignorant we have it's called the
position bias so when you give people a
list of things they tend to pick the
thing on the front and the thing on the
back and they don't pick the middle so
you give them if you give them a
multiple choice test and they're
perfectly ignorant they pick a and D
over B and C but you could fix that by
just randomizing the answers and that
could some weight to some degree
overcome it but it turns out there's
other things when people pick things
even if they don't know something they
pick something that sounds better
so you think about political candidates
if you had a Kennedy versus someone with
like I don't know an Arabic last name
they're more likely to pick the Kennedy
so there's that problem but it gets
worse because it turns out people are
not ignorant enough for this kind of
thing to work they have some knowledge
and so they have a tendency to pick that
go for like a certain political view
over and over again so if there's
systematic error and you can measure
that people make these systematic
mistakes they also follow one another
they're not independent
if you flip a coin and it comes up ten
it's a it's a fair coin it comes up
heads ten times in a row the next time
you flip it it's still 50/50
it's not dependent upon your previous
flips but voters copy one another and so
if voters are making mistakes they tend
to make systematic mistakes so
unfortunately it's a good mathematical
theorem but in the real world when we go
to test that we find that people deviate
this from this so much that in fact
voters are followers and they make
systematic mistakes and error does not
get canceled out but rather it gets
compounded how pleasant yeah it's
certainly obviously a oversimplification
to assume that voters are our iid random
variables who who actually are like a
coin flip yeah there are all kinds of
network effect aggregation effects etc
that make that theory that the vole can
somehow control unlikely and now it gets
even worse you make the case that it's
rational to be irrational if you take us
through that argument a little bit fact
I think here's the quote from the book a
person is rationally irrational when is
instrumentally rational for that person
to be epistemic alee irrational yeah
good so it sounds like a paradox to say
rationally irrational but it's two
different kinds of rationality what we
mean by instrumental rationality is are
you taking means or performing actions
which promote your ends what we mean by
epistemic rationality is are you
thinking in a scientific way in pursuing
the truth and the idea here is that the
degree to which people are epistemic lis
rational is dominated and determined by
whether it actually serves their ends
and that sounds weird in the abstract
but I can give a simple example that I
think makes it clear imagine that you're
taking biology 101 at Berkeley and I'm
your professor there's 1,200 other
students in the class I think the class
they're supposed to be really big cuz
like everyone's pre-med and I say at the
beginning of the semester hey everybody
I want you to know that I'm at a gala
Terry and professor I think everyone
should be treated equally and I don't
think that you deserve your own scores
because of I insert some like leftist
argument so here's what I'm going to do
15 weeks from now you're going to take a
final exam and that'll be worth a
hundred percent of your grade but rather
than each student getting whatever score
they got on the exam I'm going to
average everybody scores together and
everyone will get exactly the same grade
and then ask if you're in a class like
that
1200 other students you're all going
same grade no matter what I'm just
averaging all your grades together and
it's all based on an exam in 15 weeks
would you study would you actually learn
biology you probably wouldn't and for
what it's worth there been attempts to
experimentally confirm this and the
reality is people don't learn so it's at
the end people would know hardly
anything about biology and they might
even be feel free to indulge really
stupid ideas about biology it's not
because they're stupid as people it's
not because they're onions are all wrong
the incentives reinforce ignorant and
punish them for being informed like no
matter how hard you study you're still
going to get an F because you can't
count on other people studying so why
bother study what a democracy is is a
final exam that's held every four years
on really big questions but rather than
having 1,200 other people take the test
with you you have in the last
presidential election roughly 140
million people and it could have been up
to about 210 million people so if you
have no reason to study hard when it
comes to that biology exam give you a
less reason to study when it comes to a
major election and that's what we find
most people don't study at all they
don't know any of the information they
feel free to indulge their worst biases
they feel free to believe things that
are obviously false and very few people
actually put real effort and care into
it it's not because they're stupid it's
not because they're incapable of self
rule is because a built-in defect in
democratic voting is it incentivizes you
to the ignorant and incentivizes you to
be irrational that's not so good what
about some of the other arguments in
favor of democracy like John Stuart
Mill's education argument that political
participation makes us smarter yeah so
you know Mills writing that in like 1850
he has his hypothesis that he basically
says well in order to do politics well
you would need to know all of these
things so if we get you to participate
in politics you're going to have to
understand what other people believe
you're gonna have to understand their
point of view and and be concerned about
their welfare you'll have to deliberate
with others and then when you deliberate
you'll learn from them but what mill is
basically saying was people are hobbits
and if we get them to interact with one
another and do politics they'll be
turned into Vulcans yeah good hypothesis
but it's wrong and the way we know it's
wrong is by testing
we we run experiments where we put
people in forums and allow them to
deliberate with one another and then see
what happens and overwhelmingly you get
negative results with these things where
people they don't learn that much what
they do learn they could have learned by
just reading a pamphlet they become ever
more polarized and so on and the funny
thing is you know there are these
deliberative Democrats that cite these
studies and it'll be like one out of
ninety-seven will have a positive result
and then they'll say ah that see
therefore it works and then will accuse
me of cherry-picking because I mentioned
the other 96 on a 97 that had a bad
result so that's a little bit of
hooligan behavior on their heart too so
the evidence is just it doesn't work we
don't learn much and the reason we don't
learn much is because our votes just
don't matter very much if your vote
mattered if if you were personally going
to decide the outcome of the next
election or the outcome of the next
policy or whatever then you'd have a
stake in really being careful and
learning what you're doing unfortunate
you also have a stake in being very
selfish about it rather than voting for
the common good you probably promote
your own ends but if your vote mattered
you would treat it like it mattered but
your vote doesn't matter and so you
treat it like it doesn't and that's true
of almost everybody you try to provide
people education by say teaching them
civics in school or teaching them the
things that they need to learn to be a
good voter it it just generally doesn't
work and it doesn't work for the same
reason that school in general has a sort
of problem right you learn all these
things in school like maybe you learn a
foreign language you learn advanced
mathematics you cover some things about
Shakespeare and you read a lot of
interesting essays and so on and then
you test people a year after they
graduate and you find that they
forgotten more than half of it you test
them five years after they graduate and
they forgotten something like 80% well
why is that it's rational ignorance
reborn like I used to be fluent in
Spanish but after I left college I
basically stopped using and I've used it
maybe like four times in my life since
then so I don't speak it very well
anymore I used to be really good at
Latin not anymore I did all sorts of
advanced mathematics and I still
sometimes do but the only advanced
mathematics I really remember is the
stuff that I use in my job I took many
many chemistry classes and if you'd met
me it'd say age 20 I could have
synthesized various kinds of drugs in a
laboratory really easily and I don't
remember how to do that anymore why I
don't use it so the stuff has been
jettisoned from my brain same thing
happens with political information we
teach people through K through 12
education the basics of what they need
to know to be a good voter but they
forget all of it by the time they're 24
interesting when you and then you go a
step further and you say not only are we
not being smarter by the process but
maybe we're actually made worse more
hooligan ish it makes us enemies of each
other could you say more about that yeah
so think about the sports fan analogy
again when I met my mother-in-law she
said something which is absurd she said
I'm a fan of both the Yankees and the
Red Sox it's impossible that's right
because you part of being a fan of the
Red Sox is hating the Yankees and
vice-versa it's built into it so when
I'm growing up in New England area if I
want people to like me I can put on Red
Sox gear and when people see that
they're like oh you're one of us I'm
approachable we have a thing in common
maybe they'd be more likely to be my
friend and so on and treat me nicer at a
bar or whatever one way that I can sort
of show my commitment to the Red Sox and
become more of a people like a member of
my group is by hating the Yankees even
more the more intolerant I am of the
Yankees the sort of better I am as Red
Sox fan and the more other Red Sox fans
will reward me now that's true about
sportswear
though I hate to say it because I am a
Red Sox fan and I am a Pats fan I do
think Tom Brady is the greatest of all
time despite his lackluster performance
this this year I hate to say it but it
really doesn't matter and I really don't
have reason to hate Colts fans I don't
really have reason to hate Yankees fans
it's just kind of a thing we do as a
sort of play time thing but when it
comes to politics even though people
don't spend much time thinking about it
they don't put in the effort to treat it
as if it's something serious
nevertheless it's about morality and
justice in the common good so then you
feel like well I'm justified and if I'm
a Democrat I'm justified in hitting the
Republicans they're trying to hurt
people they're trying to cost our ORS
and hurt the poor and they hate they
hate everyone else other than themselves
and they're purely selfish and then you
ask Republicans and they say the same
thing about the Democrats so yeah in
order to show you're a good member of
your group you hate the other side and
the more you hate them the better you
are
a member of your group and that's much
stronger in politics than it is with say
like sports
in fact the effect is so strong that
current studies show that people are
more biased about political behavior
than they are about race or sex or these
other things if you think that people
are racist you might be right but
they're more partyís than they are
racist so one study that was done on
this you give people resumes and
independently have a bunch of people
code them which resume is better so now
you know when there's no political
affiliation attached to it that you know
99.9% of people say resume is better
than resume B now you do is you take the
same resumes and you attach a political
affiliation you say have the person say
that in high school they were on the
Republican Club or the young Democrat
Club and then you give it to vote people
and see how they rate it what you find
is that Democrats will overwhelmingly
say that a resume from somebody who's
like who says they're a Democrat is
better than the resume of a person who
says the Republican even though you've
carefully made sure the Republican one
is actually better like this person was
captain in the football team and the
Democrat was a benchwarmer this person
had a 400 GPA and the Democrat had a 300
GPA that he went to a better school or
whatever he has more work experience and
vice versa the Republicans will
discriminate in favor of the Democrat
the Democratic candidate when it comes
to job opportunities and these are for
things like cashier like we're not
talking about a thing where like
political affiliation matters we're
talking about separates irrelevant they
discriminate and they do this more than
they do with party other than we do with
race or sex or anything else the other
one I saw recently that was fairly
shocking but I suppose not surprising
for those of us who hang around on
Twitter and what-have-you is that today
parents will rank a difference in a
marriage prospect for one of their
children of a different political
persuasion as much more salient than
religion or race yeah I'm so that's
quite a change in say the nineteen fifty
so there's been something going on
that's made these hooligan --is--
tendencies in our politics stronger
though it's probably have been floated
probably the same thing was true in 1860
as it is today but that's certainly a
fairly striking statistic yeah
absolutely and the difference too is
people think it's justified
when you point this out to them they say
if when you've to have them read these
studies that shows that say a Democrat
will discriminate against Republican
when it comes to hiring a cashier for a
supermarket people's reaction is usually
yeah but that's different because I
should discriminate against Republicans
they're evil and bad people whereas if
I'm just kidding it's a person for being
black that's not appropriate because
there's nothing wrong with being black
so like that's their attitude that they
will just affirm it it's okay to be
partyi stin fact if you say things like
I think we should be accepting of all
points of view and I don't think I think
I should be friends with people even
though they disagree about politics
you'll get a lot of pushback I mean you
see this on college campuses especially
where people say you can't be friends
with someone who thinks that stuff
they're evil they have evil ideas they
want to silence and hurt people like me
so if you're just like oh let's let
bygones be bygones and still be friends
that means that you're endorsing evil so
there's actually like strong pressure to
engage in this kind of partyís behavior
yeah it seems like it's getting worse
all the time
about before we turn to your alternative
I'm gonna read a quote from you from the
book that I thought of as kind of the
summation of the case against democracy
I contend instead that your political
liberties and participation do not
enable you to consent to government do
not usually advance your interests do
not increase your autonomy in any
meaningful sense and do not protect you
from domination and do not contribute to
your moral development as a free and
equal person you want to say anything
more about that yeah well that's a
summary of a couple chapters worth of
work but basically one thing I do the
first maybe third of the book is just
going over the facts and the empirical
research about how what participation
does to us and what we know and then
maybe the next third is looking at
various other kinds of arguments people
give in favor of democracy some of these
things say things like well democracy is
good because it's fair but if you really
care about fairness you wouldn't really
want democracy want something else
because it turns out democracy is not
very fair and I moved Ian's reasons why
at some point there are these arguments
to try to say that democracy in some way
empowers you but the problem with all of
those is that your vote just doesn't
matter so a good way to illustrate that
is if you're a Jewish person in the
were fifth in the federal election in
Germany in 1932 it's an absolute
disaster for you if the Nazis and
nationalists win a coalition government
but you voting for against the Nazis you
voting for the Nazis and you staying
home have basically the same effect on
politics so your vote does not do much
for you just doesn't matter has a very
low chance of making any kind of
difference so all these arguments to try
to say well you know it's your vote
protects you from being dominated it
gives you autonomy and so it allows you
to consent to government they're just
they're wrong because your vote is so
ineffectual it doesn't look like any of
that stuff is true so at the end of the
day the argument for democracy has to be
something about the results that it
produces it can't be that it's just good
as an end in itself
okay now let's turn to your alternative
which you called
Epis toc recei tell us about that yeah
so Epis toc recei is a pretty old idea
you can see elements of an in Plato and
the idea is that in one way or another
you apportion political power according
to knowledge and competence and so the
term at pisaq recei was coined by the
philosopher david s Lind at Brown
University's a former colleague of mine
I used to work there with him and so
it's contrasted to democracy just the
rule of everybody though no democracies
actually extend everybody the right to
vote whereas Epis talker sees are going
in some way way political power
according to knowledge so the kind of
the version that Plato recommended was
we basically breed a political class and
trained them from youth to become good
guardians of the public good that's his
idea that kind of philosopher Kings
model and when people want to be liked
because they're hooligans if they read
my book or like glanced at the back
cover and they want to dismiss me
quickly they go uh-oh Plato said that uh
and there then they're done but there's
lots of other versions of that the stock
recei that are worth considering so the
Mexican philosopher Claudia Lopez Guerra
recommends we have a lottery and 20,000
people or so are selected at random and
they and only they are allowed to vote
and so that eliminates any kind of bias
in say sex or gender or race or whatever
or income but before they're allowed to
vote they have to undergo some sort of
confidence-building exercise and if they
can't pass an exercise they don't get to
vote and that's the system that we
that's a kind of a pistachio check on
who gets to vote based upon that another
idea might be which is not what I
advocate do I did I wrote a paper
advocating this early on but I don't
advocate this anymore you should have to
get a license to vote in the same way
that you get a license to be a driver so
you have to pass a test to basic
competence it could be as simple as like
identify your congressperson and
identify the vice-president from a list
of candidates and then you get to vote
otherwise you don't some people like
John Stuart Mill and even the left
liberal philosopher John Rawls advocated
plural voting where everyone gets at
least one vote but some people get more
than one vote there's a few other ideas
as well though the one that I think is
the best and it's not clear if we're
gonna be really fine about our
definitions of terms whether this counts
as democracy or at the stock or sea it
could be debated either way but it's
what I call in the book government by
simulated Oracle I think I like now to
refer to it as enlightened preference
voting so here's how enlightened
preference voting works everybody gets
to vote including your toddler doesn't
matter let them show up it won't make a
difference so everyone gets to vote but
when you vote you do three things one is
you tell us what you want so whatever is
being subject to an election or being
subject to a vote I'm agnostic about
what should be but whatever you're
putting there they get to tell us their
view on that second you have to put down
your demographic information because
this stuff affects how people vote and
third you take a test or a quiz of basic
clinical knowledge this quiz does not
determine whether you get to vote or not
it doesn't determine whether your vote
gets put in or not but rather when we
have three sets of data what people want
who they are and what they know you can
then statistically estimate what the
public would have wanted a
demographically identical public would
have wanted if it had gotten a perfect
score on that test so in fact when you
take to give these tests to people you
know your average grade is an F but you
can simulate well what would the public
have voted for if it had gotten an A and
a priori like just sitting your armchair
there's no guarantee that there's going
to be convergence but it turns out that
when you run these sorts of tests on
people you tend to find that voters vote
as if they were informed about economics
they vote for certain policies and
and interestingly a lot of different
political scientists and economists have
used this kind of method before to sort
of test the effect of knowledge on
people's voting preferences and they use
different datasets but they tend to get
the same results over and over again
that the public would say be more in
favor of free trade rather than against
it they'd be more in favor of emigration
rather than against it they'd be less
belligerent when it comes to foreign
policy and so on so in this sort of
system it's not literally the case that
say you get 7.4 votes and I get 6.8 and
that person gets 2.9 in a way we're all
basically equal but you're able to
simulate what the public would have
wanted if it had gotten a perfect score
on this test so it might arguably be a
form of democracy but I think of it as a
system of extracting the knowledge from
the people and the reason you get there
demographic information is that way
you're able to make sure that the
results are not because say of income or
race or gender is because of knowledge
you can sing it you can just test the
effective knowledge and one reason to
use this kind of system too is for the
past like say 30 or 40 years when
economists and political scientists have
wanted to ask the question how does
knowledge affect people's political
preferences or how does gender affect
people's political preferences this is
the way you do it you use this kind of
statistical method in fact if you don't
do this if you don't do this kind of
stuff your your results are basically
invalid now the big question that
everyone should ask it's the right
question to ask is yeah but who gets to
decide what goes on the test and the
answer is me I'm just I was gonna ask
you to steal man the argument against
but something you're getting ready to do
that yeah I mean it really should be me
but since I won't be here forever we
have to pick something a second best
sort of system and the worry that people
have which is a very reasonable worry is
if party the political parties in power
were forced to do this system they would
try to modify the demographic categories
and the test in a way that benefits them
at the expense of the other party of
course they would do that that's what
every party does in every democracy
already even we're not doing these kinds
of things a gerrymandered districts they
try to control the voting system and so
on to benefit themselves at the expense
of alternative points of view I mean
that's why I like first-past-the-post
voting will never go away in the US
because the Democrats and Republicans
know they benefit from it
so it's true that it will be abused and
we have to ask like what of all the
defective imperfect systems which one's
the best but an idea that I have which
might sound paradoxical is you let the
people decide what goes on the test so
we're going to have a test of political
knowledge that's going to be used to
weigh or to calculate what an
enlightened public would prefer what a
fully informed public would prefer but
you randomly select say 500 citizens in
the way that you select people through
jury duty you have them come together
for a weekend you pay them to do this so
maybe have a law that even says that
they can't be penalized by their
employers for taking time off and you
tell them you 500 citizens randomly
selected your job is to decide what
counts as an informed voter what do you
think voters ought to know and you're
gonna sit here for a weekend and come up
with a list of things and give us the
questions and then we'll use that to
weigh votes what's odd about that
because I've just spent all this time
arguing that voters are ignorant you
might think well how would they know
that stuff but the funny thing is when
you go and pull typical citizens what
sorts of things do you think you need to
know to be a good voter they give very
reasonable answers they say things like
you should know the president is you
should know which party controls
Congress you should know who your
representative is you should know
certain statistics about how the country
is doing and what money is being spent
on and historical facts if I even say
you should know the bus fare to get
across town they say reasonable things
so in a sense they know what should be
on the test even though they don't know
the answers to the test if that sounds
paradoxical I mean I'll use another
college example think about when you're
in you know you're getting a bad grade
like in a chemistry 101 you know what
the questions are going to be on the
test you just don't know what the
answers are right you're like I know I'm
supposed to know about like what happens
when these two things bond together I
know I'm supposed to understand what a
mole is I know so people that's kind of
what's happening with the average
citizen they know what the right
questions are but they don't know what
the answers are so I think we can let
them decide the questions that's not a
bad solution as I was reading your you
know your critique one of the ones that
came to my mind something I've written
about a little bit is maybe liquid
democracy also called recursive
delegative democracy what answer are
many of your objections I'm familiar
with delegative democracy I've heard
that phrase before and I think maybe
rather than commenting on that I should
say there's other there's lots lots of
other ideas out there about how to sort
of fix democracy by changing the way
that people vote or how they allocate
power so you know in a liquid democracy
or basically you're able to allocate
your voting power to another person and
maybe if we did that we'd allocate in a
more rational way or maybe you would end
up being being biased I'm not really
sure but I mean there's other things
that people have in mind and well what
is to just use lotteries instead of
having elections you know randomly
select people the way the Athenians did
and have them make decisions and maybe
if you randomly select people and kind
of have them serve and these sort of
citizen councils where they have to pass
certain laws they'll have an incentive
to inform themselves because they've
been appointed to an office
Robin Hansen whom you mentioned before
that you're friends with he advocates a
system in which people place bets on
policies and without get into the
details there's ways of if people place
a certain number of bets on one policy
being better than another you turning
into law and the idea here is that when
people have to place a bet on something
it disciplines them to be informed
otherwise you lose money and so that it
looks like this is a better predictive
power than other things so I should say
like I'm not wedded to Epis stock or C
as the best alternative one of the
reasons I picked it in the book was
because I think it's the most offensive
alternative it's the one that pisses
people off and so if I can if I can make
a case to the average person saying you
think democracy has a sacred value when
I say democracy you make the sign of the
Cross and you hear angels sing you
shouldn't do that democracy is a tool it
is a hammer that's all it is if we can
find a better tool not only should we
feel free to use it but we are obligated
to use it because so much is at stake so
now let me pick what you've been taught
since as a young baby is the most evil
thing
Epis talk or see and make a case for it
and show you that well there's there's
reasons to think it would be better than
democracy and if it is we should we
shouldn't use it but there might be
other things that are even better than
that why don't we exit democracy
anti-democracy the book is anti
democracy by Jason Brennan and move on
to cracks in the ivory tower with a
co-author Philip Magnus is that how you
pronounce his last name yes
Magnus okay and the
Oh Jason and fell up the aren't pulling
any punches here from right up front in
the book let me read you this quote from
a business ethics standpoint the average
university makes Enron look pretty good
universities problems are deep and
fundamental most academic marketing is
semi fraudulent grading is largely
nonsense
students don't study or learn much
students cheat frequently liberal arts
education fails because it presumes a
false theory of learning professors and
administrators waste students money and
time in order to lie in their own pocket
everyone engaged in self-righteous moral
grandstanding to disguise their selfish
cronyism professors plump out
unemployable graduate students into
oversaturated academic job markets for
self-serving reasons and so on so this
is not going to be a puff piece about
academia to say the least
but you also go on to say but many
people blame these flaws on gremlins or
poltergeist tell us a little bit about
gremlins and poltergeists then we'll get
into your case against higher education
yeah good so just like I had hobbits and
hooligans in the other book I thought
let's have some cute little dichotomies
in this book - if you know what gremlins
are you think about these corporeal
creatures that come in and sabotage
things no they they come in at night
they find your heater and they just ruin
it because that's like what they like to
do so the analog of that in higher
education would be when people want to
say that something is going wrong at
higher ed they point to particular
people that they think are badly
motivated and they accuse them of
sabotaging the system you know could be
a court could be certain like university
presidents or it could be like the
students have bad attitudes or the
Faculty of bad attitudes and we just
have to get rid of the bad people and
replace them with good people and good
things will happen and then poltergeists
are ethereal and incorporeal creatures
that also sabotage things and ruin your
house and so the analog of that would be
ideologies and attitudes you ask you've
got around college campuses and you ask
what's wrong with academia and they say
oh it's the spirit of neoliberalism or
it's the corporate business mentality
that's destroying a higher end and if
you leave the college campus and you ask
people on the streets they'll say well
the problem is like social justice
movements
and leftist ideology they're ruining
higher-ed so we say they might be
writing some of these cases that we
challenge a lot of that we say the
problem is most of what's going on in
higher ed can be explained instead by
bad incentives the rules of the game are
set up in such a way where all the
players involved from administrators to
professors to students can benefit
themselves and pass the costs on to
others or they can do certain things
which are collectively harmful but
individually beneficial and it leads to
suboptimal behavior so we say is why
don't we go through case-by-case and
look at the incentive structure that
everybody is under and then see how much
of dysfunction we can explain and also
reveal because a lot of the stuff we go
after is not the stuff that people have
been talking about and explained through
bad incentives just ordinary people
taking the bait and then if only after
that kind of basic explanation fails do
you start looking at things like gods
social justice warriors or ruining
campus or owes neoliberalism so at the
end we go after those things and say
they're not very much explanatory for us
but really it's just the people who work
in higher ed or ordinary selfish people
not completely selfish but predominantly
selfish and they face bad and sentence
and that's why they act badly yeah you
gave a nice example right up front about
a administrator who kept trying to
overrule the department on what you
might call an affirmative action hire
where clearly one candidate was better
than the other but didn't check off the
affirmative action box could you take us
through that example yeah so the
administrator in question it wasn't that
this person had a very strong view about
affirmative action but rather they face
a sort of issue where given the laws
that are in place the department in
question did not have the right number
of people who meet certain criteria so
if you don't have that you're
presumptively guilty of something called
disparate impact and if your suit you're
you have to prove your innocence and you
can be fined very easily so that's true
they weren't guilty that they had in a
sense broken the law that way
unfortunately the way that the law is
written I'm thinking about shoot I'm not
I'm not a lawyer so I camera my head at
that's title for title nine
rules the way that the law is written I
should say this is the 1964 Civil Rights
Act I think it must be title 7 well
whatever the number is love so no lawyer
can correct me so the way that the law
is written though you're you're not
allowed to affirmatively discriminate in
favor of the other groups in order to
make up for the impact for your
disparity impact so it's this kind of
paradoxical thing where in order to in
order you can comply with that law but
only unintentionally so he had a case
where the university did not have a
valid affirmative action plan that would
allow him to discriminate in favor of a
female candidate over the male candidate
but he also knew that the university had
too many men to women in terms of like
the right percentages so he was strongly
encouraging the without without flat-out
saying you need to discriminate in favor
of the woman he was strongly encouraging
people to think that way he would write
memos and memorandums that said things
like I want to remind you that every
hire is a diversity hire and people
would interpret that is sort of telling
them to discriminate even though he
wasn't actually saying that and legally
speaking he's not allowed to and then
when a male candidate came up who is on
paper much better than the female
candidate he said well you know I don't
understand why you want to hire milk in
it you have all these female candidates
who seem high quality so I think you
should they should rethink your decision
I'm not going to authorize this but
again it wasn't like this person's like
strongly committed to that it's just it
was his job to try to make sure the
university complied with these rules and
he was sort of stuck between a so-called
rock and a hard place where no matter
what he did he'd be breaking a rule yeah
very true another example I loved
actually because it was so to the bottom
line you talked about a case where the
Dean named Nancy and your experiment
letting kids do little mini businesses
and they decided to sell beer pong
t-shirts and the Dean didn't like it I
wasn't totally clear to me that was
actually your Dean or some other Dean
but anyway I thought the bottom line was
actually totally major case that's
mostly people dealing with obvious human
incentives the Dean said if students do
something that bothers parents such as
selling beer pong shirts the parents
won't call you
meaning you Jason they'll call me
meaning the Dean that I thought was a
perfect example of these kind of micro
personal incentives that drive behavior
in academia absolutely and I want to
make it clear we we do this in the book
we are not saying like we're above this
and we're better than other people so in
the opening chapters we give examples of
things that we do that are like this
like I go to hotel and I have an expense
account and I could walk across the
street and get a burrito from Chipotle
or it could be lazy and pay $100 for
room service and I'm just like I've got
7500 dollars left in my account I'll go
ahead and get the room service who cares
or I'll stay in a nicer room that I
really need when I'm in a conference or
as I'm sitting here talking to you my
feet are on top of my $2,000 standing
desk and it turns out I don't really use
the standing desk that often I forget
that it works money spent a bunch of the
university's money on this or even
thinking about where I invest my time
though it's not clear this is a bad
thing it might be what the university
wants me to do but I as a professor in
the mcdonoughs School of Business at
Georgetown have a very strong incentive
to prioritize research over teaching and
I can tell you exactly what the
incentive is because it's money and
other things if I publish one book or
article and what the university
considers an a-level publication so
cracks a ivory tower is an a-level
publications published with Oxford
University Press that is the number one
peer-reviewed press for almost every
field the university will reward me by
giving me a summer bonus or 2/9 of my
base salary it will increase my research
budget and it will release me from a
course I don't have to teach as much on
the other hand if I win the University
Teaching Award I think I get like 10
grand so I have a very strong incentive
to put my time and effort into research
and very weak incentives to put it into
teaching I should try to minimize the
amount of time I spend teaching them on
time I think about it and just kind of
like mail it in and instead pump up as
much research as possible then you go on
to and I thought was the deepest
analysis and the whole book was you know
perhaps a an attempt to reverse those
incentives that most universities now
require students to do course
evaluations you know we didn't have such
things in my day which was in the 70s or
if they did nobody looked at me nobody
gave a but so I understand now from
talking to professor's they're a pretty
damn big deal they count to some
significant degree in tenure at least it
not top research
tract universities and in promotion but
I think the word you said is the
research overwhelming shows that the
course evaluations are well garbage I
think you also said actually reading tea
leaves would be better it's equally
 but it's faster and cheaper and
you went into all kinds of really
interesting analysis about course
evaluations take us through some of that
yeah so most universities I mean I say
bonus I've literally almost all of them
there might be like three examples of
places that don't use these a student
course evaluations at the end of the
semester and they just ask the students
how much did you learn was a instructor
effective okay fair enough I mean I
don't mind the idea of having some sort
of check on professors I think it's good
to evaluate them and we should care
about this stuff I I want to measure
learning and hold her professors
accountable to this I mean I don't
really want my university to do that but
I want I think it should be done however
the question is are these s CTS the
student evaluations of teaching are they
actually measuring teaching how would we
know well the best way to do that is to
run various kinds of experiments there
are all these problems with if you're a
crappy professor at MIT your students
will probably still learn more than if
you are a really good professor at say
UMass Boston because the MIT students
are just smarter on average they're
going to learn more there's all these
other problems like all these
confounding variables but there are ways
of running experiments where you control
over all possible confounding variables
and you actually measure how much do
students learn from this professor and
it turns out that every time it someone
does any kind of analysis like this
there's not only not a positive
correlation between what students learn
and what their evaluation score is
there's actually a negative correlation
another recent example of this was
experiment was done where they put
students and two different kinds of
teaching and they measured what they
knew before the tech before the class
and after and then when one kind of
teaching method you have students
actively think through things but the
problem with the active learning is that
it shows you what you don't know so you
feel kind of dumb and then they ask
students to evaluate the teaching and it
turned out they measure they
lock through this method of teaching but
students said it was not effective then
there's another kind just passive
learning just lecture the students they
because they don't feel dumb because
they're not struggling they felt like
they learned a lot but in fact the
measurements show that they didn't so
there's there's a huge amount of
research I mean it's amazing how much
there is trying to test what our student
evaluations of teaching measuring
teaching ability at all are they
measuring effectiveness and they're not
what they seem to be interested is a
reward for being a lacks grader and also
largely a personality test do you are
you fun and engaging into students like
you by the way you might think well
being funny engaging matters maybe makes
them learn more but it doesn't so the
reason that universities use them even
though they're overwhelmingly
is one Dean's don't seem to know that
they're so they're been all
these studies where they they ask
students do you think student
evaluations of teaching are actually
measuring teaching effectiveness and the
students are kind of ambiguous the
faculty think they aren't and
administrators and Dean's think they are
even though the research says that it's
not they just don't they're not aware of
that another thing is if you think about
the there's a conflict between
administrators and faculty we're
fighting over resources we're fighting
over power administrators would love it
if faculty are interchangeable and you
could just replace them at will and that
you don't have to sort of invest in them
long term because that means more power
and money and resources for them and
faculty would like it if it goes the
other way so insofar as we use student
evaluations of teaching it's one way for
administrators to sort of win the class
conflict between admins and faculty and
I think you can cash that out in
individualistic terms too and finally
it's also a good way of bamboozling with
students because in the chapter on this
I go through carefully what would it
actually take to show that this method
of teaching is effective what would it
actually take to show that this person
is a good teacher it's really expensive
and really difficult and it interferes
with student choice so no one wants to
do that but you can give these
tests of teaching effectiveness and
trick students into thinking you care
about teaching and voila and then of
course once you get departments in place
that run this as their job they have a
very strong professional incentive to
continue to lobby for the use of it and
you have all these birds out there that
like run
has to provide soccer for and they Lobby
extensively for it so again I like I
love the idea of professors being
measured and how good they are as
teaching and being punished for being
bad teachers and rewarded for being good
teachers I totally think we should do
that but student evaluations of teaching
are not valid measurements of that
they're measuring something else and
that's despite the fact that you score
pretty high on these things I understand
yeah I selfishly benefit from them the
way that evaluations are done here in
campus your raises determined oh by
being better than the average in your
group I get better than average student
evaluation of teaching scores as a
result my raise is higher than it would
be if I got lower scores however again
these scores are actually negatively
correlated with learning so I can't say
you in my own particular case whether
they're learning more or less but an
average the fact that I'm getting higher
scores than some of the other people in
my department means probably my students
are learning less for me so I'm probably
getting rewarded for being bad I love it
in fact I actually liked your a fairly
careful analysis of where the negative
correlation came from it's one of those
things when you think about it goes oh
yeah of course but I've never
actually seen it laid out like that
could you take us through the negative
correlation phenomenon and what you
think is going on there yeah it's it's
puzzling why the negative correlation is
there but it might be things like so
this is a lot largely speculative it's
clear that there is a slight negative
correlation but why is there as not as
clear it could be that one thing is that
certain learning methods feel good even
though they don't actually work certain
methods require a lot from students and
they feel like they're not working even
though they do so again like lecturing
feels like it works even though people
learn less from it active learning feels
like it doesn't work because when you're
engaged in active learning you feel
stupid at the time
you sure struggling but in fact you're
learning more also grading people the
easier you are is a greater the higher
scores you get that seems an obvious one
to me yeah you know if you're a weak
grader if you haven't you know any kind
of reasonable theory about personal
autonomy how hell yes you're gonna get
voted up and people are gonna learn less
yeah people who are suffice to fising on
their GPAs right yeah I had this
professor in college who was a really
hard grader and she just didn't accept
anything less it was good and she would
just make you rewrite things over and
over and over again and a her case she
got good teaching
valuations only because none of her
classes were like required classes and
people knew she was a hard-ass so they
would only take her class if they were
willing to put up with that but if she
been paid to teach and they never had
her do this because of this if she'd
been made to teach like the introductory
political science course and she had
that same kind of method what would have
happened is most students would punish
her they're like she's really mean and
hard on me and she keeps making me do
more work and they would have given her
very low scores so as a professor you're
incentive is to sort of take it easy on
students and there's actually almost a
kind of implicit bargaining that goes on
with students it's like I won't require
much from you and you don't require much
for me
you get benefited because you have more
free time to to do the summer camp stuff
that happens in college and have fun and
I benefit because I have more time to do
research and all the fame and money and
statuses and research rather than
teaching yeah reminds me of the old
Soviet Union joke you know they pretend
to pay us and we pretend to work right
absolutely and fro it's worth there's
really good evidence that students are
studying much less now than they used to
in the past in the Year 1960 the average
student in college was spending um about
40 hours a week engaged in academic
activities and now it's somewhere
between like 23 and 27 hours some of
that might be because students are more
efficient they're better able to
self-select into the right program so
they're good at maybe maybe teaching
methods have actually improved and that
might be it but I think a lot of it just
comes down to we expect less from
students and get less okay how much
don't be head a little bit here on my
list because it Kies into the ongoing
conversation you had some interesting
things to say about the fallacy of GPAs
and grading in general could you take us
through that argument a little bit yeah
this is a because I that book we want to
fight throw fire and everybody so we had
that chapter on student evaluations and
faculty are going to read then go yeah I
knew it and you went carefully through I
knew it was ha ha and then the
next chapters don't go so easy on
yourselves because you're doing the same
thing okay yeah so then the empirical
research shows that assigning great like
again I I love the idea of measuring
things I am NOT a Hampshire College
hippie I have another book where I think
I argue that you can assign a dollar
value to every human life like I believe
in number
but because I believe in numbers I want
to be scientific I don't like GPA it
turns out that the process of assigning
grace to people like giving them a
letter grade actually demotivates them
it makes them learn less so that's a
problem so that we suggest that we
shouldn't we should maybe just tell
people how they're doing but not give
them a grade but it gets worse one
problem is that we say you know we all
use the same letters but we don't mean
the same things by it
so it's not just Bob over here and Tommy
over here they both you know was an easy
grader one's a hard grader so it's
easier to get an A here than their
that's it's not even that that's that's
not even half of it the problem is
grades mean different things so for some
classes like if you take a class at the
mcdonoughs School of Business or if you
take a class in the law school at any in
any law school grades are standing for
class ranking that's why you should pose
to rank people from first to worst in
the class and then you assign them a
grade that shows a rough reflection like
so maybe the people at like the 50th
percentile get like a b-plus or whatever
it depends on what the curve is and
that's how it is in some classes in
other classes a grade is supposed to be
a shorthand for a qualitative
description like excellent good average
or bad in other classes a grade is a
shorthand for a percentage of questions
you got right on some sort of test the
problem is you can't average these
things together so imagine you're taking
a class at the mcdonoughs School of
Business you get an A in one group class
that means you're ranked 1 out of 45
students you get a B and the other that
means you're ranked 22 out of 45
you cannot average it's just
mathematically incoherent to average
those together because they're not
identical scales so say well what's your
average ranking the answer is there
isn't one because the gap between
students and one in these classes might
be very different it might be very
clustered together in one class and very
spread out another they're not a
coherent thing when you have like a
class in English in a class in like
finance in a class in chemistry what you
might be doing is saying something like
here here's your grades mean excellent
plus ranked seven on a 45 plus 85%
divided by three equals what nothing it
means nothing it's mathematically
incoherent like so
we nevertheless do this and this could
be rescued by if it turned out that
grades were highly correlated with
future success linkages turned out yeah
it's mathematically coherent but we do
this and it turns out that people with
high GPAs do better than people with low
GPAs and there's a little bit of that
though to my surprise I tried searching
you know throw all these journals and
using Google Scholar for literature on
what does future great GPA predict about
people's outcomes and it looks like not
that much maybe high school GPA matters
a lot more than college GPA but it
doesn't seem to matter that much yeah we
all remember that you could pick and
choose amongst known gut courses to pad
your GPA have nothing else right
absolutely
yeah we professors we complain about
students of teaching we are absolutely
right to do so and then but we should
apply those same standards to our own
process of grading and grading does not
pass grading gets an F all right then
now I don't recall it being in the book
but do you have a theory on what might
work better for evaluating students yeah
actually I do sit in the book and then I
say we because we're selfish we hope
that our own universities don't follow
our advice what we should do is give
them qualitative feedback on how they're
doing with written descriptions of what
they did well and what they did badly
and give that to them there's really
good evidence that that makes them learn
more and it avoids the problem of
students engaging and great rubbing
behavior or students chasing the grade
rather than chasing quality it's good
evidence that works and people learn
more when you do it however it takes
much much more time and I selfishly
don't want to spend more time on grading
I want to spend more time writing papers
again if I spend an extra 40 hours a
semester grading that's time I could
have written an article if I write an
article I get a bigger race again we
come back to our incentives problem
right so if we you know put more
incentive on teaching and required good
qualitative feedback that you've put
some serious time in education may be
improved though maybe you have to do
more work to make your money but that's
okay we'll talk maybe very briefly at
the end about college costs and what the
 is going on there but before we do
that let's jump up to another topic and
this had a very nice inflammatory
chapter heading
most academic advertising is immoral
 yeah yeah for what it's worth I
recently gave a talk at the Department
of Education here in DC on that very
question
so if five years from now it turns out
that academic advertising is regulated
heavily then you might be able to thank
me but you know there's nothing quite so
tasty as the hand that feeds here's the
worry the opening of that chapter we go
through a lot of the advertising that
colleges do universities in general and
make these promises about how education
will transform you it will make you a
more moral person a nicer person smarter
it will improve your ability to think
you'll get all these soft skills that
you'll be able to use and no matter any
kind of job you get you'll be able to
use these soft skills and you'll in fact
use them they make these big promises
liberal arts colleges in particular at
universities you know like you know so
Arizona State has a liberal arts
division they'll say things like oh well
you know liberal arts training it's not
professional training but the good news
is it's better than professional
training because we're going to have you
analyze Shakespearean sonnets and right
philosophy essays and think about
sociological problems but the skills
that you learn in class you can apply
them to any job that you'll be more
creative and more open-minded and a
better thinker and better writer no
matter what you're doing I don't even
specific departments and I pick
philosophy because I have a philosophy
PhD they'll make claims like well
philosophy students get the best scores
on the LSAT and the UM CAD and the best
GRE scores so philosophy obviously is
making you smarter and every major in it
it also turns out the philosophy majors
despite the joke about becoming
hamburger flippers in reality they
actually make a lot of money and do
really well after about ten years on a
college thing that making more money
than almost any other major so therefore
we're actually helping you make money
you should major in philosophy okay
that's what they say and we give lots of
examples we even invite you as the
reader to just pick a college near you
go to their website see what sorts of
promises they make so here's the problem
with all that one problem is many of the
outcomes of college are not the result
of what the college did for you but the
fact that you aren't good enough to get
in that's called the selection effect so
if you think about a hundred people
who've been admitted to Harvard
University think of how hard it is
get into Harvard they're like oh at 4.1%
acceptance rate you have to be
incredibly smart incredibly talented
incredibly driven or even just have good
connections to to get into Harvard and
then can consume people get into like
Keene State University and some southern
New Hampshire to get in there you kind
of have to have a pulse and be alive I
guess it's about that's pretty much what
it takes high school diploma and be
alive so made no offense to the schools
because I'm about to like criticize
Harvard as I say this but the people who
get to Harvard are really impressive so
it's not a surprise when they graduate
that they do really well because you had
to be the kind of person who was bound
to her success to get him in the first
place so uh Ellen Kruger and Stacy Dale
and a few others have done studies where
they look at people who are admitted to
these really fancy schools that have
incredibly high selection criteria but
then it actually go to the schools
versus people that been admitted and
then go to a much lower tier University
because now you can start seeing okay
you have the same quality person but one
goes to the school and one doesn't
what's the difference in their life
outcomes it turns out in terms of salary
they end up making the same amount of
money
so yes Harvard grads do better on
average but not because Harvard is doing
something but because they're good
enough to get into Harvard so that's
already really depressing but it gets
worse
they make these promises about how much
you're going to learn turns out they
don't learn very much you can test for
how much students learn they forget
almost everything that they do learn
they make these claims about how the
skills that you learn in class you can
transfer to any job it's true that you
could but the question is will they and
there's this idea in educational
psychology called transfer of learning
transfer of learning is idea that if you
learn how to write analyze a
Shakespearean sonnet that will make you
better at writing a business memo if you
learn how to do advanced mathematics
that will make you better as you know
doing whatever kind of math you do on
your job it turns out that for about a
hundred years educational psychologists
have studied the phenomenon of
transcript learning and they
overwhelmingly conclude that people do
not engage in it that learning is
instead very highly specific in
particular and carpark mentalize if you
want people to be good at something you
have to teach them to do that thing very
few people will engage in transfer of
learning
unless they're pushed to do it by an
external force you know who's actually
really going to transform learning
college professors so it really is going
on is our model liberal arts education
is based upon a theory of psychology
which is true of ourselves and false of
everybody else so like that's pretty bad
but it gets worse it agrees and gets
worse is that college is extremely
expensive and it's time-consuming it has
a high opportunity cost so we make all
these promises to students and we are
sincere when we make them we believe it
but that doesn't mean it's okay so
imagine like um I I sit here in my my
office and I find the various chemicals
and stuff I have here and I put them
together and I make some sort of new
serum and I say to you if you pay me two
hundred thousand dollars for the serum
it'll make you smarter it'll make you a
better person and will increase your IQ
by ten points it'll make you more
open-minded and kinder and nicer and
better able to write and I offer you
this you know snake oil serum well if I
were to do that you'd be able to sue me
and your beautiful win prevail if you in
a court of law and I even might get
fined by the FDA and others imagine a
drunk company said you have a new drug
called Cola grow
calligraphy six hours per week over four
years for you to take it cost two
hundred thousand dollars you won't be
able to work a full-time job but if you
take caligra you'll become smarter and
get better test scores and you'll be
able to be employable in any job and
better at whatever job you do and you'll
have all the more open mind and become a
better person if Pfizer made that
advertisement the FDA would find them
they wouldn't allow them do in the first
place and they get fine and they
actually sold the drug and it didn't
work people to sue them and they would
win universities are making exactly the
same kinds of promises and the only
excuse they have is well we're not lying
because we believe it and the reason we
believe it is we don't look at the
evidence there's mountains and mountains
of evidence to the contrary
that's been adduced by educational
psychologists over the past hundred
years and we completely ignore it so
yeah I call it not false advertising but
negligent advertising it's selling
something on the pretense that it works
when you the seller should have done the
due diligence to test it before you made
that promise now it's a libertarian we
you support an FDA type standard for
academic advertising
uh yeah I you know I was only at the
department education I said I I'm Conner
Burriss is not a big fan of a regulation
in general I guess I think you should be
consistent with your regulations and not
exempt universities from them just for
like procedural reasons but I guess what
I really like to see is more of a tort
system kind of fix I think if someone
sued and won then that would change
things and there were some cases
recently I don't know the exact details
where I know people are suing certain
law schools for making certain promises
about employability they because of
those cases law schools stopped making
those kinds of promises so yeah I think
there should be something done about I
think University should be punished for
lying one way or another I mean again
not lying
sell you know negligent advertising
saying stuff that's false they should
know better than to say they may believe
but without any basis for such belief
for it absolutely yeah you know the
degree of harm ain't clear about this
okay if you go to like the metaphysics
story in Tucson Arizona I don't know if
it's still there but I was a graduate
student there is a store called the
metaphysics store and if you walked in
there they don't sell you books about
philosophical metaphysics they sell you
crystals another if you walk in
and they're like hey man if you like
take this crystal and put it by your
bedside table you won't have any bad
dreams man okay if it cost me ten
dollars like that guy he's full of
he should know better but at least I'm
only out ten dollars it's not that
harmful if he says if you take this
crystal it will cure your cancer man and
then I die well then he's done something
pretty rotten by making that promise to
me though keys in this case you might
think well you know buyer beware I
should know better than to think that
crystals are going to cure cancer or fix
my bad dreams you'd have to be an idiot
to think otherwise but universities you
know there's there's reasons for people
to think that they're working it's not
like buying a crystal but the other
thing with universities is like we're
costing people so much money even if
it's a State University like you were
like oh it's because they're they should
be private they should all be paid for
by the state same argument applies
education is expensive so whoever is
paying for this this is money that could
have been spent on all sorts of other
valuable things it takes tremendous
amounts of time right so you're wasting
students time and you're wasting the
money whoever is paying for this stuff
and you're depriving people and whatever
their next best opportunity would have
been so the more expensive colleges in
terms of time and money the worse it is
for us to make these promises and not be
able to back them up and all this in the
context of unbelievably insane prices
I've actually went and did some numbers
this morning compare then and now and
and I was a working-class kid my father
dropped out of high school and at the
end of ninth grade my mother left home
when she was 14 so I did not come from a
privileged background by any means and
somehow I managed to scrape my way
through MIT and I spent $16,000 from
between loans and grants and workand and
a couple Awards I got what have you I
just barely made it you know today I
looked up the MIT s forecast what four
years would cost there $300,000 I then
went looked at the st. Louis feds
deflator GDP since 1975 and the answer
is three point eight so my 16k should
have become 62k in those years but
instead it's three hundred thousand what
the right and of course you know
the issue is that it works quote unquote
on the numbers and higher ed has
essentially become a positional good you
know I want higher ed just so I can say
that I have it probably for signaling
purposes etc and that puts us all in
this crazed race degenerate game theory
race to grab our spot at whatever price
they charge us because it perversely is
valuable and the thing that screams to
me is why hasn't an industry arisen that
does signaling an evaluation that is not
free because we know that a free signal
is not worth anything but it's expensive
enough to be a good signal but is way
less expensive and I can imagine in a
six-month process of physical mental
moral evaluation that could probably
tell me as a higher err more about who
I'm hiring than $300,000 worth of fancy
higher ed why hasn't that happen yeah
good question so he have to gonna
speculate here about these things what
one thing's worth noting though is that
the sticker price of these universe
the actual price is often very different
so uh you know my university its sticker
price for four years is two hundred
seventy thousand dollars but on average
people are paying 120 all including all
expenses because people have financial
aid they get kind of grants and
scholarships and other sorts of things
so they're the real price is lower but
it's still even when you take into
account inflation it's still much higher
than it should be so like the average
student in MIT you can go on the
Department of Education website right
now look it up I wouldn't be surprised
that they're paying on average about a
hundred twenty-five but as you said it
they were just keeping pace with
inflation it should have been like 62 or
65 so it's much higher than it should be
even even taking that into account there
was a lot of financial aid back in my
Bay I mean my 16k half of it was
financial aid yeah okay there you go um
yeah why is it why don't we do about
this why is it so high a couple things
one is there's this thing called bobbles
costs disease it's explaining some of
the pricing problem in fact it might
even be explaining most of it Danny bhai
bobbles price disease is that certain
kinds of fields become more efficient
over time and others don't
and so his example he was using was
opera the technology for doing opera is
basically the same I mean now we have
microphones inside of Opera House some
opera houses you're not really supposed
to you're not that's actually considered
a bad thing but opera singing is not
really more efficient but in order to
hire someone we have them do opera
you're basically competing with all the
other things that that person can do and
other fields have become much more
productive like auto manufacturing and
so on and so since they could be lured
away to do these other sorts of jobs you
have to pay people more to do that the
job you want them to do even though
you're not they're not more efficient or
more productive and that's called
bobbles cost disease that might be
explaining like half of what's going on
in higher ed another problem though is
the fact that we subsidize higher ed
actually increases the cost of higher ed
so to analyze that imagine you know a
new candidate comes to power over the
next couple in the next election he says
I'm worried that too many Americans
cannot afford a Honda Civic you know
they should be able to buy like a a
small high-quality compact four-door
sedan but too many them can't afford it
so what I'm going to do is
everyone in the country gets a $15,000
tax credit to be spent on Honda Civics
or any other car like that and then yes
well what would happen to the price of
Honda Civics like how do you think auto
dealers would respond if we did that
they would they would raise prices right
yeah they would raise prices probably by
about $15,000 in fact that's what
companies do when you give math
subsidies if you give like a targeted
subsidy a small number of very poor
people and won't have much of effect in
prices but if you give a subsidy to
almost everybody then what happens is
the price of that good goes up but
that's for profit auto dealers of course
those greedy jerks are going to try and
take the money
but obviously noble people working at
Harvard and Princeton and you know Keene
State College or not going to do that
unfortunately it turns out they do
so when governments put subsidies
towards universities universities
respond by saying oh there's an
artificial increase in effective demand
we can charge more money and then we can
offer certain kinds of services we
didn't before like you know the
difference between if you went to MIT
now they have the experience as a
student might be a lot more fun because
they have the rock climbing walls and
the lazy river and it's more on the
dorms are nicer and it's like more of a
summer camp feel and they can also take
that money and like do more research now
than they were doing in the past and
have like a bigger faculty and so on so
universities react the same way auto
dealers do they they just capture all
that extra money and they keep raising
prices so the perverse thing is that the
phenomenon of subsidizing everyone is
actually increasing the cost of college
and making it ever more unaffordable I
don't want to say that's the only thing
doing it there's phenomena that would
cause it to rise and price even without
that but it's still going on
yeah now you're asking like what do we
do about it why don't we have a fix and
you pointed out that people aren't
learning that much if it's just an
expensive signal why don't we find some
other alternative signal I think here my
buddy Brian Kaplan has a good line where
he says you know going to college
signals not just that you're smart it
signals not just that your perseverance
but it also signals that you're you're
normal you're you doing society expects
of you like I imagine you know they
think about signaling when it comes to
you proposing to my wife one thing I
could do to prove them sincere is by our
$5,000 ring and say well
I've wasted money on a trinket I really
love you another thing I could do is cut
my arm open and believe right up until
the point of death and go look I want
you to marry me to prove that I want you
to marry me I'm going to believe for
four hours and then I'm gonna stop right
before I die and call an ambulance
now those are both really good signals
of sincerity in fact the second one
might be better but she'd probably be
more likely to take me in the first one
in the second because the second one is
so weird
she'd be like who the hell is this guy
like I don't know if I can he means he
really just want to marry me but he's a
creep and a weirdo I don't know if I
should be with this guy and the worry is
that alternative mechanisms of proving
that you've got what it takes in your
the right kind of person come across as
being like the person who cuts himself
to bleed and in order to show he wants
to get married and employers are like I
don't know we should take a risk on
these people they're weirdos so
education has the benefit of being a
conformist behavior that proves you're
the normal kind of person and why take
the risk on something else
yeah that's unfortunate but
unfortunately probably true well yet we
have time for one last question I got
bunch more on my on my list here but in
the spirit of throwing elbows every
which way why don't you talk a little
bit about the moral grandstanding around
tenure yeah moral grandstand is a
phenomenon about using moral language in
order to promote your own status
you see talk about morality and it
sounds like if you just take what people
literally think they're concerned about
ethics but in reality what they're
trying to do is show that they're a good
person and we engage in a lot of moral
discussion in academia when we're just
promoting our self-interest
so we'll say you know the English
department will say things like the
reason we need to force people to take
four courses in English is because it's
good for the students and they'll learn
more and become better writers but the
truth is we need to force them to take
four courses in English because that
gives us money and status so that's
that's the kind of behavior tenure looks
like another example of this the
arguments for tenure things like people
need to have academic freedom in order
to do high-level research and risky
research you give to people tenure as a
reward to give them the freedom to swing
for the fences and do risky things that
might not pay off okay good hypotheses
testable hypotheses they've been tested
and they're fall
it turns out as you would expect in any
other field when you give people a job
for life that's very hard to lose they
stop working as hard they publish less
their ideas become smaller rather than
bigger they don't swing for the fences
they don't go for like the bigger
long-term riskier projects they just do
less work people's research productivity
there's much higher when they're chasing
tenure then after they get it on average
again it's not true of everybody I mean
I'm I'm publishing a higher rate of
books now that I was before I got tenure
but I'm a weirdo and probably at some
point I'll get lazy too like on average
people slow down after getting tenure
they take lower risk projects they go
for smaller ideas rather than big ideas
and that's exactly what you'd expect in
any other field if you're working at an
ottoman as an auto mechanic and your
boss said to you hey here's the deal I
don't care how many cars you fix or how
much the value of the repairs is as long
as you avoid sexually assaulting the
other people who work here and you just
show up every day and do like the bare
minimum you can keep your job forever
and get a 5% raise year after year you'd
expect that auto mechanic would probably
slack off
that's what faculty do - the only really
good argument I saw for tenure was an
argument that said that maybe holds up
was an argument that said if we were all
able to get fired as soon as there was a
financial extension see then what we
would do when we hire people because
faculty decide who gets hired in their
own department we would purposely try to
hire people that are inferior to us and
that seems right I mean if I knew that
like the next time University is a
budget crisis they were just gonna start
firing the least productive faculty well
then I would make sure the next time we
have a job I try to hire people that
suck compared to me so that I keep my
job and they don't so I think that's
probably true but the other other
arguments just don't hold up tenure
makes people worse Donna stock valiantly
at the Santa Fe Institute or I've been
involved for many years and including
his chairman for a while we resolutely
do not have tenure for just those
reasons we only grant five-year
appointments that are renewable used to
be only twice but now they're renewable
an infinite number of times and I'm with
you I would not expect to defy human
nature by giving people a job for life
yeah this has been a wonderful
conversation I knew it would my wife
asked me what I thought the conversation
today would be like and I said it'll be
hot and furious and Illinois the piss
out of a bunch of people would it be a
lot of fun and it was all those things
so we're like the thank you for being on
here and for again to remind our
listeners to books cracks in the ivory
tower and the other one was against
democracy and I would recommend people
read them I read them before I even
tracked Jason down so thanks a lot and
this was fun yeah thank you for having
us a great time for me too
[Music]
production services and audio editing by
Jared Jane's consulting music by Tom
Muller at modern space music dot-com