all right hello Internet today I wanted
to talk about impostor syndrome which is
the phenomenon that basically everyone
feels like an imposter
no matter how good they actually are and
what they were doing and I think all of
society feeds into that because we
require perfectionism we require for
someone to look perfect in order for
their idea to succeed and then to some
degree we punish them when they fall
short in that either and so I was just
watching - we're looking into -
Elizabeth Holmes which she was the CEO
of theranos which took blood samples and
said they could figure out hundreds of
Diagnostics from once are dozens of
diagnosis for one little tiny prick but
she was 19 years old when she started
that and there's these big-time
investors that are giving her millions
then hundreds of millions of dollars
without having the concept proven
without having any scientists on the
board so she's now going to probably be
going to jail for it but there was a
piece like when I was watching her she
committed fraud outright fraud these
things are being used in hospitals and
being used to diagnose people there's in
no way she's in the right but when I'm
watching her I'm like right I see my
sister in her my sister who is not a
medical person does eyelash but required
as a business person to fake it till you
make it and say yes and then figure out
how you actually get there and that
process because we require it is hurting
things then people's actual lives are in
danger like in the case of Elizabeth
Holmes and then I watched the fire
documentary on Netflix which is about
Jay Rule and this guy Billy McFarland's
festival that was just like a big
up huge fuckup and a big piece of it was
like they trusted his vision even though
they saw it falling apart and he's like
no it'll happen cuz it's like no no it
will not you can't if you can't show us
the roadmap to how we get there you
clearly don't know what you're doing and
I'm funny cuz I'm in the opposite boat
where I'm like I know the big idea and I
 suck at that the actual
implementation of it and that's gonna
stop me from progressing the
in this society but at the same time I
know that this is going to be done
differently this is going to be done
with full transparency with everyone who
comes on board being able to say listen
this is where I'm not good this is where
I'm good
I only want to do what I'm good at and
at least on or where I'm not good and if
I'm the best at what I'm not good and I
can maybe take on those roles then okay
but with the understanding that like
that's not usually the hat that I wear
and I think this stops innovation in our
society when we require people to have a
perfect presentation to speak eloquently
to have the idea and be able to be
brilliant at the idea isn't enough right
even if Elizabeth Holmes at 19 had
somehow managed to actually come up with
this thing and it worked well she needed
her connections to be able to get the
money and then they just saw that
they're like Oh Monty signs dollar signs
this could be big big money they're
seasoned investors they are just as
responsible if not more response to who
were on the board they could see the
things that were going wrong but any
right I think that what I want to foster
is a society where you can make mistakes
where you can own not these big mistakes
I don't think these people should be
like either of them should be walking
free with the frauds they committed but
at the same time that you can have
something like that that she could have
been able to bring this idea of the
blood drop to market with a process of
having it actually tested not standing
behind oh its proprietary technology and
I can't disclose that but just trust
that this is gonna this is gonna work is
not acceptable and having I don't even
know when she was 19 years old and she
dropped out as a biochemist and as
someone pointed out that works for tech
because you can learn to code on your
own
biochemistry medical like it there's a
reason medicine medical doctors as much
as I'm hard on them all the time don't
drop out of med school and her like I'm
a self-made doctor it's like no you have
to kind of go through that process and
she doesn't know biochemistry she
doesn't know it's in a drop of blood she
doesn't know what's because she's like a
second year I have a full degree in in
file
and I wouldn't know how to do that I
wouldn't know enough to call her out on
it either like I'm like right it's a
tiny drop so it's not gonna have as much
as a larger amount but it should have
the same concentration so it should seer
ethically be possible but if she can't
prove that to scientists it's broken and
we don't have the expert the expert
financial people that invested were
expert financial and business people not
scientists they didn't know that and
you're not supposed to invest in things
you don't understand so the the fire
one's a little different because that
one was a festival but in this case we
could have worked through the process if
you have full transparency to say listen
it's working really well in these twenty
things it's not working on these hundred
and eighty how do we get it up to that
speed how do we get it to that point and
having the scientists come together if
what we she wants to make money she's
not gonna do it the way I want to do it
clearly she is giving up her freedom for
the sake of possibly making money that
she clearly does not and no longer has
but having a way to get a product to
market that is actually that we can test
it so we can trust it and not just rely
on the powers that be to say that it's
safe because it clearly is not it
clearly they don't they don't know from
they just don't know they don't know
whether something that's trustworthy we
need to have full transparency and I
think this idea that someone has to be
perfect in order to bring an ID in the
world bites us in the ass because some
people have to act in secrecy because
heaven forbid they show you a flaw I'm
gonna do this project 100% here's my
flaws and we are going to move forward
and we're going to do it messily and
chaotically but as we make mistakes
we're gonna make it better we're gonna
have everybody able to contribute yeah
that's this is why that didn't fly and
have everyone be able to contribute
solutions and then test those solutions
not the secrecy that breeds this is like
the opposite of impostor syndrome this
is Trump this is like over egoic I'm the
best look at me and we believe them just
cuz that's what we're designed to to
believe so see you tomorrow