my own background is in religious
studies primarily sort of a mix of
specializing in Buddhist studies and
Islamic studies obviously my talk with
John was much more on the the Buddhist
side of things focusing in on on
nishitani but yeah I'd connected with
John a couple months back when I
organized a discussion between him and
Tom Cheetham who does does work on Enric
or bong so more on the Islamic side of
things there and we'd also had a little
bit of talk over email about nishitani
as at the time I was I was leading a
discussion group through Nietzsche
Tunney's religion and nothingness so
yeah I wants John started up his his
voices with Reiki series I figured I
would reach out to him and see if we
could dig into this text considering it
was such an impactful one for for both
of us so yeah I discuss inflate really
well I'm really happy with with how it
went as I mean just the the materials
relating to new sheet Ani online
especially in video form right now we're
very very specialized stuff like like
add students giving giving various
papers on like a Descartes and new sheet
on ease thought and how his
interpretation it's really covered by
Heidegger or something so very
high-level stuff that someone like just
just getting into the text would would
feel quite lost trying to bring to a
tackle so yeah the the discussion with
John we really kind of followed the arc
of the the text really not not very
intentionally it just kind of kind of
happened that way which was interesting
so yeah it was it was really exciting to
sort of cover these these different
concepts and at least be able to
introduce them to an audience so they
can dip their feet in a little bit and
see if they might want to explore deeper
with some of this kyoto school
Southie
let me ask you what what you know John
is called it's one of the three most
influential books you know what makes a
philosophy book that powerful like what
is it about this book that that you both
Revere so much I think just speaking for
myself it's it's how he's able to like
weave together different levels of
discourse so excellently I mean this is
certainly a history of philosophy texts
in some important ways and that ego goes
through various philosophical figures
and levels critiques and shows how
interpretations have sort of built on
top of one another but it's always also
at the same time through that speaking
very pertinently to to an existential
level of our own experience and some of
these fundamentals that we hit up
against in life and and so it's I mean
it's almost a paradox in that like my
own students if you want to call down as
we were going through this text we're
constantly wondering like what's what's
the like pertinence of this what's like
the practical value and I saw that in
some of the YouTube comments as well but
somehow even though it's it's it's at
this so abstract level there really is
it really speaks to some of the core and
the depths of human experience and yeah
it reads it reads like a meditation in
you know in a deep sense and and
sometimes as like a Zen Cohen and just
how he's able to to weave all those
levels together and and state something
profound and historical about the
developments in philosophy while also
like speaking like to you and in your
own deepest being is is is really really
something unique a
have been found in other philosophical
works
right so when I was one more
introductory question then I'll pass it
to two others but you talked a lot about
nihilism and the hill of tea in the talk
can you just give us a definition of
nihilism and Elodie
yeah the the easiest way to perhaps
conceptualize these things ahilla D
especially is is just like the the
finite aspect of things the that aspect
of like death and decay that is that
always comes along with the the being
the existence the the substance of the
thing so I mean you can't have some
object that also won't be falling apart
and in in some sense as it as it moves
through time so ility really just refers
to this pervasive aspect of experience
that an existence that everything is has
it at its at its ground there there's
not you can't find something that is not
in some way connected to this ahilla T
it's like the as as death is to life
Hilla T is to being and so so nihilism
is really just the personal
psychological standpoint of really being
existentially aware of the this field of
ahilla T and being sort of caught and
it's in its grasp so to speak and a lot
of a lot of the time we hear about we
hear people refer to nihilism and sort
of a derogatory or negative you know
negative way you think it's
intrinsically negative
yeah that's a great question for
nishitani it is definitely not
intrinsically negative in that it is
just an aspect of existence like like
being itself is but the the human being
staying stuck on the standpoint of
nihility and nihilism that is a limiting
situation and and one which comes with
with negatives so the progression
through this this nihilism this field of
nihility is is something that that ought
to be undertaken so that we get to the
integrated standpoint of Shunyata our
emptiness where ahilla tea and being
codependence and co-existence are really
really allowed to come forth both within
our own viewpoint but also through that
like ontological e in the world as well
this - twofold term of realization that
it's something that you apprehend
personally but it also becomes
actualized in in the world there as you
have pretended
all right well thanks so let me turn it
to two questions so who so I ask people
to you know just I think it went well
with with John's talk so you know I just
sort of first come first serve and if
you hear someone talking you know maybe
let them go first I think we have a few
enough people that everyone should have
have time to ask ask their question so
so go ahead who has it who has something
to ask
don't be afraid well I guess I'll go
first
I actually wrote out this question and
then if you saw it early or not but it
is why does nishitani I understand his
criticism of Aristotle and substance and
I'm sort of agree with it but my
question is why is he going off to
Aristotle and not say Parmenides is he
getting I think Heidegger made more
religious a move and I'm just wondering
the mission to get it from Heidegger or
is there something else behind it yeah
that's a great question
hey I would be inclined to say yes that
this is a as a Haida garyun influence in
his thinking here yeah it is the same
same with his reading of Descartes is
definitely indebted to Heidegger in
terms of why he makes that specific move
that is the good question
I don't know if I know enough about
Parmenides to give a particularly robust
answer my my intuition is is perhaps
just that Aristotle's such a such a big
named thinker and so many so much of
Western philosophy really directly and
indirectly goes back to Aristotle and
has built off of Aristotle and so even
if he might not be the like pinnacle of
substance thinking and in the way that
Parmenides might be he his impact with
that style of philosophizing has been
very pervasive and so the decision to to
go towards Aristotelian ism I think has
more to do with trying to speak to some
of the very foundations of Western
philosophical thinking rather than
trying to tackle this idea of substance
and perhaps its most mature form if that
if that makes sense because he weaves in
a lot of
ideas from different thinkers especially
in terms of like nihilism melody or
nothingness he he goes over Nietzsche
Heidegger Sartre all in in quite a bit
of detail and so really really what he
is trying to do is look at the the arc
and the development of Western
philosophical thinking and and critique
where things haven't haven't lived up to
his vision of emptiness or Shunyata and
Aristotle's one of the really
foundational figures in in terms of this
arc that he's looking at okay thanks to
the answer I might as a candidate
explanation just offer the fact that we
don't really have much of Perlman ideas
left right you know so people we have
fragments but you know they say he was
the first MIT position hmm I think one
of the books at Vevey ki recommended
even you know what it's at Erik Paul's
book on metaphysics explicitly you know
it makes that claim for example yeah
well the one question that I would have
been in that regard I mean we do have
good records of Plato for example and
can you speak to how Plato would be
different from Aristotle in terms of
substance is that something that you're
familiar with
yeah I'd say nishitani is definitely
more aligned with Plato than Aristotle
philosophically the the Platonic idea of
form or I das even though it's it's
still a more of a being notion of what
constitutes the identity of a thing it's
it's not it's not as materialized in in
the same way that that Aristotle's
substance vision is materialized might
not be quite the right word for this but
well it sounds to me like you're almost
referring to the differences in realism
because latronnik realism you know
it was the generator was not the
particular yes it was the individual and
well I kind of got like that kind of
hint from the way that you inve key were
talking to each other about Misha Tony's
emphasis on the individual because it
sounds like there's a similar kind of
tension going on there yeah yeah just
can I ask you that though for the
benefit of everyone can can you like
define some of these terms as you're
going through them just very briefly so
everybody can sort of be on the same
page with where you're at
great yeah so the the big term to keep
in mind here with nishitani is that of
Shunyata it's a Sanskrit term that is
most oftenly translated as emptiness and
that's that's really at the the core of
his his philosophy here so this idea of
Shunyata and then in terms of the
Platonic philosophy that we're kind of
getting into now we have the notion of I
das or or forms as if that is often
translated and ver Vicki talked about
this a couple times in his meaning
crisis series but yeah this is sort of
the idea that there's there's a there's
a world of forms
that's a metaphysical reality where the
sort of ideal essence of a thing is is
is realized so like you have the I das
of chair in this world of forms that is
sort of the the archetype of chair Ness
so to speak and so in this in this
philosophy of Plato compared to
Aristotle you you have a I mean a more
hierarchical vision of reality versus
considering things more in their
material particulars and a thing is
defined not so much in terms of its its
own substance or like materiality but
more in in relation to this more
intellectual idea of
of a form of an eye dose so in terms of
nishitani x' critique aristotle just he
he locates the the being of things much
more in this in this materiality much
more in this particular ality in a way
that that takes us away from meeting
things on on their own home ground so to
speak in nishitani x' language there
where as the Platonic conception here
has a little bit more of of that that
ability left in it
great think does anyone else have
have a question
you
just just go forward I
ones are
okay well I'll throw another one so
certainly you know what
what does meaningless mean so as
conscious intelligent beings it seems to
me that what we're sort of we have we're
meaning generating by our by our nature
now maybe not universal meaning in terms
of you know the universe as a whole
having meaning but it it seems that we
always should have meaning if we're
understanding each other for if we have
any kind of agent arena concept we seem
to have meaning so so how do we have
meaning its meaninglessness just sort of
mean like I think John raise it as
despair I mean that I sort of yet but I
don't really understand having no
meaning
mmm-hmm right yeah that's that's a
excellent Avenue to look at this so
meaninglessness in the shoe Tony's
conception is is intimately linked with
this idea of nihility sona hilla t is is
that which nullifies meaning so let's
say for example you're you you're your
grandfather dies and this death this
coming of me he'll 'ti can can
definitely lead you into this sense of
meaninglessness of of the relationship
you had
and and just like all all the
potentiality that was there all that
what you you you hope for and how you
idealize that relationship is it hits a
it hits a wall with this this coming of
of Mahela d but the important point here
is that that's not the the end of the
story for for nishitani because he
doesn't stop at this this perspective of
of meaninglessness of 'no hilary so when
we're able to soldier through the the
nihilism then the hill it'd be that has
come forth in this life experience we
get to this point on the field of
emptiness where
instead of trying to relate everything
about our grandfather back to our own
selves back to our own hopes wishes
goals on this field of consciousness
that we have and we've inherited this
from from Descartes really once we've
gotten out of that mode the the meaning
of our grandfather's life and our
relationship with him is able to arise
codependent ly with this ahilla T to to
be encountered on its own terms and on
its own home ground is the language
nishitani uses a lot so that that
meaning is the meaning we initially have
on this field of consciousness which is
very linked and determined by the
notions of being and substance that he
is critiquing here as as only one side
of the equation it it's it's real in a
sense but it's also limited and then
when we get to know he'll OD that
meaning is transformed into
meaninglessness but then this final
conversion to Shunyata is is what allows
meaning to come in to its its real
essence and it's it's not an essence
that denies nihility or denies
meaninglessness but it's a it's a
meaning that is a codependent on
meaninglessness in a sense almost like a
more like a practical example that let's
take the example of the grandfather
Diane like you know you have this life
with this grandfather I mean you've had
your moments you've had your
relationship so obviously there's
meaning there but okay so so he dies
what are the thoughts that represent
what you've just described mm-hmm so the
death itself would be a sub sub specie
of nihility it's a kind of nobility the
the being of this person has been
nullified by this
experience of death their life is
nullified so I mean that has a lot a lot
of consequences in terms of how we are
able to psychologically and
existentially relate because we're very
much in this in this mindset of meaning
being fully dependent on on on being or
substance so it I mean just in terms of
how a grief would would naturally
proceed perhaps you would have a sense
of deep regrets that you weren't able to
express something or weren't able to
have fully taken advantage of of the
relationship or that you never were able
to realize a certain project you had
together or something so these these
meanings there seemed to be nullified
through the death because this being
aspect that we had banked all of all of
our meaning on has vanished through
through death there and so that's that's
a very natural response because of our
our situation of having being and this
this field of consciousness be really
the dynamic that that we have in terms
of how we how we construct meaning and
how we cultivate meaning so then then
finally getting to Juniata we enter into
a standpoint where it's it's it's
incredibly hard to explain and I mean
this is this is what a lot of people
would probably criticize nishitani for
in terms of like what's the the
practical value of this conversion so I
I'm not positive that I'll be able to
quite do it justice ad-libbing here but
basically
you are able to recognize that any any
moment that you did have an any meaning
that did arise
it was already like a rising from the
nila T and already
colored by this this meaninglessness yet
it was actually the meaninglessness that
allowed these meanings to arise in the
first place it was the fact that your
grandfather was this particular finite
limited person that and and also the
fact that you were also this particular
finite limited person who was able to
enter into relationship at all and and
connect at all that I mean those those
meanings are in a sense more robust than
than any nihility could could undermine
they did exist they will continue to
exist and there in us in a sense almost
indestructible like once you once you
get to a perspective that that
integrates the two of being and an
agility and are able to see how the the
meaning is is really this codependent
arising from from the both of them
that's that's when you're able to shift
to this this deep sense of of gratitude
for for the grandfather and for the
relationship and be able to meet that on
its own terms without trying to change
it anyway in in terms of like your field
of cognition in like terms of evaluating
it on to the extent that it brought you
pleasure or evaluating it on the extent
to which you were able to achieve the
goals you had for that relationship so
yeah it's it's it's very it's a
complicated dynamic there and nishitani
himself does not get into a single
concrete example of this sort in his
whole nearly 300 page text here so yeah
I mean you really have to wrestle with
it and
and try and figure out some of these
these dynamics on your own
what you say remind like one way I've
thought about value and meaning of a
finite life is we tend to think sort of
in economic terms the more rare
something is the more valuable we tend
to to ascribe it so having a finite life
makes each moment that much more
valuable if if we had an infinite life
each moment would be you know relatively
less valuable in in that right sort of
along the lines that nishitani is
talking about it's it's it's definitely
consonant he I don't think he would ever
put it that way
I think he's trying to to find an even
deeper dynamic than than that and that
and that's why he attacks things on
these terms of de cartes cogito or
Aristotelian notions of substance or
also even some Conte and ideas of this
like subject object divide so he's
really trying to to hit at our like
baseline philosophical inheritances here
and and show how these very things are
what allows this entrapment of nila t2
to take place versus a much more just
natural arising of things as they are on
their own home ground good so would you
consider him a non dual author yes
absolutely and that's why it's so
difficult to explain
mmm-hmm you know I find Jeff Foster's
book an extraordinary absence wonderful
for a beginner looking into what a non
dual perspective might be he has
narrative where he's describing his own
view of you know he's sitting on the
couch he's watching a YouTube video the
door he hears something knocking he goes
over he's right there he opens the door
he's in that mom
what happens and then he switches this
year you know so he really that book I
like a lot and you know these concepts
that are true you know perhaps you have
some work cut out for you because we
need to be able to explain these to
people even at a sixth grade level
because it is true yeah but to have
concrete examples you know it seems to
me that and I haven't read him I I don't
want to read the other three books you
guys or John did suggest we read first
and I'm wondering that book I did the
self overcoming nihilism that is that
easier book to read
I have not tackled that one so I can't
comment with any sort of authority just
just scanning over it it seems like a
bit more of a philosophical treatise and
not not quite this this deeply infused
existential word that religion and
nothingness is but I'm sure it covers
some of the same ideas especially as as
relating to Tannehill 'ti and you know
if we all think about it we've had the
experience you speak of you know where
we feel like the ground of being pulled
out from under it and and we have that
loss but it's a scary feeling
nothingness is sort of scary but then
you pick yourself up and you start
deciding what has meaning again how you
can look at your life in a different
perspective so you go to that you know
jump off the cliff and you don't know
where you can land and you don't know if
there's a bottom down there or not
but yeah but you get to a point I know
in my own times of that that you have to
take that jump and that was the question
that I had corn you I think about minute
26 you and John were speaking of
absurdity and meaninglessness and how we
have to you know actually embrace that
to go any farther we have to experience
the whole oneness of existence which is
the nothingness and the incredible
somethingness and you know John gets
talking about the session as' and the
Cygnus and all this stuff and I get what
he's talking about but anyways I
wondered you know because you've been on
this exploration for a while if you have
any personal experience with it is an
existential process you know how do we
surrender I mean our ego does not want
to let go
[Music]
yeah yeah that's that's a great question
one one important point I think
especially bringing in this this
language of absurdity that is
particularly relevant to the 20th
century existentialist yeah he initially
Thani levels a pretty extensive critique
against Sartre and I think it's after
2:00 and and his existentialism he says
he he gets a lot of things right in
terms of the encounter with nihilism and
the hill adiy and how this is kind of
the the ground for a freedom in a sense
to make meaning but his critique is
really that Sartre is still really
operating on this Cartesian field of
cogito so it's it's always still related
back to the self for the self that these
meanings are that come out of absurd
absurd ISM and so what nishitani really
wants instead is is to show that even
even the self itself it has an ahilla t
as its as its ground and it can't be
taken as any kind of fundamental center
any more than these things in the in a
way not there yeah not there we've
created this concept we have right yeah
and as a very zen buddhist thinker and
he's drawing on the tradition there of
no self and in Buddhism and but his
exploration of it is is very novel in
terms of how he weaves in so much of
Western philosophical thought and
integrates that he's not just rehashing
some some Buddhist talking points or
metaphysics in this domain he really is
doing something quite quite unique
but yeah it's one of his sort of
explanations is that the self as the
self as we take it is is always like
bound up within itself and it bases its
value on it
self and so this this sort of self
enclosure of the self is is is actually
one of the major sort of points of
nihility arising because we're not in
this integrated flow with the world and
instead always binding ourselves up
within ourselves and trying to base our
ourself and our life on this this finite
thing that we've somehow taken as a
fundamental that that's really where a
lot of this dynamic of ahilla t is able
to to come out from since since if we if
we had this this much more non-dual kind
of a basis for things i mean it's it's
it's there you know it's it's the world
is is going through its its phases and
and and marching forth and that's sort
of undeniable and unstoppable and so
having having that basis and we would
find a very different and substantial
dynamic wouldn't when things like death
and finitude and and such arise within
our existence because it's it's part of
this this world process just as much as
the being and the existing of things are
so yeah in terms of like more personal
experience and and non-dualism i've not
had the like deepest kinds of non-dual
experiences in terms of like meditative
contemplative states but i one of the
beauties of nietzsche chinese text is
really how how visceral and and
psychologically evocative it is so i
mean even just just reading through it
at a deep level like gets you in this
intuitive state of being able to if not
experience these things at least like
sense their their possibility or their
their existence on an existential level
oh sorry go ahead
it's it's interesting hearing some of
this because of and I'm not sure I
haven't read the text but just trying to
pick up on what I was able to be you and
Verve a keys talk
I've quite distinctly had the experience
of entering into this kind of oceanic
non-dual field and in many ways it felt
like well quite quite accurately exiting
the world of substance and instead kind
of entering almost this context this web
that kind of weaves through all the
empty spaces between things and finding
a deep sense of unity in that experience
and when I had it it was kind of hoisted
on me it wasn't it wasn't right through
meditative practice explicitly
and it's interesting rate I found that a
incredibly transformative experience
this was quite a long time ago probably
when I was 23 or so
and what's interesting is I I had a
later date had another rather intense
experience where it felt like I was
entering into that oceanic field but
suddenly there was almost a a
realization that the peak of non-duality
is two in some sent consent to duality
like it's choosing which almost allowed
this this it felt like I was able to
move into the egoic not as it not as an
entrapment
but as a kind of delight in life itself
mm-hmm
and I'm wondering so I kind of have two
questions here one is that part of I
might also add that brought me back to a
more Western religious perspective and
and kind of kicked me out of the perhaps
wrongly on on my end stated goal of
Eastern philosophies it might have been
a lack of understanding but is that part
of nishitani x' work in that sense of
kind of not so much entering into the
non-dual field as a type of we might say
pseudo tell us but actually re-entering
the dualistic and then the other
question I had is that you
you guys hinted towards his very deep
respect for a particularity but I wasn't
able to kind of grasp it in the
conversation how he was able to keep
that deep respect within a non dual
perspective
[Music]
yeah your your intuition is is totally
spot-on here in terms of the kind of
project nishitani is doing and the kind
of experience that he's really hinting
at one of the unique languages he uses
to describe this stuff is is the far
side and the near side and it's kind of
related to like imminence and
transcendence and so on the on the field
of Juniata it's this final goal which I
mean speaking of it as a goal is already
framing it in this field of cognition so
we're already off but right we can we
can do that too hint and in the right
right direction here but the the field
of Shunyata he describes as the absolute
near side so it's it's the more of the
near side to ourselves than the self
itself so when we are in our selves and
bound up in ourselves as we were
describing in some way were were
divorced from ourselves because we have
divorced ourselves from from this larger
world Nexus as he he would call it or
we've we've kind of bound up our design
or our being there in ourselves and so
on the field of nihility it's kind of
this great equalizer where everything is
like turned into a big question mark so
to speak the the everything's being is
is is on this shaky ground of nihility
so that's this like far side where
everything has sort of been alienated in
a sense and so what happens on the field
of Shunyata and what would happen in the
experience you described is is returning
to the absolute near side like via the
far side we've we've gone 360 degrees
here around around the circle and
returned back to where we were but in a
in a more expansive sense so well right
you definitely see people who have an
intuition of non-duality or some
thing as being like very like
transcendence focused and very like
Gnostic or ascetic of like trying to to
deny particulars and leave the world
behind and such and nishitani really
really rejects that kind of thinking and
I'm rightfully so I think because it
gives no recourse for for like actually
dealing with the the considerations of
life which are still real and still part
of this world Nexus as much as we are or
the external world is as well so in in
in in that sense he he really I mean the
the way he he goes about this is he
creates a non duality through particular
Lera T so speaking to the next aspect of
your question here it's it's he really
looks at individual things and each
individual thing as being what allows
this world Nexus this holistic world
Nexus to arise were it not for the
deeply authentic relations between all
things you couldn't have this holistic
unity arise and if you didn't have a
holistic unity you wouldn't have
particular things they wouldn't have any
any relationality between themselves so
it's it's it's it's held up on both
these ends and and mutually supportive
in this sense and so that that's one of
the things that that really struck me
about this approach to non duality it's
it's it's really not not too naive
holism or monism it's it's a much more
integrated sort of metaphysics or
ontology than and well it's all one and
then you just don't know how to deal
with right any of these are practical
problems and in life and
regurgitate that response that would be
yeah Nishi tony would really see issue
and that's as a perhaps as a form of
escape that naive escapism exactly
exactly when when you're when you're on
that on that sort of path you're you're
still in this field of consciousness and
you're trying to to relate all other
external things to this Tilos of
non-duality rather than meeting them as
they are on their home ground okay so
and he still uses Juniata to describe
that state which I also find interesting
just because again in my own experience
it was kind of upon this realization of
the motion through the non-dual back
into the duel
I might even describe it as a synthesis
of that that void that is the the ground
of being mixed with the fact of being
itself that I saw kind of the
re-emergence of the Godhead although he
frames it in the Shunyata would it
perhaps be accurate to say that we are
erroring in those depictions on either
side of a paradox
yeah I think so I I mean Juniata and its
standpoint is is inherently a very
paradoxical place to be where the
opposites are always mutually dependent
and and mutually self arising another
important point in in terms of some of
the language you just brought up with
Godhead is that nishitani draws pretty
extensively on meister eckhart and
employs the term god had a explicitly a
number of times
Oh interesting yeah he sees Eckhart's
utilization of this term and how he
explores it as probably the closest that
Western Christian thinking has has
gotten to the standpoint of of emptiness
in terms of its various theological
manifestations so right yeah I mean
Eckhart even talks I think pretty
explicitly in some of the quotations and
yutani employees about sort of the
nothingness of the Godhead or or how we
become nothing in the Godhead and right
like the self realizes the Godhead and
in these various ways that's interesting
because I've often kind of tried to
create or I don't know if I'm creating
describe a convergent point between
Buddhism and Christianity in that in
some sense the goal of emptying the self
is is required within the West
well the Christian tradition such that
right yeah you have to empty it all the
way in order for it to be filled and
perhaps the paradox is that there is a
filling right right right yeah no that
that speaks really profoundly to to some
of what Nietzsche Tawny's outlining here
and I mean he's right there with you in
terms of analyzing Western religion
along those lines as well he he goes
back to the Greek term connotes
to describe the emptying of the
self-will of Jesus specifically like on
like through his life and devotion to
God and how in the emptying it does have
this fullness that comes out I mean it
was via the emptying of this self will
of Christ that his he was able to embody
divinity fully right right in the
Western consciousness so yeah he
connects that as well to as like a
ground for the idea of agape as this
non-discriminating non differentiating
lovingness outpouring is also really
grounded in this this idea of self
emptying interesting very cool thank you
very much that clarified a lot of points
that I was great thanks for thanks for
sharing your experience super
interesting
Hey any other questions and yeah when I
get my dope on that a little bit I've
got a quote here just to contextualize
it this is an entry on differential
ontology and that stands in contrast to
essentialism which so essentialism
substantial ism I do you know how they
they linked it here essentialism and
substantial ism in in nishitani no no in
Western history so I mean like Aristotle
he didn't really make a distinction
between substance and essence they were
pretty much synonymous as for engagement
right okay so I just wanted to get that
so this is a quotes about yield to lose
as a differential intelligence and I
will connected in a second okay so as
early as 1954 they lose stress the
urgency for an ontology of pure
difference one that does not rely upon
the notion of negation because negation
is merely different pushed to its
uttermost limit and on how did your pure
difference means an attempt to think
difference as pure relation rather than
as not you know I was wondering well
attaches and some of the stuff that Nick
said but I was also wondering do you
connect that up with indras net at all
mm-hmm-hmm great question
I got a run for a bathroom break real
quick but I'll come back to your
question in just a moment here what
you're Jared tonight so we're coming up
to an hour I want to be respectful of
your time are you are you okay to
continue or what is is free for today so
I'm happy to continue on here for quite
some time so oh great all right oh great
take a take a break
and that's also been a good discussion
yeah go ahead and Brett did you by any
chance manage to figure out how we might
go about recording on here I haven't
looked into that I did not but Tyler did
so we're giving it a shot and absolutely
hopefully you know it'll work and then
we'll figure out the best way to host it
glad to hear it yeah yeah yeah that's
yeah that's good yeah yeah I think
that's a good feature we should try to
record all these discussions and and I
don't know if we post them to YouTube or
or just load them up on I don't know one
of the file-sharing sites probably
YouTube's probably a good way to do it
yeah and and and everybody can record
their do their own recording too just to
be to be clear you know you know there
doesn't have to be the official
recording in the recording permitted
channels anyone can record go ahead
very cool
like wait no Jared but maybe still afk
he just stepped away for for a short
second but he's coming back
yeah
but it yeah it's been a good discussion
and and yeah and don't be shy about guys
about you know about asking questions
and you know any any and all questions
are are good and everybody's at
different levels again some questions
we'll go over some people's heads
another but you know we want but don't
let that discourage you from asking
asking your own questions if that's if
that's discouraging anyone not that you
have to ask questions of course but you
know all questions are welcome
you
you
you
you
you
you
you
and it's interesting that they said that
nishitani doesn't focus on the practical
and and I find you know that sometimes
can be an issue where we have a lot of
these philosophical discussions which
stay a very sort of high level and and
even sometimes poetic and very just very
I don't like to use what fuzzy but
almost fuzzy concepts that when we say
okay but how do we apply this in real
life become yeah
sometimes aren't quite as crystallizable
and that that's something I think
especially here we should be focusing on
I mean in terms of if we're talking
about the religion that's not a religion
if we can't translate these things into
practical lived experience then then
we're gonna we're gonna be in trouble
that there's got to be some some part of
our focus I think Jared Jarrett's back
you
you
all right hello hello
hello all right could you read that to
lose our quote about to lose again just
so I'm on the right track with that one
sure
as early as 1954 Daluz stressed the
urgency for an ontology of pure
difference one that does not rely upon
the notion of negation because negation
is merely difference pushed to its
outermost limit so there's the
connection between well negation and
nihilism life right on an ontology of
pure difference means an attempt to
think difference as pure relation rather
than is not and that's the connection in
that I would draw two in designate yes
yeah and if you could justify not could
you define ontology for everyone too
while you're that's basically the study
of being aware the original Greek word
was on toss for thing so the distinction
would be here between being and nothing
mm-hmm so the ontology but nishitani
says that both being and ahilla t are
real so it gets a bit dicey because the
the generally the oncologist to it would
use the the more Western notion of real
which initial time he doesn't write
right yeah I think that works really
well with with nishitani z' framework
here definitely the idea of negation as
a sort of a parallel to Tannehill OT
here that it it sort of chopped things
off like fully in a way that is not what
we were looking for as a final
standpoint and then also yeah the idea
of a relational ontology is is is
definitely huge in that I think
nishitani might mention indras net once
or twice explicitly but he certainly
describes something very similar to it
multiple times especially when he talks
about the slave and master dynamics
between all things so let's say your
radio is the master of all things in the
universe but at the same time your radio
is also slave to all other things so
it's it's this deeply interconnected
thing where the being of one thing is
always very interdependent on the
and of all other things and it's
nothingness and emptiness that that that
dynamic is able to arise out of well the
way that I'm looking at it is that you
see it seems to me like indras net is an
expression of relativity taken to its
apotheosis known is an expression of the
relation as such rather than emphasis on
the absolute where yeah the absolute
would be like the self contained thing
the thing that is the thing in itself so
that that's just like a I guess what I
was trying to get at is is the notion of
Mahela T or Shunyata like relativity in
that sense not not without necessarily
the pejorative notion that waste that
the waste has towards relativism as such
hmm
that's a good question I'd say things
things definitely aren't relativized in
in what you were saying is the
pejorative notion but I things are also
not purely relational in in like the the
sense that you can only ever define the
the essence of a of a thing in its in
its relationships initially definitely
sees the dependence there and and how
the thing in itself on its own home
ground is is a relationally
interconnected thing in this world Nexus
but I don't think he does away with a
sense of in true individuality of of
things as well I don't think he is
involved in what Hartmann and the triple
o people call over mining where you will
reduce a thing to its its relationality
one of the important Japanese terms that
nishitani employed is koto which means
like the meaning of a thing or the
essence of a thing and it it really does
impart this sense of genuine
individuality through the particular era
T's of these these relations but but the
individuality still stands in a sense
yeah just quickly Howard koto not be
substantial thing yeah that's a here let
me let me see if I can can pull out a
quote here and in in this part of the
text it's a little bit later I think
it's in chapter 5 on Shunyata and time
he's citing a lot of Zen poetry
as sort of a point of departure for
examining this concept so like he he has
some examples with I mean this kind of
nature association we have with with
some of the haiku form and such and
they're really deep readings of showing
how the particular individuality of a
thing arises through this sort of idea
of a of a world Nexus but that it's it's
not this not this Western conception of
of a purely substantial existence
because the the whole relationship of
the the world Nexus that allows things
to come into being is integrative of
this idea of 'no hill 'ti and and
grounded on this field of Shunyata so it
really is the one of the metaphors he
uses not metaphor but example i brought
up with john was the the fire that burns
but does not burn itself and so this non
self burning fire
that's the emptiness aspect of the fire
is is identified with this idea of koto
so it's it's not the the fire Ness of
the fire but it's the non fairness of
the fire that that imbues it with this
individuality in a sense so that's
that's where it departs from from this
thinking of substance okay so if i
understand correctly the fire the the
part of the fire that doesn't burn is in
some sense unobservable
but it's there is that right
definitely yeah unobservable in in its
own sense but I mean we also do see a
fire burning and not burning itself
similar to how if we poured water into
water we wouldn't see the though or we
would wait we wouldn't see the water get
wet oh I can't see space but I can
obviously see space you know right
mm-hmm
perhaps the most direct and
apprehensible version of this is the eye
which sees but does not see itself being
being the nature of sight vision and our
eyes so yeah it's it's certainly a
complicated dynamic nishitani would say
that you don't really hit at the the
non-burning of fire if you're staying on
this this field of coquito and looking
at things only through this being
substance sense but that on the field of
Juniata this this aspect of things would
would would become clear in your
existential approach and also in the
like ontological reality
okay thanks add-ons another question
awesome
you
anyone else here with something together
but another one I just don't a jumpin
Tyler question while you were away as
well that may be an interesting one if
he's still around to ask it hmm yeah I
would definitely take that he may he may
have stepped away
Karima you had you had a question right
yeah I do I just you know wanted to let
other people that haven't spoken have a
chance but I'm wondering you know how
things happened very synchronistically
sometimes we notice sometimes we don't
sometimes later we notice anyways about
20 minutes before I got on this call I
had texted someone and you know together
when we used the G word we know we're
talking about the equally you know 500
other names you can use for that but I
said I've been thinking about how to
know I am doing God's will which is a
sacred adventure I do realize the will
of God penetrating all substance and
nature and that it can at least be
reduced to the common denominator of
love life and light and then I said do I
dare to think this very moment is the
will of God coming alive in me minute by
minute when I simply do the next step
before me with integrity and love and
when you two are talking about how this
adventure of being human we discover the
the eminent of that which is all and the
transcendence into that which is all you
know the idea is we still continue to
wash dishes and help our neighbors they
need groceries so how do we merge the
absolute and the relative is this whole
game but does nishitani speak of the
will like who
we'll is it you know we can we can kind
of tell by the effects in our life you
know what if we pay attention to our
intentions and our actions so we kind of
relate to it's maybe a different or
better or you know a nicely infused
aspect of will but does he speak of that
at all in his writing yeah he tackles
will a lot especially in the last
chapter of Juniata and history when he
analyzes how so many different theories
of history or standpoints towards
history have have been based in this
idea of will whether it's the
traditional theistic conception of God's
will being the driver of history or our
more enlightenment ideal of progress
stemming from human will as being the
driver of history and then to
Nietzsche's idea of the will to power
and and his eternal recurrence which is
his theory of history that sort of based
on this idea nishitani really wants to
get past the idea of will altogether in
in a lot of ways because he ultimately
sees this as something intimately bound
up in this idea of of selfhood and
self-consciousness in in a sense that
that doesn't really mesh well with this
broader vision of this integrated world
nexus so yeah go ahead you mentioned in
the end of your talk an auto t illogical
photographic an ontological history that
was it and then john said what is the
giver of paradigms what gives the being
that is not a B so you know I don't know
how to get around you know I mean
sometimes I think about this idea of
well apparently I have been lately but
yeah you had said a you know going from
going into a more multi-dimensional view
of history and you know I mean how do
you explain who's driving the bus you
know it's probably everything I always
figured everything you can think of
probably is happening in some way so
we're all co-creating this existence and
yet you know there's other forces powers
I'm not going to say what or define it
but you know something goes on I mean
when the moon's full we feel something
so you know but yeah you were mentioning
that a non geological history and I was
just wondering that's kind of what
you're saying he hoped we go toward
mm-hmm yeah it's what he both views as
the actual situation and what he thinks
we should take as a healthier more
proper theory of history so yeah and in
terms of the will bound up in the self
definitely but of course there's still
going to be action and happening and
doing even on this this field of Juniata
similar to how he doesn't want to deny
particularity and wants to actually see
non duality being dependent on
particularity and vice-versa
he he does still have an idea of action
and it's it's of course going to be an
action of non action and so we're gonna
have a teleology of non teleology as
well so I mean it's it's it's a very
complicated
I like the butterfly effect you know
butterfly on this branch
you're wiggling his wings definitely
effects something on the other side of
the world you know I think that and
modern you know quantum physics is
showing is impertinent of that and you
know just I remember when I first heard
words like non-duality and like what is
that and is it the opposite of duality
and it's also confusing but I just think
if it can be you know like I say and I
think Brett said we've got to get this
truth down to four
you know six eighth grade that's what
most newspapers are written an eighth
grade level you know right so uh and and
it'll happen but it has to kind of be
digested and lived and then you know
don't happen we can explain it but yeah
duality and non-duality or not at odds
they include each other if they're like
the yin-yang symbol like what feel holds
that symbol you know
mmm you just keep going beyond the
beyond the beyond and we don't worry
about it so much and we're never going
to get it right and we're never gonna
get it done because you know it's just
how it is yeah absolutely I mean the
nishitani speaks a lot in terms of this
notion of field so that's that's
pertinent language definitely and I I
think that comes out of Heidegger to a
degree from the little Heidegger I've
read I mean he at least in the
translations I've encountered the word
like region is is strong and that has a
similar kind of connotation to this sort
of a spatial idea of a standpoint or an
arena in in a sense so but yeah I mean
to bring it down to sixth grade level
nishitani basically says I mean
everything is coming out of this field
of Shunyata of emptiness and it's
emptiness that allows things to to be
how they are and to develop and to
relate and to decay and to have newness
and universality come come about so
yeah it's it's a it's a very
all-inclusive standpoint and field I
could just see one of those animate
cartoons as you were talking right there
and you know if you watch something like
that you get it ha ha
oh yeah
yeah anyone else I know yes Tyler back
he had a question hello hello
yeah definitely thanks for recording
you
yeah
you
[Music]
you
you
you
mmm
[Music]
sure I'll tackle the the first question
first I appreciate you bringing it on to
a to a personal plane here I think it's
yeah interesting stuff and allows us to
connect beyond just this narrower
intellectual or spiritual mode here so
for me personally one of the most
impactful features of nishitani x' work
here has is the the the nature of his
method and the vision of his project I
mean he's he's drawing from traditional
Mahayana Buddhist sources he's widely
familiar with Western philosophy and and
shows as much as he talks about each of
these figures but he's also deeply
invested in the development of
Christianity and that religious system
and the way he approaches things isn't
simply as a Zen philosopher
pretty-pretty right off the bat in in
his text here he makes it clear that
he's not using this term Shunyata out of
any sort of exoteric loyalty to to
buddhism as a tradition but simply
because it is a manifestation of a deep
truth and so I mean there's times
throughout his text here where he cites
the Gospels not as just a source to be
analyzed but as an exposition of truth
in the same way that he is employing
this idea of Shunyata and so being able
to draw from from these wide sources and
be deeply discriminating in terms of
finding truth and in all these nooks and
crannies of human philosophical and
theological thinking throughout history
is is very refreshing compared to many
philosophical and theological projects
that are much narrower in terms of sort
of being grounded in in certain credo
presuppositions of what the bounds of a
truth seeking project could be so just
and out of that like comes this this
vision of religious truth being much
more accessible and pervasive than then
we would often think in terms of the the
the religious truth being a something
that's just merely given by an
institution or something of the like so
yeah I find a lot of inspiration in in
the nature of that project and I mean it
certainly connects very readily to this
idea of the religion that's not a
religion of being able to to draw deeply
from these various sources for religious
ends and philosophical ends but not not
be bound by certain orthodoxies or or
creedal presuppositions but on the on
the flip side and also not be engaged in
a you know merely cherry-picking or
idealizing project of just throwing a
bunch of things together that that you
like and trying to to build self suited
philosophy out of those I think anyone
who reads Nietzsche Tony's book will
probably not see that as his project
here even though he is drawing from from
multiple traditions and sources here so
I hope to to be able to do similar cross
religious trans religious type of
thinking in my own life and work
especially with the Islamic tradition
and in the Western tradition and maybe
some Buddhism as well so yeah that's a
that's a big personal inspiration here
we
yeah
[Music]
you
you
okay I've not read it I know it is a
well-loved book and recommended by many
people I trust so yeah I have a general
idea of what what the content and style
is
you
mm-hmm
[Music]
you
you
you
mm-hmm
right ahilla D is is impermanence is an
aspect of melody or a kind of nihility
in that it is this like represent
representation of finitude through time
these things are fading away as as they
move through existence in terms of
nihilism we have our encounter with
impermanence triggering because of our
various presuppositions and human
reactions to such things triggering a
nihilism in in our in our consciousness
as a as a result so the important thing
is that it's it's both this like
ontological reality and also a
psychological existential one so the
milites the ontological side the
nihilism which Nietzsche Tony doesn't
use as often he talks much more of Nilla
D than nihilism
yeah the nihilism being the much more
existential psychological aspect but
they're they're definitely intimately
relate
and encounter with Mahalo tea is likely
to produce nihilism in in the historical
philosophical context of these various
inheritances we we've gotten from from
Western philosophy and theology but the
nihilism that exists doesn't mean we are
forced to abide in the new Hillah tea
that exists doesn't mean we're forced to
a take up nihilism as our final abode it
is this is this in between that we're
meant to to pass through on the on the
journey to this conversion to Shunyata
you
you
sure
you
you
you
Oh
right
you
you
you
you
hmm
that is an excellent example I'd say
yeah I mean looking at it from this idea
of the the field of cognition I mean the
young child is so bound up in their
self-centered idea of their their mind
that when something is is removed from
their immediate sense perception they
fall into this trap of thinking it it
was completely destroyed or nullified
and likewise that's that's what we are
also doing bound up in our own
self-consciousness when something is
removed or nullified from the bounds of
what we take our consciousness to be
that's when we hit up against that
ahilla d but that isn't just just as in
the case with the child that's not a
truly objective process it's it's really
grounded in this how it's grounded in
the extent to which we've limited our
approach to reality to our field of
cognition
you
[Music]
you
yeah
you
you
you
you
yeah
you
you
mm-hmm yeah I liked the way you used
impermanence of impermanence there one
of the ways nishitani describes Shunyata
and the the field of Shunyata is the
nullification of nila tea sona hilla tea
is this great nullifier but even the
Hillah tea itself is swallowed up in the
even deeper void of Shunyata her
absolute emptiness here so I mean even
if we just think about it like when we
fall into nihilism it it's always
nihilism for us it's because we can't
find the meaning in something but we're
it and so the the nihilism is is still
this like thing that's caught up in this
representational process of the self and
so it's it's emptiness here that able to
swallow up that that whole dynamic and I
mean then when you remove the the self
from this dynamic of ahilla tea there's
no nihilism left to be found because
there's no self bound up in itself to
relate to
Hilla tea back to and so it loses its
ultimate power in a sense there and
think and go on being things because I
mean they they certainly are I mean
there's still things even when you're
when you're nihilistic and there's still
meanings that arise so those are allowed
to return to this absolute near side
where they really have their original
existence to begin with
I wonder if I could ask a question that
pulls off from what you just said so
thinking of the nothing the no thickness
of the self I mean I think of it as the
South being a process right that you
know a process of the brain but it and
so it's not a thing in that sense but it
but in a very real sense at least when
we come to physical things everything is
a process you know they're all made up
of moving particles in relation to one
another and I guess the difference
between like a process like like
thinking or a process like you know with
the machine is that you know the
relationship between the particles you
know it's not an you know the pattern
varies whereas in a thing the pattern
stays more constant but
I it just seems that there shouldn't
like should we really be that
uncomfortable with the self being a
process if everything is a process
mm-hmm yeah yeah I mean that's a that's
a good point
nishitani doesn't directly talk about
the self as a process in quite the same
way
it's definitely consonant to some degree
with his thinking I'd say that there's
there's there's still a sense that
things can't be reduced to to process he
doesn't want time to sort of swallow up
things in a so to speak but yeah I mean
in the introduction to religion and
nothingness
I think it's Winston L King who wrote
that he mentions Whitehead as as this
process theologian process philosopher
as being one of the the thinkers in in
the 20th century who probably came
closest to some of nishitani x' ideas
here so yeah I mean there's there's
certainly points of convergence there
if I might jump back a little bit
briefly to was that satisfactory Brett I
didn't mean to it yep yep yep go ahead
if I might jump back briefly to your
personal value that you found in
nishitani here and what you kind of
outlined as some of your project I found
some similarity our our little bevery
group had an interview with verve a key
and one of the things he kind of
explorative li proposed was this idea of
a dynamic perennialism and kind of
contrasting that to I don't have a
better word for it so I'll just say the
naive or perhaps propositional
perennialism that kind of arose in
earlier philosophers say in the the 50s
with the or 60s with the initial
onslaught of east-meets-west philosophy
I guess my question would be would you
say that this dynamic perennialism would
be a accurate description of what you're
hoping to find there and in what way do
you think nishitani offers a pathway to
that if so that was not found in the
earlier forms yeah great question
absolutely I actually have a have a
strong background in perennialism it was
my thesis topic in undergrad so I I do
have some some robust experience here
that I can bring to bear on this so what
is called perennialism or often also
called traditionalism is a modern
religious philosophical movement mmm
often considered to be started by Rene
gay known a French thinker who was
initially interested in in the occult
but then moved more in the direction of
traditional religion he eventually came
to convert to Islam and moved to Cairo
where he lived out the rest of his life
he influenced a lot of
other thinkers the most important being
Fritjof xuan who was also a prolific
writer and the two of them are probably
considered the most influential and
prolific of the perennial estores and
both of them ended up converting to
Islam
both Europeans initially for Joseon was
from Switzerland and so a lot of times
people associate perennialism with
Aldous Huxley but it was a it was a
movement that started long before Huxley
wrote about it and this this core
movement traces back to gain owned and
Xuan here is actually pretty critical of
Huxley's hmm
own own thinking of perennialism and
think that he misses some some important
points so in terms of how nishitani
compares to to these this particular
perennial
definitely differs in in some important
ways he is more of a philosopher and an
existentialist the traditionalists are
pretty interested in upholding orthodoxy
and the institutions of Orthodoxy within
traditional religion even though they're
much more focused in on the esoteric
side of religion than the high standards
but they they definitely see immediate
necessary value in the exoteric and so
in terms of sort of coming up with very
novel interpretations of doctrine they
at least profess to be against such
things so they they would see some
issues with how nishitani is is
just kind of giving his own
interpretation of certain things
especially within Christianity as
someone grounded in Buddhism they are
also despite strongly affirming this
idea of the unity of religious messages
the idea that our world religious
traditions at least up through Islam are
authentic divine revelations which have
their own genuine spiritual paths and
sacred law that can lead to both worldly
enlightenment and salvation in the in
the hereafter but they they're they're
quite anti synchronist at least in their
in their writings
so when nishitani is bringing in he
almost wants to boo dyes Christianity
and and bring some of these ideas of
emptiness into the Christian system that
would be something that the perennial
aswer likely opposed they would respond
that the Christian system is already
full and complete and self-sufficient
and to try to import a metaphysical
framework from another religious system
would to sort of throw it off balance or
throw it off kilter right so one is
almost seeking kind of a balance through
synthesis in nishitani and the other is
almost looking at each system as a
complete representation all aimed
towards the same message yes yep yeah so
the the big metaphor of the perennial is
school is the multiple paths up the
mountain you can be a mountain climber
and you can choose any number of
different trails and still reach the
summit of the mountain and
the fact that you took one trail and not
another doesn't negate that the other
trail takes you up the mountain and so
the the perennial is you the various
world religions as these sort of
divinely given trails that have been
established and well trodden so that one
is able to really follow the trail and
get to the destination whereas nishitani
z-- method here to play off the same
metaphor is much more to sort of find
your own way up the mountain
existentially and to perhaps take
inspiration from various other trails
but to ultimately see them winding
around on the side of the mountain in
ways that are unhelpful and unnecessary
so he really wants you to be able to
struggle up the mountain yourself to
avoid just getting stuck on a winding
trail and not able to get there at all
would you say that it's fair to describe
that difference as more deeply rooting
it in phenomenology
that's a good question
[Music]
mmm-hmm phenomenology perhaps perhaps
existentialism slightly more and
particularly heidegger's philosophy the
the traditionalist authors don't really
profess to having been inspired or
drawing from any modern philosophical
thinkers they really are only or at
least they claim to be only drawing from
traditional theologians of varying
religions the the the school as a whole
is is really anti modern and sees modern
philosophy and modern world is highly
decadent so that's gonna be a big
difference right off the bat
between nishitani and and these thinkers
is that nishitani is absolutely drawing
from Heidegger Nietzsche and hence the
figures often often to show where they
haven't gone far enough but also
definitely to some degree in debt to the
contributions they make where the
traditionalists or the perennial aswer
would not draw on such authors or at
least not consciously so I have heard
that the thinking of the school is at
least somewhat rather indebted to Kant
in a way that they don't acknowledge but
yeah so it's it's interesting nishitani
you you could use the term perennial as'
to describe him perhaps in a very very
loose way but in terms of how he aligns
with the historic school not not much
really at all I'd say right right that's
great Vienna Jana posted posted a song
from adventure time that you know
thought was was relevant did you want to
say a little bit about why what you like
about in what you just why you shared it
can you hear me
I it's actually two a little bit earlier
in the conversation but I think it's
better to just listen to it
and then get a little bit what you like
first but I guess yeah it's not far
right away yeah yeah it's it's it's I've
heard some of the the music from that
show and it's kind of kind of wild how
how deep and emotive it is for
ostensibly a children's show so I
definitely had it come up in in
similarly spiritual and philosophical
discussions before so I'm I'm sure it
has something to add here so oh good
no I was just gonna ask if if anyone who
hasn't asked a question yet wanted to
ask one but if you but continue
answering and yeah I shouldn't I can
probably take like one or two more
questions if people have them my voice
is reaching the end of its stamina here
so no it's been great really appreciate
this so is there anyone first you who
hasn't asked a question yet who would
like to ask a question or make a comment
is there anyone who has asked the
question who wants to ask one last go
ahead yeah it's actually quite a short
one I don't know maybe I died I lost
Sandra but maybe inadvertently on Sid of
that in a my question is okay so
nishitani he has being a nothingness as
real so what is the opposite of real to
him
that's a good question yeah so he uses
the term illusion occasionally and he's
really drawing on dharmic philosophy
here and I think he does actually relate
it to the the term Maya out of out of
Hinduism and Buddhism as as this
illusion but like everything these
opposites of realness and illusion are
our mutually dependent and mutually
created and arising so when things
appear to us on our our field of of
cognition and we relate to them solely
through means of substance and relating
back to ourselves there's there is an
aspect of illusion in there since we
have dramatically limited the scope of
that encounter due to being really bound
up tightly in in this process of
understanding ourselves as these
cognitive agents divorced from from the
world in such a way yeah so in terms of
non reality I'd say it definitely goes
back to this this idea of Maya from from
Buddhism but he he doesn't really want
to make the world into an illusion in an
aesthetics nor Gnostic sort of sense he
he wants a really deeply real contact to
to be able to come to the to the fore in
that and I think this is where he kind
of departs from a lot of traditional
Buddhist thinking is I don't think he
even really would say this the self is
is fundamentally an illusion our
conception of the self and our our
attachment to the self is an illusion
like any other entity it the self is is
this thing that is codependent on all
other things and derives its its reality
from them so I which is it's not
necessarily a nun Buddhist conception of
it in terms of it being this codependent
origination I not in a highly causal
sort of system that is at the basis of
the self but yeah the idea of a real
self hood is is is is is there a new
sheet Ani in an important way
okay thanks to the answer yeah maybe you
could close with one last question
related to how we should approach an
author like this from a lay person's
point of view I mean not everyone has a
philosophy degree not everyone is deeply
embedded in all the you know the three
or four books John said you should have
even more even thinking of reading this
book you know so how should a layperson
approach whether deciding to read these
books or how to get something out of it
without you know we all have limited
time and know most people can't just do
a philosophy degree now yeah even in a
sort of autodidactic way so so so so so
first how should we approach it and if
there's sort of a key practical point
that you think a layperson should take
from this work mm-hmm what what would it
be
yeah in terms of approaching it I mean
you certainly could just try and throw
yourself at this work without without
all the all the background knowledge I
certainly didn't didn't come to this
having a super deep knowledge of William
James for example so I mean you can
still definitely get there even if you
don't have all the the puzzle pieces in
place in terms of practical suggestions
for reading it if you do want to do it
I'd say take it a little bit at a time
don't try and read a whole chapter in
one sitting I really wouldn't recommend
more than 10 20 pages in a sitting and
the other thing I'd recommend is to find
some some friends to read it read it
along with you and to discuss it as you
go I think that can make up for a lot of
our own individual lack of expertise and
and lack of a comprehension of some of
this so just being able to
discuss it through and and reinforce
some of our comprehension and and get
new comprehension definitely I mean I
I'm I have no doubt that reading this
with other people made it much more
comprehensible than it would have been
if I just tried to go through this this
text on on on my own then the other
thing is just don't be afraid to use
some secondary sources the the one book
I mentioned is a series of essays
directly relating to religion
nothingness trying to unpack various
aspects of it so that's definitely
helpful but there's a lot of stuff on on
Google Scholar on academia.edu which is
it should be accessible so I probably
have like a digital library of like 30
or so articles of various things
relating to Tunisia Thani here so it's
it's out there if you if you are looking
for a really specific aspect of its
thought like people are people are
writing about it it's it's pretty
confined to the ivory tower of academia
but if you if you have your your various
inroads for traversing such a space you
can you can get get what you need to get
and yeah I mean in in terms of reading
it with other people I'm really thinking
of doing another read through of this
text come this fall if anyone would be
interested in coming along for that just
because I am sure I'd get something more
out of it still and it would just be
good to have some of those discussions
continuing so that's give wonderful yeah
feel free to maybe we could even do it
do it here on me on the floor yeah great
yeah we'll talk about that well thank
you Jerry this has been great thank you
yeah no we really appreciate and thank
you everyone who asked questions so
Tyler's here Tyler did the latest voices
with fur Becky and
we're gonna be talking about scheduling
a similar Q&A discussion where we can
talk about his and maybe maybe make this
sort of a series where we follow up
voices with verve aqui with discussions
with the authors and Monday everybody at
five o'clock Eastern Time
John reveille Keys going to be here in
the forum doing another Q&A so everybody
please please come back for that and I
think thanks thanks so much and thanks
Tyler for recording today we'll find a
way they get it accessible to everyone
and I will post it and and in due course
wonderful thank you so much Jared that
was absolutely wonderful thank you thank
you yeah thanks everyone for the
questions and engagement it was super
super eventful and and just great to
connect over such topics so yeah thanks
a lot and now we can go back to just
normal chat you don't