welcome to the stola the stoah is a
digital campfire where we go here and
dialogue about what matters most at the
night's edge what's happening now
[Music]
all right so as I was just saying before
I pressed record I thought it would be
cool that we start this conversation by
having a guided I don't know meditation
of breath work led by you
so yeah let's start with something that
I do just to have a game I'm a daily
meditation practice but throughout the
day sometimes things just get a little
crazy especially nowadays saying that I
should stop drop and breathe so we're
gonna do that I'm gonna stop drop and
breathe at 8:05 I'll explain it first so
stop me is just stop stop the thought
pattern that you're stuck into or the
activity that you're stuck into that's
driving you into a stressful pattern
so you gonna stop you gonna drop into
the present moment which means just pay
attention to your breath breathe then
take five means and take five seconds
for a single breath or take five breaths
or take five minutes
I've just focused awareness so we're
gonna do five breaths okay so make
yourself comfortable
[Music]
so you're you're sitting tall and
straight but you're not straining again
a bad back you're not forcing yourself
to sit in a certain way okay so nice and
tall
now close your eyes or let your focus
just drift off it's particularly good if
you're sitting by a window and you can
look out the horizon just that that view
of the horizon is very so he stopped we
drop into our moments and let's take one
big deep breath breathing slowly and a
little pause at the top but not a strain
and I just let the breath fall away from
your body
let your body completely relax the
pratfall is way
breathe deeply in let it go deeply and
let your body fully relax as that breath
falls away give two more and really
bring all your awareness into your
breath feel the rush of air into your
body expansion of your lungs and ribs
will pause at the top little buzz and
then relax is the best falls away feel
that calm ripple through your body
one more breath deeply and they come
back to the present and just sit observe
any feelings they sensations in your
body and observe any thoughts that are
still rattling around in your mind the
noise and the chatter has subsided and
you're just with your true thoughts the
ones that matter in this moment
observe them understand them you can
open your eyes come back to the presence
and that is my my quick trip did you rob
bacon into the moments it's particularly
useful after any sudden stressful events
like driving hmm I live in Toronto and I
don't often drive in the city sometimes
I have 200 I find that it winds me up so
when I get home park my car I do that
it's 30 seconds 60 seconds so just
letting all that noise go mm and how
often do you do it a day you think so I
do that well that we just did a few
times a week whenever I know I've come
into some stressful stuff conversation
with a client that your potential client
or an interaction with something that
wasn't as positive as I want it to be or
anything like that I have a 12 year old
son so he's on the verge of becoming a
teenager he's a tween and he has a way
of getting under your skin
so when I need to have a difficult
conversation with them
it's I do that first just to be in that
moment so I'm not reacting to something
I am I'm ready for him to support him to
understand him and to listen to him so
that that's where I use that I'm the
shorter version of that just taking one
brat I don't even know how often I do
that now one focused breath I think that
probably happens
how early hmm it's um that's my that's
my tool my go-to tool is just a stop and
drop in the moment and take that one big
breath in a little hold at the top and
just ready right and it's funny that you
use the word ready because that's what
came to mind and we were talking about
this yesterday about like um stoic
readiness
you know like in order to be a good
proper stoic you have to be ready every
moment to practice your stoicism and you
know this the Roma Stoics they they it
kind of used the metaphor of practicing
your philosophies like preparing for the
Olympics it looks like you've got a
really always be on and and then you and
I were talking about like the breath and
how it's like like almost like one of
the most universal things about being
alive is you're gonna breathe as a human
right and so if you can anchor the
philosophy of stoicism and that
readiness to the breath that could be a
very powerful thing yeah breath also
anchors us to our consciousness as well
as the first conscious thing we do as
the last conscious thing mmm life and so
we can anchor that still a practice of
Stuart thought with our breath and with
our consciousness will always have it
will always be ready for it yeah one of
the things I've noticed over the past
few weeks I'm streaming how you used to
have a live meditation class people come
to the studio and I teach meditation and
breath work and it was always a struggle
to get people to come in as first thing
in the morning so people have other
things to do in the morning like wake up
and breathe but now they're they just
have to log on as streaming kits live so
they just they we have to get out then
they log in and the numbers are
exploding we're getting lots and lots of
people these daily breath classes
because it's just a way for them to
practice that awareness first thing in
the morning to really wake up their
consciousness dial into this situation
the day
be ready for so it's and a lot of people
that saying I wish I wish I started this
months ago years ago and it's like you
were saying you don't you don't practice
for the Olympics the day of your
competition you need to practice for
this emergency with the pandemic for the
corn juice
we shouldn't have practicing for this
years ago right in like that there's
something about that I should find I
just sort of like bothered me in that
moment and then when Massimo came on he
said the same thing it's like yeah we're
in the arena now like you should have
been practicing your so isn't before
this and then that that sort of annoyed
me too even though I can see the
perspective and I think it's true that
yeah yeah we should have but now is sort
of like this moment this crisis is an
opportunity to start practicing mm-hmm
yeah it's a good trigger to make people
practice I'm not saying I'm not telling
people oh you should have done this
before they're telling me that I would
they wish they'd say hey but oh that was
a great time to start yeah yeah and then
people are then and you see them and
with breath work you feel it right away
when you do a breath practice like that
we've been doing the stoic breath work
on Sundays you know you know you've done
something you feel it it's like it's
like real real exercise whatever that
means
it's like coach human doing a spin class
where you can workout with weights you
know you did it you feel it all the time
when you do more traditional focus
meditation or we're gonna mat have
meditation or anything like that you you
don't really know if you meditate it
can't really feeling off you get halfway
through anything I'm just wasting my
time I've got that Netflix to watch when
I go do that instead
it's what's that's what people get with
with the meditation without really
having a schedule and a practice to
develop it when we do breath work you
feel it right away the style which I
teach you get a rush of endorphins
dopamine so you actually feel really
good afterwards it also starts making
those little changes to the way your
brain works its way you pay attention to
things and the more you practice it
through breath work the
more you become aware of your breath
and because you're anchoring that breath
as this tool to access that's the year
you're still at practice it's there for
you
it's always there and when you have
these other little tools like the stop
drop and breathe when you know you've
just had a stressful event and so you're
gonna use your breath well now if
there's a there's a feat on to that to
it because now you're paying attention
to stressful events now you know oh I'm
gonna go into this stressful event it's
going to be stressful and I'm gonna
recover with some breath work afterwards
and so just charging in and getting all
wound up and stressed now you're all
stressed that you're not even aware of
that stress is you don't have any tools
you know many practice do acknowledge it
you go to the next less stressful thing
we already wound up speed go barreling
into the next thing you're already being
attacked by up there and you get
attacked by another bear and another
bear and another bear and then by the
time the end of the day rolls around and
you have to have a chat with your
twelve-year-old son you've been attacked
by bears all day well your kid is just
another bear so you're gonna you're
going in like all guns blazing great
great and you mentioned the the Sunday
practice and a lot of people have been
really enjoying you coming in the stoah
to do the the stoic breath and in a last
session we didn't record it but it was
like you said a lot of awesome stuff
some kind of your your origin story your
history of how you got into the breath
work and how it connects to stoicism so
maybe I'll just add a little context
about how you and I met and then maybe
we can kind of launch into your origin
story maybe and then how we got to the
stoic breath so I I run the stoicism
Toronto group here in Toronto and I got
women laugh got on my radar the wim HOF
method got on my radar
I think Joe Rogan Joe Rogan puts
everything kind of things on everyone's
radar and sorry I downloaded one of his
programs I was practicing it and then
I'm like you know I want to find someone
in Toronto who does this to invite them
in to the talk because intuitively I
felt there was a connection between wim
HOF and stoicism even though I don't
know if he makes that connection
directly yeah and the connection there
was the cold shower stuff because I've
been taking cold showers for awhile
without even thinkin knew about the wim
HOF method I'm not sure about that but
it wasn't inspired by the wim HOF method
my cold shower taking and Stoics talking
about voluntary hardship like just kind
of like put yourself in situations where
you sleep on the floor or you under
dressed for the weather or you know take
cold showers just to build that muscle
you know so you could enter the arena
and so I've been taking cold showers for
a while and then that's how I think I've
got the connection seeing wim HOF and
then stoicism bite is you in you had
like an awesome session that sauces in
Toronto really good and you tied
stoicism quite well to the breath work
that you do and we stayed in touch you
came to speak at the stoic con
conference in September which is on the
YouTube channel which is a great talk it
was a beautiful kind of experience just
seeing all the Stoics in the audience
closing their eyes and breathing
together and then and now your regular
facilitator at the stoah on Sundays so
yeah feel free to fill any gaps there
that I might have missed but I'm very
curious to hear again and I'm sure the
people listening would be here as well
so can I hear your origin story of how
you got into breath work and then maybe
how it relates to stoicism
yeah I Alden I always considered myself
to be a stoic because I didn't know what
a stoic was I thought stoicism was just
don't have emotions shove those down and
to be stoic but I realized after I met
you and I read a little bit more into it
it was the that was the small less stoic
and but I had become as I discovered
breath work the work off method I become
the largest stoic as I understood more
and more what stoicism was but I had
them practicing stoicism all along going
back in my quite quite a ways while I
was as a wilderness guide I've always
been into wilderness tripping can't
think canoeing rock-climbing all that
kind of stuff and it's hardship when you
go camping when you do a two-week
backpacking trip that's a hardship
you're putting yourself into difficult
unpleasant often miserable experiences
hiking all day with a backpack on sore
feet sore back not very good food but
beautiful sunsets beautiful fresh air so
you go through these hardships in order
to experience something greater in life
and you go through these hardships so
that when you return home your home is
that much more comfortable a comfort of
home is a pleasant experience so I
always have that lingering in the
background but all through my 30s
probably all through my 20s I wasn't
really aware of it but as I got into my
30s I was developing an illness I was
becoming very very sick and I wasn't
sure why that was a sponsored athlete
needs to do multi-day adventure racing
there's more under yourself into
discomfort and every every training
session I did it took me longer and long
to recover my body was breaking down my
digestive system was failing me I
couldn't speak properly I've aches and
pains all over my body
and my doctor said you know you're just
getting older slow down isn't my early
30s I didn't think that was that was it
surely not so I changed the way I was
exercising training the way changed the
way I was eating and sleeping and
looking after all these things every
little thing made it a little bit better
but then I got worse and sicker and
sicker and sicker and I didn't know why
and I was a personal trainer at this
time so I was doing all the right stuff
but I was still getting sick and it's
nicked nothing worse and then one day in
my early 40s I found myself lying in a
hospital bed
you know Sinai Hospital in Toronto very
sick my body was in agony I could barely
move all my joints were inflamed in my
heart it was an atrial fibrillation it
was bouncing around in my chest I
couldn't catch my breath and the doctors
were getting ready to shock me back into
sinus rhythm and she brought the crash
cart into the hospital room and I was
looking at holy Travon like this isn't
right this isn't supposed to be
happening to me and there's right at
that moment that all these alarms went
off in the emergency room the doctors
and nurses running back and forth they
were wheeling it all these people are
just been in a bar fight and this like
all sorts of lacerations and arterial
bleeds everywhere and and so I was put
on hold I was stable enough then I was
lying this hospital bed and I actually
said it loud I'm not sick and it was at
that moment where I said I'm not sick
that my heart was clicked back into
sinus rhythm and I was fine I caught my
breath and I felt better and the doctors
came and checked me out and I was
discharged from the hospital when I went
through this round after round after
round of testing to see what was wrong
with me and they finally found out I had
some sort of a runaway inflammatory
disorder that they call nonspecific
rheumatoid arthritis which is not a
thing but they had medication to control
the inflammation my body they didn't
know what was causing
here house and medication and that was a
good enough for me that that wasn't the
answer I wanted didn't want to identify
with just being a sick person that
here's your pills and that's that's the
rest of your life and so I was looking
for another way forward and that's when
a friend of mine introduced me to the
wim HOF method and I looked at it I'd
seen wim HOF years ago I saw this
documentary but this crazy guy who ran a
marathon in the Arctic but just shorts
on he was barefoot bare chested they may
have had a half mil for the two company
you had just shorts barefoot ran a
marathon that's that's pretty deep I
like the cold too you know I go to
winter camp thing I like the cold feels
good and so I watch more documentaries
and I downloaded the app and finally
after weeks of just looking at it
feeling sick i sat down and did the
breath work took a big breath in let it
go took 30 of those and then held my
breath with no air in my lungs for a
long time did two more rounds like that
at the end of those first three rounds
with wim HOF breathing that I did I felt
better the stiffness I had in my body
the achy myths that I just become
accustomed to was gone I felt this
freedom in my body oh wow this is
amazing so I got deeper into it started
this daily practice of rounds of
breathing in a cold shower rounds are
breathing in a cold shower day after day
after day a certain feeling better and
better and better
downloaded an online program the 10-week
program did all those working up to
doing a 10-minute cold shower and was
fill my bathtub up with cold water I
felt really good oh my god I gotta do
more of this I need to teach other
people this so I went into the advanced
women off course in California and it
was there that I was doing this I
started to feel we did some very very
deep breathing in different guided
meditations with a nicer to feel
something happening what's what's going
on
I feel funny feel like there's something
bubbling up inside of me they really
know what it was but then I got after
the that two day Advanced Course in
California has accepted into the
instructor master module and it was
between those times that I started
notice that I was behaving differently I
was certain to feel different to
understand things about myself
differently I couldn't quite put my
finger on it but starting to feel
different and I was realizing that yes
the wim HOF method healed my physical
ailment of this runaway inflammation
problem but looking back I realized that
I was I wasn't suffering from a mental
illness but I didn't have mental
wellness I always had this sense of
dis-ease I don't mean this agitation
this anxiety even looking back I realize
I had social anxiety disorder the things
I've read since then oh yeah that's
these are the things I felt and when I
was in groups of people and even no and
I went into the master module in
California or discern in Australia and
those five days of this deep dive into
breathing and meditating it the first
day of that we are told to find our
blockage and meditate on the blockage
but what are you talking about blockage
I don't know what that is I don't know
what a blockage hits and we break out
into smaller groups to discuss to share
do craft work big groups and meditation
ice baths swimming in the southern ocean
in their winter time is August it's a
sinkhole and it's on the last day day
five the day we were going home we did a
90-minute breath session
open up the day and we're guided into
this future self meditation and it was
just how it was a very deep experience
for me and I was feeling just just with
me uneasy out of my body like I felt
like I'd left my body and it wasn't
quite in it and then I went into the ice
water for the last time and when you
have an ice bath
there's no escaping the ice water there
is a rush of stress and fear and anxiety
it just rushing up through your body and
you have to breathe through it and face
that sphere and the stress and anxiety
in your belly up and you relax and then
you see clearly you see yourself so I
had that rush of stress of go through
and then right at the end of that I
found my blockage it was right there in
front of me and I can only liken it to
like I saw my brain as a Rubik's Cube
and suddenly I went click
and all the colors lined up and I saw me
and I saw my life and I saw my future in
my past I saw everything and this
blockage inside of me was this blockage
of emotion that burst out of me in this
massive waves of the spa the sobbing and
crying and laughing hysterically and I
laid in this tub of ice water we lost
for 10 minutes laughing and crying as
years of emotions that I denied myself
came just pouring out of me and I
couldn't stop but there was no stopping
it's just bubbling out I realized
afterwards that I that was the first
time I cried in 32 years true that the
deaths of grandparents and aunts and
uncles and deaths hats hard times is my
life rakes up breakups girlfriends and
all kinds of just nothing no emotion
because I was still like I don't have
emotions
so it was that was almost three years
ago that happened so it's been an
incredible journey where I've become a
real stoic now we're now actually
observe how I feel then you have to feel
to be able to understand you feel your
feelings you have to be able to feel and
to recognize what those are why you have
those and you understand what a primary
emotion is and what a secondary emotions
and a lot of the time
where does complicated monkeys things
happen to us that make us suddenly
stressful or angry or joyous or full of
love and it was quick and it's a primary
reaction 2000c primary emotion and then
our monkey brains fill on the rest with
secondary emotions that we do well on we
linger in this stress and this anger and
it's made up emotion that we have so
when we stop then we go into our brass
and we observe what I'm truly feeling
right now what this event around me is
making me feel recognized and I allow
myself to feel it then I can can become
complete become a whole person and to
function in this world so that's uh
that's kind of my back straight how how
I got you now how I function yeah what
came up there is um you know how you
looted to it earlier the the lowercase
stoic versus the uppercase stoic and so
the lowercase though is that that
stereotypical kind of mostly man who
just sort of represses his emotion and
can kind of tough through things tough
mudder through things where the
uppercase stoic is is the rich
philosophy and I would argue I'm not
gonna argue it now but I would argue
that if you are upper case stoic you
have the capacity to be a lowercase
stoic but not vice versa
because sometimes you need to just sort
of like have that distance from your
emotion and just
yourself and prudence and just do what
you have to do but like you said I think
a good true stoicism and this is what I
feel like the the wider stoic movement
doesn't have which is I'm seeking for or
which what I think stoicism is asking of
me right now and of us right now is -
yes have that cognitive diffusion the
capacity it is to kind of like make sure
your emotions and your thoughts are not
a mesh together so if you hear something
that you don't just get triggered and
you run off so have that ability to
diffuse which I do think the breathing
does but then kind of start building a
relationship with the rich emotional
realities that we all have and don't
view them as enemies give them a sort of
like friends that sometimes give you
wrong advice but have that healthy
relationship with them yeah exactly and
like so we can't just have something bad
happens we can't just react to that and
burst out into a fit of anger or sorrow
we have to function Society but when we
feel like coming away when we're faced
with that that anger that sorrow that
grief that joy whatever it is and it's
not an appropriate time to deal with it
it's that is using that breath to
breathe and drop into the moment and
then recognize what it is and knowing
that okay I feel this set of emotions
due to my circumstances I'm gonna finish
what I'm doing right now to get through
it and then deal with that so I have
tools to deal with those emotions which
allows us now to have that that rich
experience and that's that's what we're
dealing with in our breath classes right
now our daily breath class is we learn
to go back into how we're feeling and go
a little bit deeper into our emotions
because a lot of the stuff where we're
not in in the Western world we're not
very good at recognizing what emotions
are where are they and as soon as we
feel something that we deem as a
negative as an bad as a wrong emotion we
ignore it we push it down right away but
as soon as we do that we start attaching
all these things to it the the
circumstances that made us feel that
that soar
is now attached to us so every time
those circumstances come back we're
going to feel that sorry we have trapped
in that cycle of feel in that same
emotion so right a big thing that we're
feeling right now society is grief we're
feeling grief for the loss of our
society that loss for our routines and I
wants a pre-emptive grief of what's
going to happen next I'm grieving for
tomorrow already but grief is a bad
thing but we can't escape the reality we
keep feeling this on trapped in my home
owner quarantine I'm trapped but because
I've been ignoring how I was feeling
about that because I'm still feeling
that though those feelings gonna keep
coming every time I experience this this
this quarantine I'm going to feel that
grief again so we assume we meditate and
say okay okay grief I'm going inside
hello grief and I actually guide people
into talking to their emotions and
acknowledging them and say okay I'm
ready I'm strong I'm ready to feel what
you have to tell me all your emotions
are just part of your your psyche it's
part of you and so if you are not
experiencing some of them you're not
experiencing you you know I experienced
you as the full complete person so we
sit and we allow these feelings to come
up and allow yourself to feel a fit of
rage in an appropriate time place or the
grief the sorrow allow yourself to feel
these it's done without and now and now
you can fully feel the stuff that you
want to feel the joy happiness the love
and this sort of this rich emotional
landscape is this a perfect opportunity
to practice once this ISM all the time
yeah you know this is never a shortage
of emotions that are arising in us in a
day to day basis or a moment to moment
basis even so something else was coming
up because I know a lot of people who I
guess when they encounter stoicism
they're like oh they're just like they
feel a resonance with it like oh I've
already been doing that and it's like
some extent right and it's people mostly
in maybe extreme sports like the
wilderness training or or like kind of
like maybe a lot of doctors and
entrepreneurs the people who have
military definitely military when
there's like a high risk high
uncertainty and it's like if they want
to perform with excellence in that
domain then they have to really be stoic
even though they might not have that
word or that philosophy put on it and
but it's there just being stoic not just
but sometimes they're just being stoic
in that domain like the main of going to
war domain of going to the you know the
hospital or whatever or whatever they're
doing and where stoicism is interesting
because it's like it's like what they're
doing in that domain it's like that
local domain it's globalize for your
whole life and like how do you do that
though right
how do you do that you don't just
memorize propositions and give them El
service to them it's like epictetus says
it's like don't explain your philosophy
and body it and what I really like about
this particular practice of the stoic
breath and breath work in general it
because it's like it anchors you in the
breath and you're always breathing so it
has that opportunity to colobus the
philosophy to every moment yeah that
moment are talking about with extreme
sport athletes military doctors they're
experiencing flow state ready when they
get deep into that moment of just
performing its flow State everything
just happens perfectly
and we can measure flow state when
you're in flow you actually turn off
your prefrontal cortex and you just you
just go you just act and you you see
your entirety and you see it moving and
slowing and we we experience the same
thing when we do breath work when we do
that deep rhythmic breath pattern that
we do we start to go into temporal
hypofrontality that's what it's called
is where you shut down the front part of
your brain so through a a conscious
breath practice we trigger ourselves
into flow state which is what these
extreme athletes are doing but because
our breath and more control of it when
when somebody is a skiing down the side
of a mountain they're not consciously in
control of the experience it's a
subconscious control it's happening
quicker than their conscious mind can
have can can't control it our conscious
mind experiences the world just a
fraction of a second behind it actually
happening you have to think about it
before we experience it when we're a
flow state that does our body that we
don't have time for that through our
bodies is acting when we go into our
breath practice we're consciously going
in to that flow state so now we have
this tool in our back pocket to go into
that state whenever we want we can
trigger that that's flow which allows us
to be stoic in those moments
and I'm wondering too maybe there's an
open inquiry for both of us to go down
but like those anti flow moments is a
tortured way to put it but I think you
know what I'm trying to adjust your
towards here is that like those those
performance athletes who are in that
flow state and that domain and then if
you can manage to anchor yourself on the
breath and then engender a flow state
but there is some aspects where it's
like it just feels like you're not in
flow
you're like imprisoned in a way and what
you think is going on in those moments
if you can find maybe if you can tease
out some kind of universal aspects of
them when you're what's happening with
your thoughts when you're Kent when
you're stuck in imprisons you are
literally in your mind you're you're
thinking too much getting stuck in
feedback loops in your mind and that's
often happening when part of our are
wrinkled the amygdala that is our our
fear sensing part of our brain and it's
either sensing fear or it's not sensing
fear it's on or off there's no no
grayscale steer neither you're being
attacked by up there we are safe around
the fire that's it and when you're being
attacked by a bear that's supposed to
trigger flow State that's supposed to
trigger you into that action to just get
things done but there's no bear you know
it's just your email going off looking
at the window and knowing you can't go
outside so there's no action to be had
so now you're imprisoned in this fear
response which triggers all sorts of
thoughts all sorts of feedback loops and
in your mind of work creating things to
worry about
do Welling the things in the past
[Music]
just being agitated not knowing what to
do with your body right now when you
when you notice that you are craving
potato chips more than he used to you
know drinking more than he used to
drinking alcohol more than used to not
being able to sleep properly standing up
late been watching Netflix because you
don't want to go to bed because you know
when you go to bed you know gonna be ale
to sleep anyway right that's best that
feedback loop taking over and stopping
you from performing because you're not
noticing you're not being aware of what
you're feeling
using that brass as a trigger to
activate that that next stage we've got
the fear when you're bit to ski off the
side of a of a mountain like even the
most talented skier who does that all
the time that's fear
that drives that that that versus wants
to perform purposes jumping out of an
airplane that's not I've gone skydiving
it's not it's not a pleasant experience
a very fearful experience but it's a
rush of good feelings at the same time
because it triggers absolutely when a
doctor is a victim have somebody open
and do open-heart surgery I can
guarantee you there's a moment when he's
about to do that that that she thinks oh
crap what am i doing there's a moment of
fear and then it's triggered into that
flow state to allow things just to
happen that we don't have the action
present our lives right now when we do
our breasts we trigger that temporal
hypofrontality we trigger the flow state
undermine it change the way our brains
working to draw us into flow state so
that when we can use that fear and
anxiety that reaction in our amygdala to
say okay let's this drop in the moment
and have a look on in there
and then we can look at the that the
fear within us the sorrow the grief
anxiety stress whatever it is and say
hey are you doing back there
are you feeling you know what it's going
to be okay you're feeling this because
of this you're feeling this anxiety
because
you have to go to the grocery store
tomorrow and you don't have a Facebook
that's alright you can find the answer
to where where those feelings are coming
from and understand them right and then
once you feel that I'm gonna and
acknowledge them you can then move
forward yeah yeah yeah what's coming up
is that some like you know the stoicism
it's commonly said to live in accordance
with nature that's like the purpose of
stoicism I am starting to prefer a
different way to phrase that and this
actually comes from Jordan Hall who was
not a stoic being in right relationship
with reality and if you're in right
relationship with reality than your
right relationship with everything
that's a part of reality including the
fight and flight response and so if
you're in right relationship with the
fight-or-flight response then you could
you're afforded to those to do those
things that you just said but if you're
not in right relationship with it then
you're gonna have a pathological
relationship with with fear with you
know like dominance and all those kind
of things and then won't lead to you
know a healthy existence yeah in fact it
was a little lead to more of that in
yourself and others yeah yeah yeah and
then you'll yeah you'll spread it around
yeah motions are contagious great cuz I
thought there was a little YouTube thing
that went around a while ago where these
people were sitting in a subway car New
Yorker thing and they start to laugh
sort of laugh and laughing I'm pretty
soon the entire subway car was laughing
mmm-hmm
there's all contagious right now you
know people aren't probably sitting in
subway cars but everybody is feeling
this stress anxiety and you know these
people when when you're when we had
offices to go to and you know the dark
cloud first dark cloud is here feel the
negativity then the drain on you
everybody is feeling that
our cloud I know so you're passing it to
your spouse your kids they're passing it
back to you getting a line to go to the
grocery store and everybody has this
dark cloud hanging over giving it to
each other but we can turn that around
hmm if you recognize that you know it's
there you know you're feeling angry and
upset and scared you but you also know
that you can feel joyous gratitude love
right past these within you so you can
feel gratitude for having a safe home to
have your health you have all these
things to be grateful for it so you can
practice feeling notes and so that
becomes your dominant emotion that you
feel hmm where you practice um now when
you're standing in line you're you're
the one who's shining brightly and
passing that on to other people
mm-hmm yeah that um state of serenity
yeah
like this idea that the state of
serenity maintaining that and modeling
it for others is an ethical act in a way
because you're displaying what right
relationship is especially with the
fight-or-flight response and although
the realm of emotions and I'm reminded
of my wedding day about almost two years
ago now I got married in Ireland it was
just me and my wife we just kind of
liked it uh was it's not elopement with
everyone knew about it so it's not an
elopement but it was a destination
wedding just mean her and we got married
in this little small Irish town and it's
like an old really old church and you
know we were in Dublin the day before
just drinking Guinness and I was like
you know this is no sweat
exactly want to live this big wedding so
they don't want deal with all that stuff
right and it's like no sweat I'm not
gonna be nervous but I was like really
nervous the day of I was like so anxious
and then I was like and then I saw
the priest the priest came right and
then he just - he's like a weird
about him he just like looked at mrs. no
where is Peter nowhere it's no bother no
bother and then I just sunk in the
moment because he was like so present he
was like he could tell you is really a
man of God because he was just
overflowing with presents and then just
when he said that when I when I had
contact with him I just like I just sunk
in the moment like he infected me at the
moment and I just like was like so
plugged into the whole thing I remember
everything about it like the we don't
member everything but I you know I I
just felt in the moment during the the
actual ceremony it was really really
beautiful and I have him to thank for
that and then reflecting on it afterward
I'm like you know what it's that's an
ethical act just being him you know
because he inspired others and then that
came to mind when you you were saying
that about like in the grocery store or
whatever and if you can maintain that
serenity
people are gonna sense that people are
gonna feel it mm-hmm they're gonna be
inspired by it yeah and the more you
practice it the the more you feel it we
just it's like with insulin when you eat
sugar you release insulin and instantly
helps assure get to the cells but the
the more you have from that insulin the
harder it is for the cells to work with
it um so all of our cells have receptors
to feel things we have neuropeptides are
the sort of the the molecule of emotion
we have an emotion we released
neuropeptide of that emotion so if we
feel stressed a lot we release a lot of
stressful neuropeptides and so our cells
in our body become very good at feeling
stressed we developed more receptors
ourselves to feel stress and so because
we have more receptors to feel more
stress we want to start to feel more
stress to feed those receptors so we get
more stressful which makes us what to
have more stress so the emotion that we
focus on more is what we're going to
feel more of and we've come better at
feeling it so when we practice gratitude
gratitude meditation where you just sit
and think what are the things I'm
grateful for at the end of your day
before you go to bed you open your
journal and you're right the five things
you're grateful for today
do that all the time every day you
practice attitude pretty soon you start
to become better at feeling grateful and
because you're better at feeling
grateful you started to feel more
grateful so therefore to get better for
feeling grateful or joyous or more
loving the more you practice these these
emotions that you want to feel
but right now while we're all feeling
the stress and anxiety of the quarantine
we're getting really good and feeling
stressful and anxious of anger it's
beautiful
we're gonna really good at feeling those
terrible feelings so we're gonna start
to feel more of them and that's gonna
that's that's gonna be the next crisis
right now we have a health crisis of you
know people becoming infected and then
dying with a lot of people but the next
crisis is we're gonna have an entire
population who is really good at feeling
scared and anxious sad and grief and
where's they okay go back to work now
go drive on the highway and get to work
and I'm really good at being terrified
that's gonna be the next crisis and
we're going to see a massive spike and
youth mental health problems suicides in
marriage breakdowns
yeah and if they're kind of like the
political landscape - especially in
America becomes more unstable like I say
if the election gets postponed or
canceled and then some kind of civil war
breaks out and everyone's feeling this
way and they don't have that right
relationship with with that
fight-or-flight response then people can
really hijack those emotions and
weaponize them yeah yeah when we only
see with they use here as a tool to
politics and here in Canada we often see
the politics of fear right and one kind
of like threat I want to go down then it
keeps kind of like it feels alive is so
like the I really like that thing that
right relationship with fight-or-flight
response so like we were kind of
touching on the
flight aspect of it but like listless
maybe turn our attention to the fight
aspect and having wrong relationship
with the fight response in the flight or
fight response and in men come to mind
and I don't I like I don't want to use
this word because it's been I feel like
it's been abused but like that you have
toxic masculinity
maybe we can redefine how to repurpose
it here of having wrong relationship
with the fight response and I don't
myself like I don't consider myself the
most masculine or alpha guy but I do
have this like delicious do mos and if I
just lean into it it's just like this
 you energy and its desire to
dominate for its own sake right and and
I can see that right away another men
like I see them you I see it in kind of
like you know the enemy fighters all
those guys you know they have that and
[Music]
so but if like they have a wrong
relationship with it that could be
really really dangerous so I don't know
if I have a question here but I just
maybe I'll pause and see if anything
comes up I agree with that entirely
where that comes from trying to
searching the database here there's a
book I don't have the name at all this
isn't a very good reference but it talks
about the ages of sexuality in that and
there's the that the read sexuality the
white sexuality and the black sexuality
and the read sexuality is what we
experience when we were 14 to 18 that
surge of hormones and just horniness an
aggressive ism fight to the playground
and and bullying and just trying to be a
man and that's that that buildup of
masculinity that the toxic Maskell
masculinity but then we were mature and
we become this way the book goes and we
become horrified by that and we have
this this turn on something and we
develop this this white masculinity
where we shrink away from that power and
we develop terms like metrosexual and
those those terms like that I might have
touch with you higher now but it's that
that reversal of masculinity and a lot
of that and then we mature again and we
develop the black masculinity where you
are where you own your sexuality you own
your masculinity you own your rage as a
tool within you to use and that's where
we are allowed to be angry and feel our
anger and recognize our anger but it
doesn't control us when we were a
younger are like when we were 16 little
boys are rage would overtake us and it
would control is it make us do things
that's you know like why why did I
behave that way
some people don't mature out of that and
we have a society that encourages that
kind of where we be call that kind of
out of control purging masculinity as
what is masculine right that's that's
not this maturity that you and I have
about owning our masculinity owning our
rage moving our sexuality that is what
masculine is with that disconnect and
that misunderstanding of toxic
masculinity comes from it seamless
generate its its celebrated in the media
in Hollywood but that is bad to be it at
the same time so being able to recognize
it and own it and mature past it and
that's and that's part of stoicism too
is to be able to recognize within
yourself when you're feeling these
things when you're feeling that that
masculine rage and recognize it for what
it is mmm no go and get in a bar fight
are you use that as an energy to go for
a run or to build something or to
connect with your family or to you know
be the protector or you know and for me
like to be a protector in this day and
age I cook for my family that is that is
my demonstrate
protecting my family my vascular power
is to provide for my family in that way
I feel so important right right right
or is it yeah I like that there's a few
threads that were coming up but they're
slipping my mind let's just see if they
return and it's funny like practicing
stoicism so I was explained what
happened to me right there like I had
all these like when you when you were
talking right I had this like thread
that came up like oh this is so good and
I kind of bookmarked it but my mind just
went blank right and then this happens
yeah and this happened like a few times
before podcasting and then there's that
judgment mode that clicks in right it's
like oh
this is gonna be stupid or whatever
people listening to this and then like
there's a fear then asks us a stupid
question just to kind of like in the
pinnacles back to artificial mode but
what's so delicious about stoicism it's
like an opportunity just to kind of
pause and recognize and and call
attention to that you know like this
opportunity to practice to feel into
that judgment that was just a rising
feeling to that fear feeling to that
desire to rush into a boring question
just so keep the ball rolling because
you know we gotta we have to rid of
interview here so long move along yeah
and and then I want to see if I can kind
of find that threat ago he was so good
but it this idea of truthfulness to I
want to get your thoughts on this just
being truthful with what's alive right
now because if you're not because I was
I was just truthful with everything that
just occurred about you know losing my
thought and the judgment all that stuff
and because being truthful kind of
returns you to the real in a way like I
feel like real shit's happening right
now between you and I in this
conversation and if you can't lose
access to that if you if you get tempted
to if you get tempted to lie
then how could you be in right
relationship with the moment yeah so I'm
curious if if anything uh comes to life
to you when you when you think about
truthfulness yeah there's a lot to
unpack there mine might take up
truthfulness was always it's just easier
to be truthful mm-hmm I'd heard
something let's see it's especially
about telling a lie every lie you tell
you have to remember two things you have
to remember the lie and you have to
remove the truth right it's not doing
justice is a very eloquent way to say
that yeah yeah being truthful is no I
think I think if you're not truthful if
you're not a truthful person if you tell
but let's let's imagine you're a world
leader with orange skin and you were
very good at telling the truth it's
you're not telling the truth to yourself
that that's like lie of people tell lies
they lie to themselves mm-hmm all the
time that's that's what a lie comes from
right so I think if you're truthful with
yourself you'll have no choice but to be
truth and by that I mean like
recognizing things within your
recognizing what we deem negative
thoughts and negative behaviors and
negative beliefs when you're truthful to
yourself about possessing these things
all right to recognizing them and
allowing yourself to feel things that's
you know you don't want to be truthful
that's going to ground you and make you
a more powerful person hmm and so if
you're a powerful person you're not
going to be fearful you're not that
judge you're not gonna be cheap
you're not gonna judge yourself for
losing your train of thought you're not
going to be intimidated by asking it by
thinking this is a stupid question
you're powerful in yourself if you were
assure of yourself because you were
truthful with yourselves then there are
no stupid questions hmm like if you you
know I if you I do that I ask I'm the
one who asks all the questions and learn
when I'm in a meeting with people and I
don't understand something 100% I'll
just ask again say but can you explain
it to me again I don't understand mmm
and you can feel other people around you
going oh thank god somebody asking I do
[Music]
the I've
you know and I I don't judge I don't
judge myself based on that I don't judge
I think I used to but I don't I did I
used to for sure I used to have a very
fixed mindset that you know if I don't
know something I must be stupid right
instead of if I don't know something I
just have to find out what it is yeah no
not - yeah yeah it took me a long time
to learn that
yeah go ahead
yes so I think that that comes from
being truthful with yourself and
understanding yeah is that deeper
understanding and if we're coming up to
the power month shortly and yeah like I
do agree with that like you gotta be
truthful with yourself in order to be
truthful with other people but I also
think it goes the other way as well like
in order to maintain the fidelity of
truth with yourself you have to be
truthful other people and allow and be
receptive to other people's truthfulness
because you know you'll just get
hijacked by your ego or your blind spots
or you get too arrogant thinking you
know all the truth and it's like other
people's truthfulness shines light on
you and then like risking being truthful
in front of other people it's like a
brotherhood of truth in a way I hate
defeat if you want to have that
masculine yeah yeah if somebody tells
you something about yourself something
gives you some feedback about you and
that hurt you that hurt your feelings or
you like get angry at it it's you're not
angry at the other person it's your Aang
you're angry yourself because that's a
truth when you annoyed yourself
yeah now you'll you'll I would if you
were if you you know don't go oh
your emotions you know how old you are
you're gonna lash it on people
hey shut this down them down and
make them small because they said
something was truthful about you and you
know it you're not telling the truth
yes yeah and I noticed when I'm on
there's like real truthful kick right
now especially in a public way which
feels quite vulnerable but it feels
right to do and it's like once you're
truthful and you start exercising this
muscle and you build a relationship with
the feeling of truthfulness you can
readily spot when you just feel into it
when people are not being truthful you
know it's like okay it's a game
recognizes game in a way or hates a
cookie they got I get you're not be true
for right now I could tell right you're
like or you are and having the
discernment to be truthful and in the
right way you know and then I can
elaborate on that a little bit because
you know how politicians they call
poultry and poultry where it's like they
arrange truthful statements in such a
way we're like yeah technically it's
truthful the letter of the word is
truthful but the spirit of the word is
not truthful and they're like arranging
those truthful statements in order to
manipulate a situation and get a certain
desired outcome based on ego or having
wrong relationship with a
fight-or-flight response maybe at the
bottom of it but there yeah there is
also a discernment with truthfulness and
and being truthful in the right way and
I think the heuristic there is is not
trying to engineer and how come just
being truthful for truthful sake yeah
people have our time with that so um
back in the real world when I do
one-on-one work with people and we do
meditation I do some shadow self
meditation I people go into themselves
and find some the darker elements of
themselves and there's a lot of pushback
when we get there there's a lot people
don't want to be truthful for what's
inside them hmm at all if they don't
want to acknowledge certain things
because it's it's been right and it
leaks and I know when working with them
and we get to those places because we
all have the darker shadow
and so when they get there and this all
just sunshine the butterflies you know
you're not you're not being beautiful
right crazy / you know let's let it out
you're safe have to great but and for me
I have to create a safe place for them
to be truthful mmm telling yourself the
truth is a very scary thing get pushing
lying to yourself retire life for sure
for sure and what I'm hoping with the
stoah and that hoping is the wrong word
hoping strong word what I am listening
to and with the stoah is that an ecology
of practices might emerge from it
that affords one to like just focus in
on that one area like like telling the
truth or like you know breathing
properly focusing on that and then have
those practices the ecology like those
practices in relationship with each
other so that we could practice those
hasn't been been fully embody it and not
let because if you just kind of miss one
component like yeah you're good in this
area but then it's like yeah it's
something's not right there so just sort
of listening to what this thing wants
the store wants and then the collective
intelligence that's emerging from it to
find that right ecology of practices in
order to ground us in that good stuff
and that right relationship so yeah that
being said stoic breath every Sunday at
ten am I got that right yep yeah and
what else where else can people find you
and what you're doing and whatnot yes so
right now all I'm doing is stoic breath
Sunday at 10:00 but then I also scream
live every day from mindset dot video
myself brain Jim is a meditation studio
downtown Toronto and it closed but we're
streaming alive every day then we got we
got on that right away and it's been
highly successful so I have a breath
class every morning at 7:45 and it's
it's scheduled for 45
minutes but we generally go a little bit
over time we have a little bit
discussion afterwards
so basically 7:45 to 8:45 as well agent
schedule for that and then I have
another one at 12:05 to 12:30 and that's
just a quick sort of energy boost so
they get you back in into it flush away
your morning and get rid we focus we
energize yourself the morning when we go
a little bit deeper into some emotional
processing and digging deep it's a lot
of a lot of heart meditation a lot of
acknowledging your truth so that is what
I'm doing right now my website is
breathing in nature calm and I've got a
whole bunch of stuff about to be
launched I've got an online wrath course
that's coming out in the next these
things always take longer than I think
they should and coming out in the next
little while with sweat elite athletics
so I'll be working with them to produce
Matic based class and then I also have
another recording just a meditation
recording coming out this is going to be
available on Bandcamp
it's just anybody who has done the stoic
breath on Sunday it's like that just a
little bit higher quality book like a
proper recording of NASA musicians that
I'm working with so we've got lots of
rhythm cool it's a really beautiful
music with it with my voiceover for that
and when that goes well I'm going to do
the next one and the next one in the
next one so we'll have a whole series of
recorded meditations for accessing
different different things that we do
gratitude at heart Metta do a future
self meditation shadow meditation stuff
like that very cool so that's all the
the live stuff that I'm doing right now
when we get back to normal I'm also a
wim HOF method instructor and I hold
workshops in fact I have a workshop in
about a week and a half which we
switched to a online forum for the first
half then when we can come together
we're gonna get together for the ice
bath first half is gonna be an online
lecture with the science and the breath
work I kind of stuff online hmm so I'm
looking forward to those go alive again
I have a lot of fun at work
yeah shops where we learn everything
about breath work the wim HOF method
lots of meditation in the ice bath this
coming together as a community and doing
breath work together live you know
powerful experience sure and then I also
do my my wilderness trips I take people
out into the woods where we do some
interesting guided experiences in the
woods and my one-on-one work you can
find all that on my website so I do one
on one day long sessions where we do a
lot of breath work manual therapy as
well in fact our therapists so I use
fascial stretch therapy to help release
tension and emotion and trauma and
people's bodies breath working
meditation we focus on what that trauma
was to release it and go deep into the
body
very cool modern one awesome yeah I'll
put all that in the show notes and just
maybe send me some links to the stuff I
might have missed and then I can add it
I'll be throwing this up on the YouTube
channel but the podcast has a bunch of
listeners so it'd be good to include it
there so they can find you if they if
they're called cool so Steve thanks so
much for coming up as awesome thank you
glad we got it recorded this time