good morning welcome to meditating which
on gravity on the cognitive
psychologists and cognitive scientists
at the University of Toronto
academically in scientifically study
phenomena like mindfulness and related
phenomena like Insight flow mystical
experience transformative experience
higher states of consciousness the
cultivation of wisdom the pursuit of
enlightenment I've also been practicing
the pasta meditation Metta contemplation
Tai Chi Chuan and Chacon for over 29
years and teaching them professionally
for close to 20 years welcome if you're
joining us for the first time this is an
ongoing course you're welcome to stay
but every Monday is a Dharma day in
which I teach an important practice in
principle that builds on previous
practices and principles so you'll find
in the description of to this video
you'll find links to previous lessons
and PDS it's Tuesdays through Fridays
including today which is a Thursday we
meet together and sit I usually do a bit
of review at some point and at the end
of every day Monday through Friday
there's a Q&A please keep your questions
and directed towards this practice today
if you have broader questions about
cultivation of wisdom or Buddhism and
stoicism and neoplatonism or or the
meaning crisis or trying to enhance
meaning or overcome foolishness
cultivate wisdom etc please direct those
questions to our monthly live stream Q&A
which is at 3 p.m. est on this trip
through this channel so please like this
video stream it will raise the
visibility the visibility in the YouTube
algorithm and that will help me to reach
more people I'm offering this for free
I'm doing this because I'm trying to
help people give them tools and
resources to increase their resiliency
and activity in these difficult times so
as I mentioned today is a sick day I've
already reviewed what we did on Monday
so I think what we'll do now is
just get comfortable as comfortable as
possible and remember you'll never find
perfect comfort in your posture but get
as comfortable as you're used to set
your phones on do not disturb and we
will begin when I say begin begin
you
you
you
so they come out of your practice begin
trying as best you can to integrate with
your cultivated in your practice with
your everyday consciousness and
cognition
perhaps by reciting the five promises to
yourself
okay we have time for a couple of
questions
remember on Thursdays we can to end a
little bit early because of a mark
starting next week Tuesdays and
Thursdays we'll have to be very hard
endings we won't be able to go over ten
o'clock at all on Tuesdays or Thursdays
that's both because of them our and
because of my new schedule these
teachings of courses the first question
is from 10,000 things can you recommend
any good online Tai Chi Chuan channels
for resources that's a good question so
what I want to do is I've had a few
questions about this there's a few I've
been looking at I'm going to go online
and then I will come up with some good
recommendations I don't want to just do
it off the top of my head I want to put
a little bit of reflection into this and
then I will send that information to
Amara and I will post it in the notes
for this video perhaps at some point
I'll do a review video observe all
important information that we need to
sort of collect together in one spot was
a good question and I will endeavor to
do that for you guys
crema Dean hi crema do you have a
suggestion for sundae contemplation
besides Who am I I'm not my thoughts
motion to me if my body was changed
every 4 years since birth I'm the
wareness holding them gently so the
thing that that's if you get to that
place where you have that then trying to
ask yourself what that identification
with your awareness feels like and where
does it come from both the
identification and the awareness and
then by an Nicholson has a question when
I do met it sometimes feels more like
daydreaming what am I missing
in the practice so what's tends to
happen in daydreaming is you you might
be giving in to sort of you know just
your reactive emotional feelings and
some of them might be pleasant
some of them might be unpleasant and
you're spinning off a narrative and
that's very understandable so be
compassionate with yourself but the
point is what you need to do is try to
try to really zero in and magnify and
amplify what does this what like what is
it does this feel like not in the in my
thoughts but in the tempo and texture
the the tenor and the temperature of my
mind same thing my body how am i
inhabited this I identity what world is
being structured around that person when
I'm projecting an identity onto them
that right so that is very much an act
now you can see it of inquiring
mindfulness now you don't have to
necessarily go through all the stages
because I could get too complicated but
just the the inquiring mindfulness
they've already started to cultivate and
you're already getting an understanding
of how to apply it you apply that deeply
as I said into all those T's of them on
the temperature the texture the tenor
the tempo right the body but how are you
inhabiting mind and body what world are
you structuring around yourself or sorry
around that person and yourself as you
assign an identity to them and how is it
locked
how is it trying to sense how it's
automatic how it's reactive there's a
law to be explored there so you have to
push yourself if you're daydreaming you
know what you're doing is you're right
you're letting just automatic narrative
come up and instead you have to increase
the demand and we are always trying to
get right effort increase the demand so
that you start to get into the flow
state with respect to exploring the
process of Co identification so thanks
everyone for being present today joining
me it's also helpful to me to receive
all the encouragement that I'm getting
from all of you guys I really appreciate
that a lot
a reminder that we will meet every
weekday at 9:30 a.m. est and do this
mondays are Dharma days Tuesday through
Friday our review and sit day every
third Friday is the livestream Q&A at 3
p.m. est I want to as always thank my
good friend and techno mage Omar for all
of his help behind the scenes
my beloved son Jason please like this
video stream it raises our visibility
and in general helped me to help other
people go through this practice so
please recommend this to people you
think it might be valuable too please
subscribe to my channel you'll get
notifications of videos like this also
as I mentioned what kind of video is
online that you'll find on my channel
about a lot of these topics and wisdom
and enlightenment and mindfulness and
insight and meaning and self-deception
and reciprocal opening and the being
mode all of that there's lots of videos
there and great discussions with other
people who are very interested in the
intersection between science and
spirituality so please remember keep
practicing continuity of practice is
more important than quantity remember
there is no enemy greater than your own
mind but there is no ally greater than
your online take care everyone and I'll
see you all tomorrow