good morning welcome to day 28 a
possibility in the pandemic during the
pandemic on April 27th it's gonna just
skip a day so they made sense and I
realized come May 1st it's not gonna
make sense anyway let's just keep it and
do one every day um today theoretically
we were gonna be discussing regular base
on Russell Brand's podcast yeah under
the skin I think is what it's called and
although I watched it that was the full
intention we were gonna discuss it there
was nothing in it that kind of I want to
discuss like it was just them talking
about comedy and Cove in 19 and how
comedy helps and I didn't get a lot like
there was nothing controversial nothing
that sparked a new insight for me so
there isn't really anything to talk
about but last Thursday I had talked
about the documentary I had watched by
Michael Moore's channel I didn't vote
it's called mouth about humans has
humans in the title until Michael or
decide look at this but on Thursday and
it's the broadcasts that I've gotten the
most views on the most comments and I
have gotten most subscribers in last
week so there was something about that
there was like okay I'm gonna pick
something that I want to see that is
viral that is is something that has a
lot of views that I can slice in some of
those over on and that is why I picked
for a teacher base and Russell Brand
because I like enjoy both of them and
yet again didn't spark anything so I
will try for something different next
week but I do have stuff to share today
so I
we had an amazing together tech both
days our tech meeting that Shiloh joined
us on sorry tech meeting are born
meeting on Friday that Shiloh joined us
on and then on Saturday we had a few
people join for our Saturday morning
roundtable one of whom was Raymond who I
really loved what he was up to the world
some said we were gonna connect and we
connected this morning at 7:00 a.m. so
an hour and a half ago I've been up
since 5:00 because yesterday I wasn't
able to to read and view the stuff that
he had said to get up-to-date on his
project so I did that this morning and
when I woke up
someone had commented on one of my old
YouTube videos and because I have very
few subscribers on my youtube video it
is obvious when somebody comments on it
it sends me the
and I look at them because I have so few
content right so whenever anyone watches
one of my old videos there's always
something perfect about it and I read
watch it I'm like I need cherry watch
this today thank you for commenting on
one from so long ago but this morning's
was like a little extra perfect it was
me from September 5th or 6th it was
really early in September and everything
about the video does a short video is
only like three minutes long I linked it
in the description on YouTube for this
video it's at the end it says like baby
baby me from September because it is a
baby B from September I'm wearing the
same shirt I'm wearing right now that
was not I didn't put this shirt on
because I was marrying and I woke up and
this shirt I slept in this shirt I I saw
me from September 2019 and not only am i
wearing the same shirt the person who I
got this shirt from the weekend I got
this shirt from his Kyle C so you've
heard me talk about him he's had this me
Tuesday and come out and so he's fallen
from grace in my mind but get up but I
still use a lot of its tools like his
the internal GPS and apples make apple
trees make apples aren't concerned about
they make them out of but it's like what
I'm wearing in that video is this shirt
and the necklace that I talked about
they came off at 1:1 GPS moments then
where I am in that video 99.9% of my
videos are recorded in my house as I'm
in my house 99.9 percent of the time but
a couple times a week I go for a walk
around this um just this specific walk
that I go on and right now it's kind of
closed down because of COBIT 19 you can
only go on it if you're running but
there's a nearby golf course it's opened
up for walking and it's like the perfect
day injury in the kinds of a like I go
and walk around on a golf course like it
feels like you're alone there's actually
other people there because of all the
hills and it's very well manicured
because it's a golf course it's just
like beautiful and I love it and so this
video from this morning it's me begging
people to come play with me like it's me
saying like I've been doing this for so
long all I want is people to come
through this with me I can't do it alone
I can't do anything but be live on a
video I can be part of a conversation
for an hour
have a meeting that's what I can do
anything that uses more executive
functioning than that I cannot so I need
people to do that part and so much has
changed since then and so much has not
changed this bed because the person who
commented was like is the offer still
stand or something I'm like yes I am
still absolutely looking for people to
create solution raisings with to work
through what is a process we could do
with 10,000 people and $100,000
everything that's occurred since that
since that conversation it's like less
than two weeks later I found game be him
be found me it's like I put out in the
universe are unified by people and they
found me the necklace fell off right the
exact moment in time the person fell
from grace at just the right time who
knows like I'm like I need people to
meet with between this time of this time
of my kids in school you sent your kid
to school during the day and had
childcare oh and then my video with
Ravens there were some technical
difficulties and it is also but I'm
pretty sure we're both into radical
transparency so we will be putting that
up I he drops for part of it I'm gonna
figure out how I was gonna I'm going to
figure out how to edit that part out
because it gives you incentive to edit
and learn I can like I can cut out the
part ready drops that's an obvious thing
to cut out I don't have the executive
function that I just have to figure out
how they actually got it which is a good
a good place to do it this video it's
like what I'm wearing is perfect where I
am is perfect and then what like what I
don't know is happening is perfect right
that I'm about to find game be that then
my necklace is about to fall off in six
weeks and that is about to be a profound
moment that I the cove in nineteen is
coming in and everyone's gonna be locked
inside and everyone's gonna have this
lifestyle but everyone's gonna what can
you do for that space I think that where
I'm walking is gonna be closed down
schools gonna be closed down Oh chil if
you want to join on camera you can
follow the link the stream yard link in
the description supposed to be talking
to myself but like I don't I don't know
if everyone else has those moments
because they oh and the other thing so
then just little because I guess I'd
mentioned at the number 28 is is a
number that just generates in my life
it a lot of things happen on the 28th
and today is the 28th possibility to
condemn back tomorrow is the 28th but I
was the 28th viewer of this video
there's a video from September of me
because that's how it subscribers I had
at the time roughly probably and I
launched the idea cafe like right after
that I might have had it as I didn't
mention it during there so I can only
imagine I know I had just gone to
Whistler but friends of ours who my
friend is friends with their kids so we
got invite it was like the first time I
met one of them the year before when we
went and then this time I know them
better but well I was I smoked a joint
and then took the bus to Whistler my kid
got driven to his circus I can't drive
about the highway by them but they
didn't have room for me so it was like
perfect I end up like smokey Detroit and
somehow like taking the bus to the bus I
had this like a PIFAN II of everything
I'm doing should be within like the
parameters of a disability Union like
how people with disabilities come
together and create our own solutions
and so that's also a benefit
I just wouldn't looking far as other
people with disabilities you want to
have conversations on how to create the
World Cafe and then I just created the
idea of cafe lesson we did our first one
on September 11th so that was like less
than a week after that and that sounds
like about how often I I probably had
that idea like right after I posted that
video the fact that I posted it the fact
of everything still up like the right
people find them at the right time and
who knows if that person will come and
help with the new need but it's not
about that like it's just about
following the biggest through then I'm
sorry today's one is called mercury base
and Russell Brand because again as I
mentioned the very beginning I'm not
really discussing because there's
nothing to discuss it was like two
comedians getting together and shooting
the during cope at 19 there was
nothing world-changing nothing that like
me sparked a new and innovative an idea
in my brain
it was just Ricky Gervais is a muscle
friend talking for an hour I mean I was
totally listening to it well putting
together also in the comments on YouTube
sorry description that comments is I
finished my document I mean it will be
updated constantly on whatever thing I'm
up to I think it's called what it's
stupidly up to the actual documents
called I'm Jubilee but what I'm up to
it's like it explains
what together Tech is the idea cafe
solution raising the five questions and
this possibility of academic like
writing it out I'm like I'm actually up
to a lot that was the other I tweeted
this morning like me from that video
it's like yes I still need help I'm so
seeking the same thing I was seven eight
months ago and yet I'm so much further
like I'm like I don't feel alone I don't
feel even when I feel like it's all on
me I know it's not actually like I know
there's tons of other people doing this
work there's tons of other people who
also have world-saving ideas and
changing ideas and that we're coming in
together like I could also see a
coalescing like I can see which is where
I knew I'm supposed to share this
journey because one like I'm evolving
and changing rapidly whether you can see
that or not is not really for you it's
for me but then like the the coalescence
of the project is also like it it's like
a somewhat blurry photography photograph
that other people can't see but it's
coming slowly into view and you have to
guess it you know like it used to be on
like Sesame Street those things I'd be
like yes the thing is the faster you
could guess at the more points you get
you don't have talked about in any way
they'd have like a panel and they slowly
show you more and more windows of the
panel that's kind of what like I feel
like my project is like it's it's
coalescing in a way we're like it well
although it's not changing that much the
ability to explain it to other people is
changing like this piece will come
together this piece will come together
my my person like who I need to be for
this thing to come into the world is
coming together and that is what this
video she showed me who's like six
months ago
again same position and yet everything
that unfolded directly after I released
that video that I found game be all of
the conversations I mean I've probably
participated in at least 100 hours of
conversation probably 2 or 300 hours of
conversation since then with with maybe
people I mean if I added it up perhaps
show you it's worth that I mean when I
was on stream yard every month was
around 20 hours and those were them just
the ones that were recording stream yard
and I was very close and all of them
were conversations it wasn't me to be
this morning it was only me having
conversations with people and Gabey or
are together tech medians and our India
cafe so all of them were
verse Asians and then I have again I'll
be olive like Eric's conversations that
I participate on that aren't on my
channel and so on hands but they're
unlisted and all the other conversations
that people don't even there's a few
that are lists that are like through
stream yard on my channel that aren't
listed because the person it's not
listed it's for them not to be public
but yeah like that it's funny because I
tell this story a lot that like I'm used
to think I have to change to be the
person I like I have the world-saving
idea but I need to change to be able to
do it and here is me like explaining Who
I am and what I'm looking for and I have
not changed I mean I'm changed and they
be profound ways but that part like I'm
like I didn't get executive functioning
I didn't get an executive functioning
gained the capacity to do something
besides have a conversation I just
Oh more like figured out how to within
my within my capacity have a
conversation and change the world with
it he was like okay this is what I can
do cool I don't need something to show
up in edit videos cuz this videos don't
need to be edited they're alive I don't
need and on there I'm like I can't even
do a thumbnail I can now do a thumbnail
so I'm even good on that on that front I
can I still don't have a video but
today's the irony is that today's is the
one I'm gonna edit so I'm gonna edit out
the part that Raymond drops from a call
and like things are coalescing they're
coming together and all I have to do is
surrender to it just keeps proving
itself but I have to keep alert me that
lesson every P like truly awe like and I
was not good on the weekend on the
weekends I wasn't bad either because
this doesn't really exist anymore but I
I spoke too long before I was supposed
to on both Saturday and Sunday
it was just a like boredom meeting to
numb feelings out and so today I'm back
to not smoking pot until at least noon
but preferably to to is the time period
and because I've been smoking pot
earlier for those two days I also not
before I was going for my walk as soon
as I did that so it was that is perfect
where's my smoke pot sure that had if I
don't want to go for a walk at that
point in time and that's it that doesn't
so today I have plans up until 11:00 so
even if I do smoke pot it
I'm gonna go for a walk at that time
period cuz it's just about owning it
looking in it being it I don't even know
anymore
oh this video this morning baby me a my
hair my hair is like completely it's a
haircut oh yeah it's like I got my
haircut like September 10th or 11
because I then went to the groundswell
events that evening for the karaoke
after the first idea Cafe on September
11th yes look I have no memory like I
see what happened yesterday no but I
remember what I did on September 11th
and September 13th because they were the
day I launched the idk cafe and also
there's a figured out game be Friday the
13th right before I went live for the
first time on fix our world Fridays
which I still call it everyone's mom cuz
if this bunion it's fun time to call it
because world Friday's every time
we fix the world yet he's fixed right
did it conversation is starting with
Raymond who's really awesome
he's funny hello Jade and down stack
keeps coming into my life like maybe I'm
supposed to be involved if I'm supposed
somehow someway but even if it's just
that but they exist and that I exist
that is and if anyone wants to join me
on camera ask questions in comments
there's a link in the descriptions on
YouTube I didn't put her on Twitter
today I could I could put it on Twitter
let's do that you have a moment so want
to do it right away because that it's
like everyone starts with me me when
everything starts with me oh I heard
someone join I'll be letting you on in a
second I'm just trying to find me I'm
tweet I'm gonna guess it Shiloh it is
Shiloh
I guess the three men was really cool we
have another one because I don't think
any game be conversation can take place
under an hour it's like it's like you
don't even start getting good until an
hour into it and then like they
basically have to be two hours but even
he I needed to come on and do this but
also he was like at the are he's like we
got
wouldn't give me this again it's for me
we're having part two on Thursday yay
good morning which works out pretty well
for for me despite the fact that my body
wants to wake up at 4:30 in the morning
I set my alarm for 5:00 it was like so
4:30 but it was fairly wig like I mean
that's what my body does if I have to
get up it stresses out and I oversleep
it but if it's like an invitation to
awaken that always you know naturally
awake before now but my hat alarm I
would you know naturally for it never I
don't know I don't understand it those
things happened to you they're nothing
waking up alarm clock thing but like my
video thing I'm talking about yeah they
happen in everyone's life right for like
you start to see you to like I think
then back and hurry the same shirt and I
hate wearing the shirt now because it's
organic cotton and I still like the I
don't bite I hope I screw this up so
much more from screwing it up getting it
right you have one to share like one of
those moments one of those stories um
probably that I can't think of it
exactly but I can say even just coming
across you and trying to share my idea
like trying to fit into the world in a
way but then sharing with you really
helps me re realize that I don't need to
change me and be that other person I can
just still be me as an artist and get my
message out I don't have to like form
the world but I can share what I feel is
coming
I guess anyway it's very very nice and
thank you I really appreciate it but I
have to keep learning that lesson I got
it done like it takes old me some sticks
my like seven months ago it'll look like
baby me it ends I was like it is baby me
like it's in some ways the project is
know much further on I'm not that much
further on you
after like hundreds of hours with other
people like I know how to play Gabey
with Dragons I feel like I know and it's
not really about the outside world
reflecting back that whether it is or
not but it's kind of like a snowball -
it just keeps collecting and getting
bigger and bigger
I definitely no longer feel alone before
it was like alone and like periods of
connection and now it's like connection
and periods of aloneness like it's like
and I need both of those I need yeah
okay I need those downtime so on my show
no it's not you know it's not even in
those moments I know that's not the
truth and yet there's still this thing
needs to get out into the world it's
still and the world needs it now more
than ever and it's more important than
ever at the same time the more I
encounter other people out in the world
doing things the more it actually takes
the weight off my shoulders like okay I
don't have to fix it because even if I
don't somebody is like it is happening
although chain is creating the
technology that Woodstock that's
creating the technology and then it lets
me truly find what what is my piece yeah
job could not have known a year ago
honestly a year even that video I
wouldn't have known that my piece
strangely cuz in there I'm like all I
can do is have a conversation yeah
that's my piece my babies how to
facilitate and have a conversation and
including the parts that I find really
hard about that or my piece to figure
out to make it easy for everyone and
then I'm better at it than I thought I
was like I'm like I can't get people to
are it's like actually I can I just
can't get people to a Facebook group cuz
Facebook's not designed like that that's
okay yeah it is what it is it's like
alright like I don't know if you saw my
tweet this morning but I was like no he
heard seven months ago saying like I'm
alone and I am like look at what I just
all I did was a screenshot of my stream
yard because I just started on Sundays
but do you not like to knit together
tech ones the idea cafe in the solution
raising and one other one I don't report
the other one was
Oh coach g91 Fridays on here so two of
them possible in the pandemic ones
because they happened to be actual
things and then
together tech ones and then Raymond's
conversation and this morning wonders
because for this money and so I just
screenshot of that which is like seven
or eight and they're not even all my
videos right like they're just the ones
I have scheduled for this week and I put
together a spreadsheet and a document
this week which is what I could do may
convention we can do a document on
Google I was like yes that is within my
capacity I need to read it it's just
like a little blurb on you should they
do and it's like writing it oh like oh I
have a lot going on like together
taxation raising in an idea cafe a pasta
in the pandemic and five questions and
like now this needed to make this it's a
little confusing for me you couldn't let
alone but then it also feels a lot like
can you see the comments from YouTube I
mean you're finally this first thing
comes in all the time it tells me I'm
boring it above when I'm like why are
you here I don't understand
the double booth yeah do you see this
big you know I don't know what he's
getting out of him he's getting some out
of it he keeps coming back his gender
let's go get more water okay
it's almost out after my conversation I
thought how does a bunch of people
because the reason escapes topic is
Ricky Gervais and also practice of why I
did Arts on Thursday
house like 1500 or 1200 or 1500 views
and and then like a bunch of comments
that I'm not commenting not because it's
mainly like climate deniers for kids
maybe but like see you call that science
deniers I'm like there's a big
difference it's like you can't look at
what we're doing to the planet and think
we're not having an impact on it versus
letting the big corporations that broken
in the first place greenwash the
solutions hmm those aren't the same
thing
like it looks like the same thing to you
I get it but it's not the same thing
like there's no point you could convince
me man it's in anyway okay to pop or
toxic sludge into our air and water
I don't know when is that help me I
don't there's climate change or not
instead what's the safe level of crap
are allowed to like put on our mother
none none is the safe level and and
finding out but like how to have those
conversations with how do you because
those who share the world together so if
you're a climate denier and you truly
think it's ok to pump toxic sludge and
you could have tires every year or
whatever I don't know how to have that
conversation
besides to bring it back to the door
what would you drink the bleach oh the
president did just say dirty can inject
bleach so I guess alright well I don't
know I was like people you have only
three people watching it I'm like yeah
and if you're listening to what I'm
saying there's also a hell of a lot
going on behind the scenes and I was
doing this a year ago without people
anything going on behind the scenes
that's why I got to the point where I
was so desperate like where are my
people I've been doing this for so long
so you spent a year videoing yourself
talking about your system or your idea
and how you could change the world
before you actually went live I had
because I can only do what's easy for me
so I had stages for sure ah years ago
three years ago I had I was like you
should go live on YouTube no the
periscope existed so I went live on
periscope which is only ever a handful
of people and then at one point I went
live on YouTube and there was a you were
like one viewer and I jumped up I was
like that's a Facebook group that
started as a project it was like an
auntie it's called the auntie living
this project it was only me and my
brother and I started recording live in
there and then I kicked my brother out
so it's only me and it's like my
thoughts but it's funny because the
difference between me being lives like
it's like I'm talking into a mirror
versus being on camera is different and
it's like a lie when I'm alone with my
own thoughts I can succinctly I could
say them more succinctly then I can when
I'm on video and it's like there's
that's just the difference
be recorded nod there's nothing it's
different but I had to take the next
step
it had to feel safe and so parents every
once in a while is still record on that
Facebook group because I'm like oh I
don't want I just want to record my
thoughts I don't want it but it's not
because I'm not willing to be seen by
the world generally speaking then it was
and so it's like getting comfortable
seeking myself on camera and I'm always
like I have this I don't know if you
know how to Green Gables I feel like you
just could smell so bright hair but
maybe more yeah it's like five four
these stories all once in a degree when
she talked into the mirror and at her
reflection that was like her friend that
was me as a kid and I think it was
partly because it had in it where I was
so I'm talked to my reflection my whole
life
I went talking to the mirror and she got
the cameras kind of just dot anyway but
it's very different like I find this
easier talking to someone then just
talking into the camera but I have to
assume that the person is thinking
insane and then he boner are commenting
even when they're kind comments and
productive it's hard to read and have a
conversation so it's like I'm either
talking and almost like proselytizing or
interacting and it's hard to do but I'm
better at a conversation like an actual
conversation that isn't just me on my
camera but it's big green that part how
do you do any of that so I was on
periscope for a year but like off and on
as soon as I would get regular people on
up it's like it was like I'd go off for
a month then I come back on it was like
scary and so I would quit wasn't
conscious like it was a bit conscious
but mainly subconscious like as soon as
that started going and there'd be the
odd time I'd have twenty or thirty blurs
and I'd get into my heart space and I'm
like this is awesome and there's other
times I'd be on for an hour and you know
what right so it was great practice yeah
and then this YouTube channel has been
around for that amount of time but I've
only been putting out content as I felt
like it right as I was like oh well do
the 11 a.m. fix the world Friday if now
let's move to twelve comedy agent that
may schedule it makes more sense and you
got to you cafe and it started like
everything's just evolved slowly it's
like it's I'm very rigid but it has to
be
yes and then it beat shifts and I'm like
or it doesn't and they're like oh
there's possibility here there's pause
there's always possibility like the idea
cafe I'm like oh like it was hard for me
to find people and then I started giving
them at the same time it was easier and
now I'm like oh right the same time I
show up if there's people who do it if
there's not we don't great I'm game
being hated a lot easier as opposed to
finding be like once to have this
conversation
it's how Raymond found you through the
game be projects or do you know how
Raymond came across yeah yeah through
the gates oh he's a baby yes I've seen
him it's the first time I saw him saw
him saw him was the together one on
Saturday but I've seen his post a few
times I really liked a redis medium
article uh no and I really liked it I
loved her it's funny at the end of this
conversation today because I'm stalking
transparence and he's all about like
don't the wordiness that like inviting
trans-fats right that if you're
demanding transparency its rival rifts
and so we're gonna start there on
Thursday because I'm like yeah for you I
wouldn't want to demand transparency
right for individuals absolutely not
it's up to you to share your data up to
you share where your that's how you're
going to feel safer just spirit is if
you have ability to talk share it but
for corporations and governments ah he
kind of invoke transparency on their
behalf and so I'm looking forward to
that conversation on Thursday to start
there let me go from there I'm feeling
very more energetic today conversations
fortunately and you got up what's that
it's also how I know it's my thing is it
like gives me and what keeps my energy
like putting together this spreadsheet
putting up the videos isn't my thing but
it's a small enough not my thing that I
know I can do it is it it helps my thing
it's like Greg I can do this little
things in order to do that same I'd like
cleaning my house you know although even
not I have to wait till I have the urge
to or or I overspend my spoons all right
median sold out and then like it
helps the rest of my life function right
it's like having this spreadsheet
cutting the place I love like it's so
honest and yet until you do a document
okay I can create a document linked to
that and I can keep that updated or I
can keep a spreadsheet updated every
week when I don't write like Boop's
forgot until Monday to roll with it and
not be so demanding with yourself so you
can be healthy you know can't perform if
you're not healthy
no and that is like truly understanding
that I need balance and it's because I
know I logically know I need it the
world keep it like of course everyone
needs it but it's really hard to
actually surrender to I'm clean enough
well the other time is open all the
other time self-care family care house
care because I'm still it's different
when something it seemed like a new earn
anything to write and you go to do
that's different but when I'm just
sitting there like waiting for that like
I'm like inspiration let's solve the
world problems I have a blank piece of
paper like it's gonna come to me I don't
need to sit at my computer and be like
is the world safe yet yeah the world no
no it's not oh good he's recurred
example first of all this is the kind of
person we thought the comments you know
their quality woman's opinion about
anything does anyone care other ones
especially unemployed women they're at
stores where would you like us employed
like in the kitchen raising kids I am
actually like what is that's not the
part part is yes moms have all day to
think about their opinions this is all
they have that's literally the world
right now let them back at home and this
is the scary part because we don't have
pot as legal we know is does it actually
awaken is the world right like how
people sit
they're not gonna take much action but
they're also not gonna have a belief in
the system I know everyone's at home
with Cogan 19 you know realizing the
world doesn't work like right there it
doesn't there's nothing but time to sit
with your own and the world
and so yeah he's gonna generate some
discomfort and other people we're better
for it the deeper we think about our
lives and our interconnectivity at the
better I think I mean I think that's
pretty pretty self-evident in every
religion in every part of the world it's
like the people take time out of life
right to take a vowel are taking over to
like spend all that time reflecting and
not need to become or to become any of
those sayings at the same time the world
has that right now it's very
uncomfortable especially when you're not
joking no choose to do it and that's the
same thing with disability in hell it's
Terrance you know what I could really
use nothing but time on my hands right
and nothing but time on my hands have no
energy no money you know the ability to
do anything only time on my hands but
then the world gives it to you like that
like your health and now like the entire
world has it at the same time and what
is coming out of it is vocal conflict
right there like like people who are
like really uncomfortable sitting that
there are emotions so they go on someone
says YouTube channel and like how dare
you exist in the world of like heaven
yeah mostly
I didn't choose to have my disability I
choose to stay at home yeah Society
would consider unproductive but I
actually look at what I'm doing
right now I have never been more
productive I've never given the world
more than what I'm giving them right now
and the same is true for everyone
sitting at home at 19 like where are you
is he doing this is who you are and that
doesn't mean if you're taking downtime
right now and like recovering
I don't even common items mistake of
like the state of the world now is new
and yet from that space you can give
your best self and so like all it like
now I'm thought of as a bomb it's so
ironic because like this is
the world likes it with your own emotes
like go sit with yourself that is what
you've been that's wrong I don't care
whether you're making a million dollars
a year and actually paying your taxes
you cannot you from your high itself
until you're willing to sit with
yourself and be with yours and yet
that's probably bit like it's just the
reverse of what they're doing to you
right like yo gob you're not doing what
you're supposed yeah you know are you
who's to say your own internal guidance
who says okay you do know our economy
makes no sense right like you need to
pause to realize that like what is all
this what is this it's just like complex
and broken and weird and like who owns
what why why do you pay for it okay
why D like why do my own this phone and
it came from minerals and stuff from the
ground yes I paid for it but at one
point it was free right like and not no
way was it actually why don't you allow
things to be why do we know I mean it is
cut down a tree and say it stores my
minerals and say they're yours
why do they belong to you or somebody
else especially when you have some of
all the extra nominees everyone else who
gets control over your life and so it's
like we're in this is toggle more of
like who are we gonna give up our power
to the church government the something
else they're like my horse Oh
whoever you want to give up your power
do and nobody else and so it's a it's
interesting like two years ago again
someone popped on and - on number and I
jumped off right I'll be able to handle
some idiots it's about me right like it
took somebody in my community yelling at
me then I'm useless it's paint all the
battle in my own head to me out a
heartbreak and problem in order for me
to be like actually there's a tiny piece
of truth then I'm reacting to that I
feel like maybe I got a free
loader and I don't show up enough and I
fixed that and now there's nothing she
can say to me like it's like because
there's no truth there it's like there
was a truth when she said it either
I wasn't referring order I was looking
out for smooth votes agree
are you ready nada after their dog I
participated in both I clean but I
wasn't showing up for the like common
clean like antic I start cleaning this
is something I can do I'm tired on a
Wednesday can do on a Thursday it's
quiet I can play music I enjoy doing it
and it's something that needs to get
done so it was like anyway and now I'm
like you know what for someone who
doesn't live here I contribute a hell of
a lot more than other single parents who
live here don't you like or a non single
parenting with you like did someone
there's other people who are always
gonna contribute and I'm like I feel I
feel good interpreting and that was the
key but it took like somebody who I
thought was somewhat my friend by Quinn
yelling at me the things that I had in
my head I ate like you're free low
barriers you're not really disabled and
you're not really it was like people and
then I kind of had that was like this is
what the community thinks about me and
I'm sure there were no that's not the
question you know and there are other
people like sincerely like no of course
not and I know who those people are and
I'm like I care less and less about how
other people and all of its on how I
present myself and so if there's any
truth what I'm saying then I learn what
I need to learn there's someone come in
they're like oh let me you're never
going to get married I don't want to get
married you're really not gonna go there
but there are ways people right like
there are certain times like because I'm
variance in not that because I know it's
not true but like something along them
and then it's my to learn like you
cannot do anything to me that's not
gonna teach me something like in my
highest good to have every interaction
that comes towards me because it's my
choice to get the highest interaction
from everything that comes towards me
like there's nothing in it that
are they commenting I did yeah terrible
like honestly I became like that cuz I
think that um your own life and you want
to commit suicide you watch me say
things on video then I mean I don't know
what to say your own video will create
something in the world go beat and that
is like I had this argument with one of
my cousins by absolutely I don't know
what it was about
oh I think she commented some people
wearing socks oh no it was like they the
hipsters like it was something I was
like if you don't like them don't date
right like doesn't matter that they
exist you don't need to berate them on
your Facebook page we somehow got into
this like a little bit of a war on
mistake over two years ago and she's the
one who's now a lawyer becoming the wire
and this point where I was like you know
what like you're doing more for the
world than I am like even if my opinions
valid you are according to law school
and you're doing actual real good like I
now feel that way about me you can't
actually and the less Fox idea about
what anyone else thinks that we need a
more powerful and it's layers of that
it's like layers of caring more about
people in general and less about what
thinking and it's funny because I don't
even know why watch this you know on
David Icke not someone I was and it was
like a five-minute video and it's like
one of those reptilian conspiracy
theorists we were I don't agree with one
that I think but what he was said during
this five minutes was basically life's
hard for you especially as a young child
you either like become someone angry at
the world and closed off or you stop
getting
and realize that your age your truth
your truth becomes more important and I
didn't it's like yeah if more people do
that better up and as someone who had an
anxiety and cares about the world it's a
little place to begin to give more facts
and less bucks at the same time right to
be like what you think about me what I
think about but I do care that you're
basically right I care that you're your
health care your kids are educated I
Karen anymore able to give your best
place in the world that has nothing to
do with what you think I'm good I'll
call it and that wasn't always true and
you didn't look like you don't even
under to happen and even my sister and
you have a falling out over something
very still right here ago and that I'm
almost late so I can have her back in my
life no matter who or what she is and
have it be empowering what is he like a
bulletproof like I'm not its and I'm not
always right there's time Germany Lobos
to me if there's time for things get to
even overall they just don't like and
they did and so like there's part of me
because it's like social media starting
to and it's just how everything unfolds
in its proper time because if I'd been
where I am now he'd been a year ago I
would not have been ready for it and
time am I ready to have like all of a
sudden that number shot up to ten
thousands right there were 10,000 people
watching this or even 100 oh no let's
see let's see if that would be Joe Bob I
don't know it's like it's fun to find
out it's fun to find out what's coming
next and what how this how this involves
and how right people at the right time
coming on make it and everything
happened
I'm here to serve something so much
higher than what these people have to
say about me like so much higher and
it's not even anyone elses God right
it's not it's not something you can
learn about
it's like an internal guide keep moving
itself to me and so I'm here to serve my
mission and my place in this world above
what any single individual things or
group of individuals thinks of me and
you can't with that and that's
where I like to even I'm like even if
you think you're taking over the planet
yeah there is a trickier and the more
because that's what I'm learning is like
more stepping into that more stuffy
that's giving less
keeping less and less and less and
showing up more and more as yourself and
it's like I wish it was easy as flicking
a switch then you just carry zero but
it's not it's like a weight but it's
perfect because the layers is every time
I get that next layer I feel like it's a
hundred percent like this is me 100
percent off that taking them there's
like another layer and another layer
once that starts happening and you're
just like I don't know what is true well
meaning you know what's true about the
problem and yet it's so much further
than your a button for staying at all
because you're not working right like
it's like I get it I probably thought
that before at different times
mm-hmm I still think charities not the
answer I think that people stay at home
on disability animal I don't think
taking it away from them is the answer
it's the best we got going on yeah it's
designed to not have her picture it's
designed to have charities instead of
working in solidarity for themselves and
others yeah I'm here to get myself off
of disability I'm here to get everybody
off of this in a real empowering thing
it's still like I don't
yeah I'm on it because it's it's real
actually entitled to it I've had brain
tumors I'm deaf in one ear
I'm exhausted after two hours of the day
right like and that's just reality my
reality and so if I can figure out how
to give for my plates and kind of have
other people in power to raise me yet
they're giving them if oh if you just
let a bar anyone below it is giving
disability and everyone above it gets to
you that bar look I don't know where
does you just feel like you're you can't
be there there's
right I don't care where that bar ends
who are you watching you have to give
and how can we empower you what we want
to do and take your place in the world
without other people having to define
that for you because other people are
gonna be asses yeah their listener if
you're Elon Musk or Oprah you
show up and down the road people are
going to not like you including some of
the most lovable people of Oprah
I don't know how anyone looks at over an
eight sir you decide to make me for her
wealth about her but like I think she
does pretty good with it and yet like
you're gonna be so freaking vanilla for
people to like you that why why so you
have to like make yourself so small yes
ladies version a big there's just
nothing there I don't want to leave that
I want to live my life and then what
constant constant I smile like and then
if I'm winning at anything that is
happening as other people watch me and
even if they don't come and stay here
and they're like I could do YouTube
video
yeah absolutely you can anyone can if I
can and that's actually true unlike
everyone else you sent it right the
people with like tens of thousands of
dollars of production quality I can do
it anyone can do it
I love how this domain is showing me
that like the opposite like all the
people with millions of dollars behind
them still can't freakin working camera
look no where's my assistant my kid like
even go where you up that's that's what
I'm looking at so refreshing to hear
somebody talk like that that flake has a
lot of self-worth even though they're on
disability and then wants to engage
others wants to you know a bigger
solution so that people don't have to be
on disability you don't have to be
limited like that so that we can really
shine as people as humanity not just be
one way like these people that are
talking on YouTube seems to think that
we have to be
I don't know I guess white male that's
what I was asked to be the other day
more oh I'm so sick of hearing that you
just be a white male it's like oh and
it's funny cuz I often if you look at
the world changers they have it all Ben
Wyatt in fact some of the been
whitewashed when Jesus was what probably
wasn't he chose to be clear on that one
but the male right Jesus was incarnated
or whatever into a male body and
Mohammed and the other funny and all of
these and Martin Luther King and like
why the did I choose to be a female
I'm like first of all I couldn't have
had my kid if I wasn't and she's an
integral part of my journey and because
the world's ready the world's ready for
a female leader and you know it doesn't
actually like to be a President of the
United States and beefy well I'd the
world's not ready for that and you can
see that in who we put up as the females
right even like um Wow Hillary Clinton
is very male right and there was an
article in she was running against
Bernie that was very beautiful and very
like this is where it was like by the
time we were ready for Hillary we were
past her like we wanted Bernie by the
time we were ready for Hillary and it's
like but Hillary had to be Hillary to
get to where she is and Bernie was
allowed to be burned to get to where he
is right he was this from the 60s he's
not changed but she couldn't noway been
Bernie back in the sixties and yes no
and so there's this certain amount of
like if you have to be male or have to
sound white or have to sound European in
order to be taken seriously how far I'm
gonna come and I'm not trying to be
female or trying to be male I'm Nene and
I don't actually care what I like it's
like it doesn't matter what I hear on
the outside this is who I am and there's
something very powerful about being in a
position of disadvantage
I can't string a thought together as
though I don't know the words my mind
goes all over the place I can't I don't
have the executive function and I
definitely don't have a penis all of
those things are exactly how they're
supposed to be the order for us to
change world because you know what it's
gonna all the
autistic people can't come and play
right you can't get over their and
even those that obviously aren't
misogynistic if there's getting parts
about the playout right just like
there's gonna be parts of the play on
racism and homophobia on queer right
like it's just what we're dealing with
and I can't I can't go back an email
anyway nothing tell me more nail with a
leopard home and I'm not supposed to
again I wouldn't have my kid I know
she's a very I'd world needs her know it
only gets me exactly as I am yeah and
the fact that people like your opinions
like why are you doing even oh my god
it's just hilarious yeah I want to hear
women's opinions all the time yeah all
day every day you want to know who's
been eating at copán 19 all of the
female leaders around the world
mm-hmm you might not want to hear their
opinions but they're solving well
breastfeeding in Parliament you wanted
me like you got it
we're good you not believing in it you
can push him back against it it's sorry
on some girls Bingen yeah let's tell Mia
yeah this is working like this is
actually yes some on government
assistance service the rest of the world
right now
yeah and I'm giving from my highest
place I ever have and nobody can give my
place and that's the same for everyone
right like no one else can be Jubilee no
one else can be Shiloh there's no and
that's true or for us probably for her
brother but it's true for everyone like
no one can be you yeah it more
replaceable you're not doing your job on
this flat in because you absolutely
replaced at your place of business right
as an engineer as a doctor it's a matter
what your position it you probably be
replaced but you can't is your interest
your talents your challenges are what
make you unique and different and what
you have to give our gaming world
doesn't look at like that at all it's
like well sorry you're not good enough
you didn't meet the bar we're only
hiring the top lawyers we're only hiring
the top people that came out okay
are you do them data actually show
they're any better than the other law
students no not in any way does it show
that but those are the people who get
the job so people get the highest paying
jobs and not necessarily the best of it
and it's like right because we can own
our like uniqueness right like even this
it's like you're into Marvel Comics or
you're any to 1200 European history or
like any weird thing you're into it's
part of what makes you you and so that
conversation that's what you bring out
all the experience you've been to the
good and bad it's like that's what makes
you you and at a table full of people
it's at the conversation that emerges in
unique individuals mean they're bringing
themselves to it the more they're able
to bring in there they're so nice so are
you gonna do it what a video on Ricky
Gervais and brand with his name Russell
Brand this is the video about the only
reason I could so I had done the one
last Thursday on and it got the most
viewed so I'm like I want to be coming
to pick something I'm gonna watch it and
I'm gonna comment on it that's what the
video will be on so it brings a more
people mmm wonderful people like this
doesn't wasn't it hard bass is it the
other comments you can't see on goods
you it to do something like that was
something popular and so that's what I
chose as Ricky Gervais and Russell Brand
and I watched it and it just wasn't that
it wasn't I'm gonna have to pick Joe
Rogan and some look like Daniel but
there's the thing is is the game be
popularity is it actually popular so
it's not actually gonna bring people
whereas like Michael Moore and Russell
Brand are they're also this like
dichotomy right there's people like
loves other people who hate them they
want to spread their hi Joe everywhere
and so it'll bring who at brains and I'm
I'm good with that but that was the idea
yes this is the one where keep your base
and also Brad we're just not talking
about that because honestly they brought
it with a word there was just an hour of
them talking about like common in the
World Cup in 1900 which was good Ricky
Gervais is um bit like comedians who
make a lot of money
and then they go and do their stand up
and they're like when I was riding the
bus here there he he does the office and
I don't kind of like someone piss on the
audience ready to be like like I'm
better than you you opposite and it's
like yeah yeah I got that from my
teacher base pretty goodness he does do
more of that for sure but that that like
you know like this friends for the
nineties where it's like all these
downtrodden hard-working living in an
Manhattan apartment like this that's not
real it's not you're not you know you
can find actors like that let alone the
actors oh yeah so yeah I watched it it
didn't work that much help me figure out
something else for next week that
hopefully sparks more well maybe more
about a documentary that is more popular
but documentaries aren't that popular
are you um you're talking again to
Raymond on Thursday and so do you think
you'll post it on Thursday or Friday I
can't wait I can send you the one today
if you want it's okay unless didn't send
it to you I'm just gonna wait till their
belts done you won't have the part about
where he's on sure the call dropped but
then when he comes back we go on video
as opposed you want this boy so there's
that and um well good I just I'm really
excited to hear about it I love the
getting deeper with holo chain just to
see maybe the difference is between the
two and how I I feel like we could have
many multiple systems still working
towards the greater good and hopefully
you participate in the one that you like
the best
I agree and I don't think that there's
there's a problem with polo chain and
I'll stack em together Tech mm-hmm oops
if we can't save the world someone else
can my guy back would be he didn't exist
I would tweet it read the other tab
you'd like did you say in the world yet
it's like I'm saving the world with
burger save in the world I'll compete
you couldn't gonna happen moderator as a
game PD was I remember what he said it
was something about I said I'm like I'm
gonna beat you and I don't make a rule
like I'm gonna make a real mega rule
show you I'm gonna cooperate it so
cooperatively it's Emma now compete you
at corporation it was there's a lot of
that though I mean it's hard not to we
live in a cooperative I mean a
competitive society and then we're
trying to build a cooperative system er
I don't know co-operative Union
cooperative something but yeah we all
think more in competitive means and
needing to win is probably just part of
who we are as a society
happy Anna yeah I don't think
competition is bad enough itself it's
just if it's like life or death
competition yeah where if you're not
successful at competition you get to
starve to death it's over your kids and
you don't get medication because there's
literally nothing in this we're
competing and winning is its own reward
right like winning it soccer winning the
gold we need is its own reward if you
also throw on talked about that when you
win you get the best health care you get
the best nutrition you got the best
representation get the best everything
then that's not a fair game in any way
and that's what people are interested
well seiyya t be register right you're
entitled to everything better because
you have more money and then that gives
you a more of an incentive for the next
round in the next round in every round
and I don't think anyone is more has a
little right to those things than
anybody else only your needs should kind
of like there's this real I could use
somebody clean my house there's people
who absolutely need people to clean
their house more than I do
but I could use it more than your
average person I could definitely use it
more than your average housewife who has
all the time all the ability but like oh
I need to go get my nails done um no but
she can pay for it so she gets it and
it's that is our sister that's how it
works but it's like a lot of people all
the seniors all the like new mothers all
the like could really even it someone to
help them out for a week or two or every
week and well then they should have been
rich right no no no I don't like so if
you're rich you get a chauffeur you get
someone else to clean your house you get
someone to do your gardening you have
all the time on your hands you're
allowed to take risk because if you fail
just declare bankruptcy and your parents
will give you new
it's like this is not a game that's in
any way fair and I like from my
worldview
I think everyone's entitled so I want
everyone to have the best nutrition not
just me and my family am I good for
selfless reasons and also for selfish
reasons you're able to give from your
best capacity you're able to better
fight cope in 19 if you're properly in a
proper nutrition yeah you're better able
to give your next innovative idea that I
can't think of because I'm not you
you're not in competition with you
you're new like it when you get that
selfishness and selflessness to get up
like that's what it it's like actually
what's best for you
is everybody being better off yeah then
it's like you realize you're not truly
in competition you're in cooperation
already you just don't realize that when
you're an engineer anyone can compete
when you're you as an engineer nobody
can be with you because no one else is
gonna bring you to the engineering
project and the more we open that
together it's like right this
engineering project would never happen
if the six of us hasn't sat together if
one person had not been here would be a
different project every entity cafe
every I'll make a room even though
there's the same people I'll show up
Toto make a rule every week for our one
on Wednesdays there's five of us who
show up rather regularly and it depends
on which of those that's like is a very
different conversation there's sometimes
like thank God you came thank God
Heather came and whatever is it's like
the perfect people to show up and have
that conversation yeah and there's
something about that that I know he's
gonna happen in the world but it's like
it's not about finding the best of the
best to do it it's just about doing it
and then making it better and better and
having anyone be able to compete right
not having only gold medal athletes
that's all but that's the only sport
that's available it's like you can
compete on every level you can start
skiing it's a matter what your
socioeconomic status is you can already
hear your skis there's a ski hill that
everyone gets to play there will
absolutely be only one gold winner
winner right it's just that doesn't make
you more or any of the food and the
education and everything else what does
that make you more or the of the gold
medal that's it that's what you win
congratulations you want it's not feel
good if it doesn't you're the wrong
thing because you want it does it feel
good to any silver and this is like
there could only be one best whereas we
all can be the best us we can like
finding the internal pieces of us and no
one else can judge that I get from the
outside world I look like a bum on the
government on society whatever
yeah right because you're judging it
from the outside view you're not in it
if you are in it you would have no
judgment you were in my body Friday
you'd be impressed yeah I know it
because I'm in it and I'm impressed but
from the outside world it's never gonna
look like I don't even like I realized
at one point there was part of me that
oh that's like I was trying to walk like
I looked like I was in painting the
people would know I was in pain which
what me more in pain yeah like I'm in
pain I don't need you to know I'm in
pain I just needed to be minimized to my
body which there is no way like if I
hurt my foot I'm gonna walk on it with a
limp but in my actual body moving one
way versus another doesn't feel better
or worse so I don't need to baby
something right I don't need to walk
this earth it just is what it is I might
take the elevator instead of the stairs
and I make different choices it's like
you're not gonna know that you're not in
my body you're not gonna know what my
pain tolerance is but I can tell you if
you were in my body for a day because I
know my can you tell it this is high you
do you'd be flat you would not be okay
and I've had to develop my tolerance for
it over over time and that takes its own
set of skills have any final thoughts
Shiloh say goodbye to me too um thanks
for asking me to come on I normally
would not come on but I feel very
inspired to keep working at it and being
more comfortable in these social
circumstances but maybe live or public
that's so weird for me but thank you and
also helping me learn how to just roll
with people that are gonna say things
that are meant to hurt you
but having more self-worth developing
more strength within myself leads to
that just bouncing off and being like
that's their problem
so thanks for being that example that's
really great
welcome it's funny cuz I think we you
have to start one or the other either
you find a community that sees you and
loves you and gives you that like
vulnerable compassion and then you're
able to more show up as yourself or you
have to find that in yourself so you
could find the group right and neither
way is wrong which is some people come
to it one way and some people come to
the other way I had to come with to it
as an individual there was no other way
I wasn't gonna allow myself to be part
of a group and love to accepted me
because I was so I'm sorry part of them
it's like you can't even accept that and
see that until you can see it in
yourself and there's something about we
can offer to each other in the world
that like I fully see that every unique
individual has amazing to offer
this world every single one in fact
people show how they're very
confrontational that's your little piece
that's okay
you're giving me something you don't
even know but I know there's also
something much bigger than like
something that you're you're you're
pushing away when you find it its own
internal reward and it's like knowing
that I truly do see the Union and
intelligence and everyone in everyone
but I do see a little extra and you
jealous cuz it reflects my okay you're
humble gentle videos that are you're
open or I can help you see that in you
the better did you see
thanks for hanging out I will be back
tomorrow at 8:30 right sounds good have
a great day