hello everybody I was busy downloading
information from 2028 so I was I gone
yesterday
my name is Jubilee and I have access to
information from 2028 as to what we can
create together in the next decade in
2028 we live in abundance and prosperity
which I realize is the same thing in
peace and everyone has access to the
tools they need the resources they need
a world we never would have thought was
possible in 2019 is absolutely possible
in a decade of working together I got
this information in 2018
so it was 2028 that this information was
but this is a different timeline we
don't do the work if we don't come
together it's not gonna be created in
this one and we're possibly gonna
descend into chaos but if we do come
together create the tools that we need
that we can trust that we own together
anything is possible a world of
prosperity and peace for every single
human being and we have more innovation
they could ever be imagined
because hence why I'm able to send back
information to my past selves in
alternative universes alternative
timelines we came together and created
the online infrastructure that helped us
understand information so we didn't have
to discuss the same problem over and
over and over again and we were able to
actually discuss solutions and assess
those solutions and decide which ones
were best and implement them with the
tools we created we created project
management systems and conflict
resolution systems and figure out who
you are systems and what makes you happy
and how do you find the people that make
that make you happy and that you can
create with and by tapping into that
human ingenuity that human talent that
had never been touched before because we
were requiring everyone to be these fake
versions of themselves and pretend to
know what the they were doing
instead of actually knowing what the
 they were doing and like right I
know what to do in certain areas and
what not to do in other areas and owning
that and we created the Netflix of apps
sounds like another Netflix how's that
world changing well we have all of those
tools the project
and tools tools to know what to eat and
and how to get yourself healthy and how
to be in financial control and how to
come together and change our politics so
they're actually working for the greater
good how to understand economics how to
track the money and all of the
corruption and greed in our society and
by doing so by giving people access to
the information the people demanded
change by showing that it was possible
to have a democratic transparent
organization that functioned and worked
we demanded that of corporations and if
our politicians once we knew it was
possible and there's so much that has
happened from 2019 to 2028
I would love if you all would ask me
some questions and I'm going to do a
video series this week and possibly next
week I'm gonna do what life is like in
2028 when our clothing systems like what
our food systems are like but I can do
my list and you guys can ask questions
and I will do videos on the questions
that I can't brainstorm myself because
life is better together we were able to
come together and create we have we can
see every issue before it arises come up
with solutions one person can't do it
this isn't about a figurehead
being the new world there is no single
hero coming we all do it together
well not all we don't get 7.5 billion
people on board we start with 5 people
to be the board of directors to move
this project forward and then we have
10,000 people who crowdfunded our first
campaign and had a voice in a boat in
what this project was going to be and
then we they they went out and recruited
their friends and family because they
had fun and had access to tools that
were amazing and when it made sense we
switched over to paying $10 a month and
we had lineups of people wanting to join
it wasn't a free-for-all it was like
okay now we're ready to double now we're
ready to go to 20,000 and 40,000 80,000
and you had to go you were allowed to go
out and recruit one friend and there
were people who thought what didn't
speak to them and so they gave there's
two other people because there are
people who had like I have my whole
family I want to bring on board there's
not enough time I need them all and we
just have so much better problems in 22
it's like Oh what kind of gourmet bo am
I gonna make for my friends how can I
see all of my friends in in 2028 how can
we yeah please come and help me create
the world in this timeline because I
know what is possible and by working
together we can create a world of
prosperity and peace for everyone in a
decade it helps us all climate change
helps us all the cancer crisis
everything every human being problem
they're all interconnected the only way
to understand them is to come together
and create the system that helps us
understand them create the system that
helps us get to the solution and
actually implement it bypass the
government bypass the corporations and
do it ourselves and so please ask
questions in the comments and I will be
on Torro with a topic from 2028 as to
how we do by ask how we did it but
otherwise I'll be talking about what
life is like in 2028