welcome to the stola the stoah is a
digital campfire where we go here and
dialogue about what matters most at the
night's edge what's happening now
[Music]
all right check-ins maybe like three
percent nervous there's a kid eNOS and
I'm really looking forward whatever word
could describe looking forward to this
conversation that we're about to have
right now with my friend Greg so we have
great Thomas here today at the Stella
and Greg has over 25 years of experience
as a writer producer broadcaster and
educator he's CEO and lead facilitator
of the jazz leadership project and he's
written extensively about culture race
and jazz and publications ranging from
the Village Voice New Republic salon
guardian observer and he's lectured in
on American cultural history at Harvard
Columbia Hamilton College and Jazz at
Lincoln Center and he's into integral
theory he's plugged into that scene and
he was recently featured on rebel wisdom
a few times and that's how what we
caught on each other's radar the folks
at revelant
introduced us and then when me and Greg
zoomed in and we just like like kindred
spirit we were jamming and riffing and
like manless to the set of a session and
we had like 20 sessions that we had
lined up already and just on the first
encounter and we settled on a session
called stoic jazz because I come from
the tradition of stoicism and he comes
from the tradition of blues and jazz and
there's a lot of intersection between
the thinking there so that being said
how it's gonna work today Greg and I are
gonna jam a little bit for about you
know 15 20 minutes and then we're gonna
open up for Q&A s so if you have any
questions during our kind of
conversation feel free to write in the
chat box and if you've been here you
know the drill I will call on you and
you unmute yourself ask your question
you want me to read your question your
behalf
I just indicate that in chat box that
being said Greg how you doing man I'm
doing fine Peter how are you man I'm
doing well I'm doing well good good
thank you for inviting me to the store
yeah man thanks for being here
sure so there's like so many threads I
want to go down but maybe why why did we
settle on store jazz from your
perspective because I feel that there's
a think there's an intersection between
certain wisdom traditions in fact if you
really want to go to the deepest part of
wisdom traditions I think there's
connectivity on many of not all of them
but in particular restores ISM I found
in my studies of it that it's not about
what became a very abstract kind of
philosophy in the West it was more about
like how do you live a good life how do
you flourish in life no matter what is
going on outside of yourself what do you
have that you have some control over
excuse me
much of our lives on the outside we
don't have control over but what do they
have control over well our responses to
situations we have control over whether
we get up in the morning we have early
we have to control over what we focus on
we have control over whether or not
we're gonna review the day we're gonna
have we have control over our r8a you
know what is our vision and values of
excellence what is our vision of a good
life and a good soul eudaimonia
you know these these kind of principles
I find are because they're wisdom
tradition they're not bound to a
particular time so I guess so one of the
guests you had and I was actually there
James cars' one of my favorites one of
my favorites you know so you know when
you told my wisdom you told him on an
infinite game this is not something
that's bound to a particular time it's
applicable to our lives now so the same
thing is true for the Blues idiom first
the wisdom that has come from the black
American experience here in the United
States and found its way into the Blues
as a form of poetry as a form of song
and as a philosophy a wisdom tradition
of life itself particularly through the
work and thought of Ralph Ellison the
author of Invisible Man and Albert
Murray author of 13 books on blues and
jazz primarily mostly nonfiction but
four novels at tetralogy and I find
there's a lot of you know synergy
between those two though there that
there are some distinctions but I've
just wondered about it and so I really
welcome the opportunity to explore the
possibilities with you men so yeah you
turned me on to this guy Albert Murray
and I'm like I thank you for doing that
cuz I've been reading all the articles
you sent me and I've been reading about
him and this guy is amazing and there's
there's a bunch of things I want to
inquire about but there's just Germany
has that really stuck out to me elegant
resilience and then here's here's a
quote from him a definite characteristic
of the descendants of American slaves is
the orientation to elegance the
disposition in the face of all the
misery and uncertainty in the universe
to refine all of human action in the
direction of the dance beat elegance I
submit that there is nothing that anyone
the world has ever done that is more
civilized or sophisticated than to dance
elegantly which is to state with your
total physical being and affirmative
attitude toward the sheer fact of
existence I'm like man that's where it's
at I think I think Peter agrees with you
I think Peter agrees with you that is
cool yeah that's my man that's that's
master Murray
well elegant resilience I mean to him
it was about art and elegance versus
entropy okay and chaos so for him
elegance
I'll give you a quick example this
african-american
scholar who's a favorite of Ken Burns oh
what's his name
Gerald early well I had occasion to meet
and talk to my was a member of the
Columbia University jazz study group in
the late 90s through the early 2000s
until that study group between the
center for Jazz Studies at Columbia
so I remember reading one time where a
New Republic I think it was Joe early
critique Murray on his concept of
elegance because he he defined it early
that is as kind of an effete kind of
thing to him right I brought that up to
Murray he says man these guys need to
get an education he says we're not
talking about elegance I'm talking about
like mathematical elegance like you come
up with the proof that is so elegant for
something that's complicated or complex
but you come up with a solution that's
simple but that incorporates all of that
complexity and solves the problem in an
elegant way
so for Murray the blues and jazz were
ways in there are other aspects of
african-american culture that we could
talk about from the dance traditions to
the spirituals and gospel that also
reflect us but if you're talking about
music blues and jazz it was a way that
we responded to the vicissitudes of life
to the absurdity of life to the
unfairness of life to the actual
segregation and oppression all of that
stuff we responded in a way in which we
created forms that allowed us to put our
wisdom into those forms to confront
life in a way that allowed us to have
what Kenneth Burke calls a frame of
acceptance in literary terms there
according to Kenneth Burke two primary
frames you have a frame of rejection
frame of acceptance so a frame of
rejection is like a lament and elegy
life is wrong and it shouldn't be that
way and you create different narrative
forms through that the frame of
acceptance accepts the fact that life is
a low-down dirty shame and said you know
something we're gonna persevere we're
gonna struggle we're gonna rise to the
occasion anyway so that's a frame of
accepting the necessity for struggle and
to Marie that's the foundation of like
epic heroism
so for Marie the blues and jazz for
forms that reflected American principles
of democracy in action and reflected an
orientation to life that says that no
matter what we're gonna still for as
many bars as we've got swing as much as
we can elegantly so we're solving
problems through our movement through
our style through our improvisation and
as there's that resilience there so it
gives us a way to bounce back from the
troubles of our lives okay and he didn't
use this term because I don't think
Nassim Taleb had created yeah but anti
fragile see so I think he would probably
I mean I think elegant resilience is
actually more elegant than elegant
antifragility as a sound as a poetic
sound but that's kind of what he needs
you know I hope I answered your question
I kind of went around to get to it yeah
yeah totally and III this is where the
intersection of stoicism in like you
know the blues jazz idiom just totally
collide is this kind of what we're
talking about before like the obstacles
the way right with this frame of
acceptance rather than having to stick
the mindset where you're just not kind
of acknowledging and embracing the
hardship of life and I just like the
this elegance elegant resilience isn't
that that that kind of a tag of elegance
there you know that's that's something
I think modern stoicism is missing or at
least a lot of people who talk about
modern stoicism because there's like
beauty to be found in the resilience in
the struggle and putting emphasis on
that I think is the right move and then
there's another quote like this that's
coming to mind I just like he came out a
book by Ralph Ellison the Blues is an
impulse to keep the painful details and
episodes of a brutal experience alive in
one's aching consciousness love it love
it keep going man they could that whole
quote is a classic quote can you keep
going on that yeah okay so uh okay I'll
start again the Blues is an impulse to
keep the painful details and episodes of
a brutal experience alive in one's
aching consciousness to finger its
jagged grain and to transcend it not by
the consolation of philosophy but by
squeezing from it a near tragic near
comic lyricism
that's classic Ellison they're from
Richard rice Blue's 1947 yeah all right
so yeah that says it man now let me give
you another aspect Murray and Ellison
both like the term antagonistic
cooperation this is a term that derives
from the hero's journey from the
archetype and it basically says that the
hero will have to face challenges and
with each of us in our own way as we
journey through life we're on a journey
and you can say that journey is a heroic
journey as we face those challenges are
we gonna face it with a frame of
acceptance so we're going to face it
with the frame of rejection if you face
it with the frame of acceptance that
leaves room and space for youto laugh at
your troubles to cry at your troubles to
get ready to battle to fight but it's a
person
spective in his wisdom it's a
perspective that looks at antagonism and
challenges as a way that cooperates you
collect work sorry cooperates with you
so that you can grow and learn in
situations so it's that you could tell
that the words antagonists and
corporation they don't seem to go
together and there's a tension there but
we know about evolution that's gonna
happen through tension and when you talk
about music you have tension and then
release so all these like ideas and
concepts go together so antagonistic
cooperation was a very important idea
for them that I think goes to the
obstacle is the way and like I wanted to
inquire into you know rooted
Cosmopolitan's amande like the other
interests that you had but how do you
teach this stuff in your kind of like
jazz leadership is this something that
you sort of put emphasis on that's
interesting well antic we have in jazz
leadership project we do workshops with
the live band for organizations but
small groups of teams and organizations
to help them become more resilient in
high performing so we have four
principles and six practices right so
antagonistic cooperation is one of the
foundational principles that we use okay
so it's embedded in the very structure
of what we do and we demonstrate it like
like for example for antagonistic
cooperation we usually show a video of
Wynton Marsalis and Jon Faddis two of
the greatest jazz trumpeter is alive
going head-to-head on a an incredibly
fast song by Dizzy Gillespie and I mean
it's like on the metronome
is like I don't know 300 beats per
minute I mean it's ridiculous and they
are trading fours and they are battling
but they're doing it in a respectful way
they're listening they're responding and
they're doing it
take each other to higher and higher
heights so it can be viewed from the
outsiders antagonistic but they're
cooperating each other to grow and to
bring pleasure to themselves and to the
audience and the other band members so
we give those kind of examples and then
we for the antagonist cooperation we'll
look at challenges that people have gone
through in their life where at work and
then we help them do a shift from like a
victim perspective oh so and so from the
outside is their fault and blah blah
blah - more of a player you know you're
a player in this game this infinite game
we don't get that deep into the
philosophy but we are applying the
philosophy and we do a shift from how do
you look at your challenges as something
that's against you as something that's
actually for you to grow and learn and
use actual examples in their lives to
reflect that principle they write about
it they talk about it in dialogue and
that's how we kind of embody and enacted
in that so that's one example I'm gonna
be doing some more classes on cultural
intelligence and that type of thing in
the fall that'll have a lot of these
principles also what is the distinction
with fur for people who don't know like
between blues and jazz I'm so glad you
asked that
okay so blues is the fundamental form
that actually is a foundation for
American music writ large blues is a
form that in the American South on the
Mississippi River developed first you
have the folk blues where the the image
of the the guitar player who is playing
the guitar and singing the blues like a
12 bar blues or playing harmonica and
then singing the blues so you have the
individual there when you get and that's
like turn-of-the-century right
WC handy was a great writer of songs
like st. Louis Blues Memphis blues
he codified the blues and wrote many
songs to really write down a tradition
what in many cases it wasn't really
written now and these were itinerant
musician so disliked their old song and
dance men and women and back in the day
in Europe this is a similar thing so
they would travel on the railroad and go
from place to place and play and get a
little money in but WC hand is important
in that then you have in the 20s a
period that's called the classic blues
this is where women like Ma Rainey
Bessie Smith and Mamie Smith and others
they sang with a band and they were big
sellers and what they call race records
at the time big sellers of the blues so
that was a transition from the
individual to more of a group dynamic
and the distinction between blues
Wizards use a 12-bar form with 1 4 & 5
of the eighth notes or the eighth doremi
fossil at Edo scale being prominent in
those with jazz you and I'll use a
Murray term you extend elaborate and
refine upon that folk foundation and
then you create forms that go into more
of a popular which is more of a wider
span of embrace to fine art where if you
listen to Lead Belly my muddy
what's-his-name any warriors or any
number of really even be became great
blues artists you listen to Charlie
Parker played the Blues you listen to
Duke Ellington compose what Murray
called the fully orchestrated blue
statement and you can tell that there is
a level of of sophistication and
technical prowess that is beyond what
you usually find at the folk level so
what you got
foundation of the blues that then jazz
builds upon and actually gospel music
which was the father of gospel music is
Thomas Dorsey he actually was a blues
pianist playing with Ma Rainey and then
he transitioned to the sacred dimension
and started writing gospel music which
was actually based on the Blues for I
hope that answers a question adequately
yeah in this article you sent there's
like the three distinctions between the
folk art pop fare and then fine art and
like could you tease out a little bit
more like you know pop Ferrer versus
fine art like what makes it what are the
heuristics that make it what it is okay
good question I don't appreciate it I
like what you frame that too
well I gave you the folk you know that's
like that's like the earth but then for
pop music what pop music and look pop
music has taken over the world these
days okay
so pop music actually draws upon folk
fine whatever and it presents the music
in a way that is most widely appealing
okay through how it does what it does
rhythmically melodically of course we
know in terms of corporations there's
huge mark marketing dollars that go into
making certain stars stars but pop just
means it has a very wide appeal fine art
is the realm of masterpieces of masters
grand masters who create masterpieces
that stand the test of time beyond the
time that it was created and does so in
a way where they stomp the blues
continually throughout time because they
are facing entropy and chaos itself and
saying you know something we're gonna
bring some Nega and repeat to this with
a masterpiece I can let you hear certain
solos that were 60 70 years ago but the
power the majesty
the the the combination of technical
virtuosity with deep soulful feeling is
so profound that it just becomes a
masterpiece so those are some of the
distinctions you know and there are some
pop art that becomes fine art don't get
me wrong I listen to Whitney Houston
singing the star-spangled banner it
gives me chills every time it's
incredible
that's fine art Donny Hathaway singing
all the music for all we know
masterpiece so it's not confined to jazz
and not all of jazz is fine are some
jazz is just good music but then you
have the Masters and Grand Master's that
create masterpieces which you can then
say is in that rare realm of the fine
arts and when you're describing the fine
art as almost like you're having an
orgasm right he's like so into it so is
there certain like like out of those
three categories when it comes to like
jazz or blues like is there a certain
ontological state that you get in in
order to appreciate it or does it like
when you listen to it you fall into it
and you like equally appreciate the
different categories and that you know
different moments of your life you're
you just you know more into the fine art
when it comes to chess oh that's another
really good question um good increment
the thing about fine art is that often
these days it takes some developmental
work by development to work I don't mean
in terms of like spiral dynamics like
you've got to be at the the postmodern
level to grok this I don't mean in that
sense I mean that because there are
certain levels of complexity and
sophistication to the form you just need
to have an introduction I mean I sat
down with someone recently and showed
them the spiral dynamics you know from
beige to yellow and turquoise and I
explained in that showed it and then we
looked at some some we looked at Peter
Mary's volution theory and because she
had that foundation she was able to get
it
all you need is an introduction so as
far as jazz sometimes you just need an
introduction because jazz is not really
heard and on radio stations not much on
TV so people are not familiar but if you
are if you can explain someone that
you've got the bass and the drums and
they hold the swing and the bass is
walking and the drums is riding the
cymbal and the piano is comping which
means complementing or accompany and the
lead instrument the trumpeter sax is
usually out front and you may be short
in a four chart graph that we actually
do in a chance leadership project people
can get it and then when they listen
it's like oh and the thing is but even
without that you know you could feel and
since when you're hearing something
great even without that if I played some
Charlie Parker right now you could feel
that this is on another level of
saxophone playing this is not Kenny G I
don't mean to dis Kenny G Kenny G's got
a beautiful tone he's a pop artist okay
he's an instrumental R&B player I don't
get me wrong but Charlie Parker's on
another level John Coltrane that's
another level you know so yes you can
feel it and sense it but usually it
takes some grounding and some and some
training or just you know some
introduction to basic concepts that you
build upon and I'm gonna throw an
article that was written by Craig in the
the chat box he has a bunch of videos
there then he has some commentary on so
I definitely recommend check that out
it's from your integral life article oh
thank you so you know a couple more
questions but if you have any questions
for Greg now's the time to start at
throwing in the chatbox and then I will
call on you in a moment so a couple of
things I wanted to touch on there is
this term and one of the articles and
something that you quite liked and I
just mentioned previously is that rooted
cosmopolitanism and it's not by
algorithm errific murray you didn't say
that i don't think those two other
philosophers could you speak a little
bit more about that and how you resonate
with
term so deeply thank you so much man you
give me an opportunity to riff on stuff
that I don't get a chance to speak about
it now so I so appreciate it
Rudy cosmopolitanism is a term that
comes from the philosopher Anthony
Appiah who's now at NYU teaching the law
school he has a weekly column in The New
York Times Magazine he writes for
various publications Wall Street Journal
Times brilliant guy brilliant so usually
you hear that
the idea of an unrooted cosmopolitan
someone who excuse me is a citizen of
the world
no moorings no foundation no roots and
and frankly in the history of the term
they were usually speaking about Jewish
folks when they said that so he coined
this rooted cosmopolitanism as a way of
looking at just the reality that you can
be rooted in a tradition in a place in a
tradition ethnically culturally but you
can still be cosmopolitan at the same
time you can still be world centric and
cosmos centric you can still be both it
to me it just makes so much sense so if
you put it in spiral dynamics terms you
can say first tier is kind of the rooted
part you know and you can say second
tier is the cosmopolitan part now of
course I'm what would be the term I'm
privileged in the cosmopolitan on the
higher level but I think it's a useful
term to get away from some of the
potholes and trapdoors of race talk and
race discourse so we could talk about
traditions idioms cultures that you can
feel
rooted and grounded in and at the same
time you can relate on larger spheres of
care and concern and identification you
know Danielle Allen who's at Harvard
who's she's got two phd's I mean it's
like she's the ridiculous level of
education she was at Princeton's
Institute for Advanced Studies for years
and she also adopts the term rooted
cosmopolitanism in certain context so
yeah I I think that's the term that I
think people can use I mean I proposed
it to the integral community through
integral life and for some reason I
maybe I was wrong messenger people
didn't seem to gravity at least maybe
they didn't I didn't didn't tell me but
it seems to me it just so well describes
like it's the integral concept in that
you could be rooted but you could also
be cosmopolitan at the same time because
if you're supposed to transcend and
include all of that shouldn't you be
rooted but as well as cosmopolitan I
mean to me it's just it just makes a lot
of sense what do you think Peter yeah I
dig it because you know the Stoics have
their like they view themselves as
citizens of the cosmos but then that key
thing that you mentioned that's often
doesn't get mentioned often that rooted
piece right so it's like both end you
can have both and I think that is more
honest to the human experience
you know just gesturing towards one and
not actually denying the lived
experience that you have every day yeah
and I I want to just like hand it over
to you if you have any questions for me
if you wanted just something burning for
you or inquiry but I just wanted to also
appreciate that it's rare now I feel
like when someone comes in with all
these different cool concepts and terms
like you know elegant elegant resilience
or you know the root cause with Paulette
is amid 'i'm a geek out over that so you
know i appreciate for give me this
download of all this new and new
material so Matt absolutely absolutely
well let me ask you something um when
did you get into stoicism
and what did it trigger in your body not
just your mind what did it trigger in
your body great right I don't if you
hear dogs barking above so opportunity
to practice the all of our stoicism
that's a very interesting question why
did trigger in my body so I was first
year university student and I was in
philosophy and there's no mention of
stoicism and philosophy it was only
until a friend gifted me a epictetus his
handbook that's my discovered stoicism
and I just immediately clicked
he had that that was the exact book
actually that was gifted and it just
immediately clicked like yes this is it
not only an intuitive level but on an
intellectual level and I guess it I
don't know if how I felt largely
disembody like I didn't have a lot of
somatic practices when I was younger but
it did have a grounding effect you know
like it had a firmness they're like okay
you know it's it's harder to shake me
now when I had these principles kind of
downloaded okay that's cool that's cool
all right appreciate that appreciate it
now I'm looking in the chat and as I see
a bunch of stuff here you know but I but
I really want to I really want to
respect your role as moderator
facilitator curator and have you picked
the ones that you think you know we
should be bringing out yeah yeah so
usually you can view it as well usually
I use my discernment and just kind of
see what questions feel alive and just
piggyback on the ones that follow so let
me just take a look at it to do okay
usually here's a good one and it's sort
of related to what we were talking about
and they want me to read this on their
behalf so hey Greg enjoyed your talk on
interval life what has been your
strategy and navigating through the meta
crisis any tips to help in in mediation
through the culture war well thank you
for that question
and I just so resonated with
his term a medic mediation that spoke to
me because I feel that that is one of my
roles to mediate this meta crisis we're
in I'm 56 years old I have been engaged
in deep study for a very long time and I
had I've been writing and publishing for
a very long time I've experienced a lot
of life I got I've got a daughter who's
in her early 20s and married and lives
in the Bay Area you know so I've got a
lot of it got some living under me but
I've got a lot of study too so I almost
feel like kind of being prepared to
enter the culture wars in a way that I
can do some mediation between and among
some of the factions of some of the
different you know groups of thinkers of
discourse ins if that's a word because I
don't find it happening I find people
that talking past each other their
flaming each other you know I mean now
at the high levels of the of the of the
culture in terms of like the New York
Times and Wall Street Journal let's talk
about black intellectuals for a second
there are certain black intellectuals in
the Wall Street Journal who can flame
other black intellectuals and writers
and journalists and the New York Times
and vice versa
but why won't they ever get together and
talk why what's up with that now some
are willing to do it and that's great
but I don't see many or any people
actually bringing them together to have
a respectful conversation well
can agree to disagree they can work
through and wrestle through issues and
go through some agon you know I just
don't see it happening it's ridiculous I
mean some of this has to do with the way
social media structure and now
mainstream media is structured so that
the polarities and the dichotomies are
something that triggers our amygdalas
and our you know fear response
flight-or-fight and all of that and
they're able to get viewership clicks
that's why for decades I haven't watched
local news in the evening they always
start with some type of tragic horrific
crime and I knew what they were doing
when I was like a teenager I'm like
they're doing this on purpose to
trigger you you know and I'm not gonna
fall into that so the structures are set
up for that and we have to find some
ways and it'll take some courage and I'm
sure I'm gonna get my knocks but I'm
ready for it I think I've been prepared
for it so in terms of how I deal with it
I stay centered in myself with through
my own practices I meditate I have a
wonderful wife so I have a support
system
I'm have good friends I've got great
books this is my Ellison Murray library
here and so but it's like I almost feel
that I can't hold in these perspectives
and his knowledge and not bring it to
the fore that I have a responsibility to
step up because the need is so great you
know so I'm willing to take the risks
you know to to do some curation and
facilitation and mimetic mediation you
know to do that yeah yeah I do
definitely think you're the man first
refer for that job especially when it
comes to the the race issues and
so just said in chat the culture wars
needs more of you Greg thank you
and then yeah it's Oh Greg and I have
been conversations about including him
and evolving it more in the mimetic
mediation project at the store as well
so we'll see where that goes
so another question this one's pretty
good Andrew can you unmute yourself and
ask great your question oh hi I'm just
curious like if you had to pick a song
or two like that people that everybody
should hear before they died what would
it be like I know it's hard but I just
want to pick you I just like was alive
for you like the first spot Wow Wow
oh man there's a song called better days
by Lea Andrea Johnson she's a gospel
singer and that song moves me so much
because she's talking about it's like a
blues situation you know sometimes the
people closest to you are you know not
supportive you've got you know what is
it god bless bless the child who's got
his own and all of that kind of stuff
but it's our song of Hope saying that
better days are coming you know so it's
just it moves me so that's that's one
song let's see oh my goodness that's
Angela James no no Lee Andrea Johnson
Lee Andrea Johnson okay yeah that better
days how much time do we have
Peter so we usually schedule for an hour
but we took over a little bit longer
yeah well the thing is though I mean see
don't get me started
actually playing music CD will be here
so check that out I mean there are
others Lord knows there others but
that's that's one that I would strongly
recommend it may be I was called to say
that for you thank you you're welcome
and the other Andrew had a question as
well
thank you Greg I'm a big fan of the
blues I like listening to a different a
lot of different kind of music but
there's something about the blues and
sort of like the visceral connection
that it brings to me that it's really it
really draws me towards that like I've
been playing guitar for a while and you
mentioned BB King and like those bends
so that BB King does like it's not the
most complicated stuff but it just
really brings out like a whole bunch of
emotion and it's really great so the
question I had is can you genuinely play
the Blues if you haven't faced adversity
or struggle in your life the answer is
well first of all do you know anyone who
hasn't faced some struggle in their life
okay so you know that's a that's a
universal and look you could have all
the money in the world you know what I
mean and not be happy
so first so that's one of the things
about the Blues it's about you know that
Buddhist you know life is suffering you
know so that that's that's intrinsic to
it but to answer your question from a
musical and technical perspective yes
you can play you don't have to and
there's a book I'm going to recommend to
you and and this may seem a little
self-serving because I am one of the I
want to show you this okay here it is
okay
talks music Albert Murray on jazz and
blues and you see this guy right here
wrote the afterwards Greg Thomas so the
reason I recommend this book in this
context is because there's a
conversation in here between Wynton
Marsalis and Albert Murray when Albert
Murray was Winton's intellectual
grandfather and mentor he was my mentor
I mean I actually knew him was mentored
by him and they talked about that very
issue so when you're talking about a
musical form you learn the musical form
and then you practice and get better at
that form so there's a separation
between your actual experience and what
you're playing is a feeling in form
that's Suzanne Langer but you don't have
to have experienced the heartbreak in
the specific form that you're singing
about you know you can draw upon this so
when you're talking about an art form
you're talking about developing a
certain technical skill level to then
play that form yourself and with others
so yes and no but it's not a requirement
in the sense that you meant that that's
why I want to say no you need to learn
the form you know because without
knowing the form and the technique your
ability to express those feelings in the
form are going to be limit limited right
so I hope that answers the question yeah
that's great thank you got
maybe great you've had a question I'm
sorry
oh maybe great okay hi Greg
my question was about if you feel that
music opera offers an opportunity for
cultures to learn about each other in a
less adversarial context than we're
usually offered through things like
social media what do you think I mean I
definitely imagine that it is but I'm
interested in your viewpoint on it
absolutely absolutely I mean music is
one of those universals all cultures you
know have music dance so it's so
fundamental to our human experience that
it's something that can go past some of
the cognitive or much of the cognitive
and go right into embodiment you know
it's because so you can feel it and not
just think about it so the answer is
absolutely and it does do that and I
want to address something this is not in
your question but this is something that
troubles me so much with certain
discourses and I'll have an opportunity
hopefully in some other places when they
talk about appropriation of cultures
there is such a thing but I think that's
overdone that's the way cultures work
you see something you like you try it on
for size you compare it to your own you
have fun with it you play and you adapt
it that's the way culture actually works
so it's not about appropriating per se
it's about the actual way that culture
and acts itself in the world you know to
me now if you take something claim it as
your own don't give it credit that's
appropriation but if you can acknowledge
the sources and say this is part of my
learning and this is where I got it from
that's not appropriation that's
appreciation
okay Megan you had a similar question
would you like to meet yourself and ask
it oh great I think you just answered my
question already I was asking for a
positive direction that you'd like to
take this idea of cultural appropriation
and maybe there's a there's something
else you'd like to take that that idea
and I'm worried about the D emphasis on
personal intention that often comes into
that story and worse than D emphasis I
was trying to think of the right word
there but almost attacking the idea that
intention matters I'm often reading that
and in mainstream media about this idea
which really worries me I don't know if
there's anything else that you'd like to
add to that idea if you've already
answered that well Megan I want you to
tell me a little more about the
connection between intention and
appropriation I want to get that before
I respond for me well it seems to me
that intention is absolutely critical in
that question so if you're absorbing
something because you like and respect
it and you're making changes to it and
and creating your own thing based on
that and that to me seems like a really
positive thing to do but there are
narratives that I've read I've heard
from people that I know that says that
it actually doesn't matter whether you
have good intentions or not what really
matters is you know what your genetic
heritage is and that to me seems like a
really concerning direction that I see
people around me moving in yeah I hear
you that's that's very troubling that is
very troubling on so many levels so let
me just give a little plug here my wife
and I we have a blog called tune into
leadership comm and I mention it because
she loves to write about creativity
purpose intention and those types of
things I would invite you all to check
that out
intention of course intention matters
motivation matters I mean one of the
things about the the discourse on the
left
particularly the
or left with a postmodern very
progressive and political bent is that
they they stretch a discourse that
beyond not only logic in many cases but
so far away from the very traditions
that they should be looking to for
wisdom okay you're gonna you're gonna
actually say okay let me give you this
when I was in grad school at NYU from
1996 to 99 that was an American Studies
doctoral program at NYU and that's when
this stuff was really getting going so I
studied critical race theory and then
critical theory that that was based on I
studied Foucault and there he died and
others you know and I got something from
it but I was so grounded in Ellison and
Murray that I was inoculated from some
of the extremities from that and I was
also in my mid-30s so I you know I
wasn't gonna dis fall down some paths
but they talked about essentialism back
then essentialism was the idea that you
have bass tones from inherited
characteristics something that's
essential to you based on your blood
your genetics and the idea at the time
is that essentialism wasn't good
seems like essentialism has been thrown
out the window and adopted as the the
fundamental essence of your identity and
it is it's so far off base and it's like
there are bubbles of discourse and it
just sorta that that that particular
bubble of discourse is now getting
mainstream distribution but we have to
really critically analyze such terms in
such ideas because they're dangerous
where do you find the basis for human
commonality where do you find the basis
for you know saying that or
cosmopolitanism if you use that term I
mean that idea is so far
if you're gonna say that because I have
a particular genetic heritage therefore
X Y Z what about your cultural heritage
biology is the foundation culture comes
along to extend our biological
inheritance like a prosthetic that's
what great anthropologist Paul Bohannon
who wrote foundational book me how
culture works put it so if culture is
something that extends your human
capabilities your biological
capabilities and culture is something
that you learn through education
language observation traditions if
you're in the United States where you
have all of these multi-ethnic
multi-cultural I am an anti race
anti-racist so I'm against the concept
of race so so I don't like to say
multiracial but we could say that too
how in the world you have all of these
mixtures what albamar recall omnia
Americanism all of these different
mixtures how in the world are you going
to even scientifically determine some
type of racial or genetic purity it's
 most of us are mixed one way or
the other and if we're not mixed
biologically with mixed culturally I
mean it's ridiculous but we have to be
patient now we have to have give people
a chance to voice their opinion and
hopefully through discourse and dialogue
you can help them look at things
differently or consider some different
ideas and maybe show them some of the
limitations of that train of thought
because there's so many limitations and
so many dead ends to that train of
thought yeah so I don't know if that
answers the appropriation anymore I
think I kind of did when I anticipated
when I psychically
and just a painted your question Megan
okay so there okay all right all right
so we'll have time for one more question
yeah let's end with Lisa Norton you had
a few questions
ah Lisa Lisa all right by the way this
is this was early on will you put the
title slash author up please so grace I
mean you bring up Lisa
but grace I want to say that the first
quote was Albert Murray and I have a
piece called reading Albert Murray in
the age of Trump that's available at the
New Republic that that quote comes from
so grace you can find it there and the
second quote was by Ralph Ellison from a
excellent essay of his Richard Rice
blues if you get the modern libraries
collected essays of Ralph Ellison you'll
find that essay in that quote in there
so that I hope that's helpful grace okay
Lisa
where is she bringing wrote are you
doing Lisa I've been a fan of Gregg's
for a long time at least a decade
I love seeing your voice in the space
more so thank you thank you so much for
what you're doing I would just say quick
question because a bunch of people +1
the idea of hearing your your comment
about convening across spaces of
difference of all kinds if you could
speak to anybody right now who would
that be and and if so what would you ask
or offer them one person or two that I
would bring together
that's anyway you hear it Greg okay the
woman who's leading the 16:19 project at
the New York Times this is an essay that
you read this essay
you cannot dismiss this essay she wrote
there are folks who are who count to
state the 16:19 project Coleman Hughes
whom I love in many ways I've stated
that in my conversation with integral
justice warriors two days ago but he and
some others formed a committee or group
to be anti the 1619 project based on
some historical inaccuracies and the
idea that this is presenting a picture
of black American life that's based on
victimhood a view since I take the
heroic blues idiom model i chafe against
that myself but I want to be able to get
together her and forgive me sister for
forgetting your name right now I don't
remember name but she's a lead on that
project when I get her together would
say John McWhorter I want to see the two
of them engage in discourse sit down and
rap okay sit down and talk I'm gonna see
some I want to see Brett Weinstein in
conversation with her sister who's a
critical race Theory Abdi Angela no
that's white fragility actually she's
another one let's use her how about
Brett Weinstein and Robyn D'Angelo
engage in conversation especially since
that term was weaponized against him
when he was drummed out of Evergreen in
that unjust way I think he was very hurt
but he was he was deeply hurt by that
and so I think there's some selection
bias when he seized this everywhere I'm
not saying that it's not a troublesome
but he sees it like everywhere because I
think that's what he experienced you
know so how about engaging in a
conversation with her maybe she gets a
chance to say you know I'm sorry that
term was used against you in that way so
he could have some somatic trauma
healing
I'm saying so there's people who are
talking it they're strong Manning is
strong women in each other and they're
not frickin talking so I want to help
make that happen you know now maybe
they'll use their own platform because
you got that you know intellectual dark
web now we got you know stoah we got
rebel wisdom we got these different
platforms and I love you know Peters you
know his the spirit of what the store is
bringing different voices together
giving people you know a platform for
that and I plan to do some of the same
thing you know so I would love to see
some of these conversation I really
think they could be breakthroughs I'll
give you another one on another level of
the of the culture I'd like to see
what's his name the open society
these are billionaires the Koch the the
Koch brother who's still living and
what's his name what's the guy for us
George Soros let's see George Soros and
one of the Koch brothers sit down in
conversation how about that because to
the left the Koch brothers they were the
devil to the right George Soros is the
devil so let's have the two Devils sit
down and talk and see if we can come to
something else will be wrong with that
I mean maybe it's a pipe dream maybe I'm
maybe I'm just a dreamer maybe I'm an
idealist but these folks you know they
you should get them together and talk
thank you Lisa
very cool
so yeah we're about time is there any
closing thoughts you had first great
well I just asked those to forgive me
for being so demonstrative I I get kind
of excited and I use a lot of hand
gestures and stuff I can't be as cool
and calm it seems as John McWhorter and
cold it is able to sit back lean to cut
and be cool about it I got to work on
that but uh anyway I'm kind of joking I
just want to thank you Peter this thank
you and everyone's here for the
opportunity to share my heart and my
mind you know my soul with you and I
really I just appreciated mmm thank you
my friend I really really enjoyed that
that conversation we had and I'll read
this comment someone said Greg feels
like a father figure I would want to
impress so I agree with that sentiment
and then we would love to have you back
there's like a lot of stuff that there's
sessions that were talking about even a
meta modern black experience conference
symposium we might have here and so I
think that would be really cool so let's
talk about a few upcoming events at the
stoah 8:30 today so I'm like an p.m.
Eastern Time which is a thirty minutes
Tyson Wagner's doing his free stuff like
freestyle rap
it's called flowing through a
knowingness so just RCP on the website
it's really really cool and fun building
that relationship with uncertainty we
got a bunch of cool events man can
really just read a few may be great you
have an event tomorrow at 8:30 p.m.
Eastern Time
did you talk about that if you're still
here yeah absolutely I'm so excited for
this event tomorrow it's
called dark eyes with Leslie Rogers
Leslie Rogers is from the light-dark
Institute and he works with bringing a
different sort of understanding to our
sexualities that's focused on absolutely
radical self-acceptance and it's just I
had just am wild about it I love it so
much I'm so excited I think you
absolutely have to be there very cool
and you definitely check out like maybe
Gray's that raw sexuality series she's
like amazing MC so I'm very excited to
see where she takes that and yeah before
her event on Tuesday we have a dialogue
Oh switch on Vicki guy sang sock
possibly Jordan Hall they're having a
biweekly dialogue Oh session where they
engage in dialogue amongst themselves
and then they kind of spread the
dialogue with energy people go to
breakout rooms and do it amongst
themselves that's bi-weekly first
sessions tomorrow 6 p.m. Eastern Time
really excited about that yeah we have
how to win friends and influence people
during a medic crisis so my buddy Kevin
Crone who's the principal at the Dale
Carnegie here in Toronto he's gonna come
in and you know talk about how to have
social skills during our meta crisis so
definitely check that out and that is
July 2nd Thursday at 10 p.m. a.m.
Eastern Time cool so that being said day
the stove was based off of a gift
economy and we're viewing it as a gift
for all of us to freely use in this time
of need if you're inspired to write a
gift the stove there's a few options on
the link right here alright everyone
thank you so much for coming up