so we have like let's call it a baseline
cycle and unfortunately I don't I don't
know the name so maybe you can find it
and put it in a little subtext I forgot
the name but it's the basic cycle of you
know denial and acceptance and
bargaining all that stuff and this seems
to be just an actual it's a kubler-ross
stages of grief yeah yeah that's right
that's exactly right so there we go
so the Cooper of stages of grief seems
to be a part of just psychology and
Franklin's probably really good reasons
for it it's been selected for over long
periods of time and lots of different
contexts and think of that it's like the
natural thing so no matter what when you
run into something that's going to hit
you with a big shift in change you will
go through that so don't fight it swim
swim with it so when you're feeling
really depressed by the realization that
things are much worse than you thought
in some sense if you can be
metacognitively aware of the fact that
you're in the right place and just kind
of allow yourself to process that and
the way it needs to be process so you
can get into the other side of
acceptance as smoothly as possible not
as quickly can make it go faster than
you can then you're doing as well as you
can
I want to put a particular note I've
noticed in myself at least four of these
cycles but the last one was two days ago
at 3:00 a.m. so something's going on
right now with this the rate of change
and the magnitude of change and the
quality of changes is such that
acceptance which is to say to begin to
step into the building an adaptive
response to what is actually finds
itself yet again overwhelmed by a change
of what it is that is big enough and
magnitude required that you actually go
through on your cycle so that's kind of
like an unfortunately powerful part of
what's happened but then we actually
have a different dynamic and this is the
dynamic of addiction
which has to do law mostly with denial
this is a breakdown of our sense making
in choice making system where reality
hits us
it's actually not it's this this is
Cooper Ross system but a particular
subset of what happens it's a reciprocal
closing of their Reiki as we're making
describes so reality hits us and we kind
of have a choice
we can either deal with the this cycle
deal with the unpleasantness of this
cycle and the necessity of actually
changing our behavior or we can
ourselves all right and we have that
choice and if we happen to have in some
sense the privilege the benefit of being
able to ourselves and not have
reality really kick us in the teeth it's
all too easy to ourselves and
if the magnitude of change that we have
to go through in the context of reality
feels uncomfortable enough all right so
we get this kind of separation this is
why by the way addiction can really
really hammer the wealthy because money
allows you to by not changing
a lot easier you don't hit rock bottom
as painfully
which is kind of an odd thing like
oftentimes people who don't have
resources get it gets really bad because
they do hit rock bottom but the amount
of sort of what gets pulled with them
and duration in life may in fact be a
shorter cycle we hit rock bottom in
years as opposed to in decades but in
any event as a cultures is particularly
the case so in the West the max the
massive plenitude that we've been able
to produce over the last 50 years
seventy years has given us the ability
to sort of kick the can down the road to
go into bullshitting ourselves and
avoiding the uncomfortable reality of
the necessity of changing what are in
fact
rather significant pieces of our
behavior and our infrastructure and our
institutions and by the way stepping
into a lot of uncertainty will change
requires actually stepping away from
certainty into uncertainty that by
itself isn't conquer
and of course if you do that if you
 yourself reality
well sometimes reality just goes away
sometimes it actually works out
sometimes the thing that you were trying
to avoid thinking about actually does go
away and you can yeah I got away with it
which by the way reinforces the behavior
but generally speaking it doesn't
generally speaking reality is reality
and doesn't really care how much you
 yourself in fact generally
speaking people pushing yourself you do
make matters worse so you know the next
day reality comes knocking at the door
and says hey it's time to change and
something just went wrong again you're
faced a choice but now you're kind of
deeper in because the magnitude of your
 the delusional story that you
begin telling yourself and the self the
self denial and the narratives that
you've constructed to enable your
 have a bigger control over
where you are and you have to actually
go through the field you have to feel
all the discomfort you've been delaying
at once so instead of being discomfort
of one now its discomfort of three
so you have a choice you get a deeper
into the rabbit hole and
yourself even further or do you suck it
up and go through the even bigger
magnets you just change you have to go
through generally speaking people will
often choose the first path and again if
you can get away with it you can throw
more it's just just like the
financial system is a very concrete
example
2008 reality hit us and said you guys
have been really this up for a
long time the global financial system is
not functional its hyper fragile it's
optimized for efficiency it's making bad
choices bad resource allocation got to
change this in a big way big banks gotta
go
probably even centralized banks as a
mechanism they've gotta go this whole
structure and our global collective
intelligence governance system said oh
that sounds really painful nope you know
I'd rather do I'd like to take a double
shot of heroin and amphetamines did we
get a big shot of heroin in bet amines
well yes we can okay good let's do that
instead and of course there's a period
of time I was like where all that and
feta means wasn't enough we need a lot
more which is like putting a load of
money quantitative easing just basically
printing money right
yeah listen let's cut interest rates a
quarter point but I didn't work okay
let's cut it half a point that didn't
work that's good as zero interest rates
well that's not working anymore that's
go to negative interest rates it's that
kind of that cycle and the point of that
stage is that each one of those decision
points was a decision point where you
could decide either to yourself
more or suck it up and actually good
through the change necessary to get to
actual sobriety and so at the level of
the financial system like reality had
percolated through the crisis it can
have come enough to an end that by the
time that we were sitting around in 2014
2015 2016 and in our capacity for
producing stimulants was strong enough
that we went through a felt sense of
another high but it wasn't a real thing
but the underlying damage is pretty
heavy it's a little bit like you can
imagine that you were running a race and
you like fell and sprained your ankle
really badly but you just decided to
wrap it up with some tape and then
inject yourself with a combination of
painkillers and stimulants and just went
back running on the on the ankle well if
you're under if you're when you're under
the influence of the painkillers and the
stimulants and the rappers it's kind of
good enough you might actually be
running pretty well
but you're doing damage to the ankle and
when the stimulants the pain cause we're
off your now even worse than you were
before so that's that's what's happening
right now and the financial system the
magnitude of what's being done right now
in the US and this is going to cascade
globally of course is like a whole step
up from everything that happened in the
period between 2008 and 2012 like it's
like 2 or 3 times X already we're only
four or five days in which is to say
that we're just continuing to choose to
 ourselves the addict is
continuing to choose to update the
delusional story whatever you do don't
pay attention to what's real and
doubling down on the the stimulant the
thing that allows the system to continue
to operate as if reality isn't what it
is and you know eventually as every
addict knows you hit rock bottom and you
always have a choice when you hit rock
bottom you had a moment of clarity and
the moment of clarity you can finally
choose to just take in to get into
complete acceptance and by the way
oftentimes the I believe the story is to
submit to a higher power
there's surrender and begin to say okay
I really don't know how to deal with
this I need to actually begin learning
from the beginning again
and realize I got to take my lumps
actually have to grow through the change
that has to happen to get to this
brought us to sobriety and ultimate to
health or you can go right back down to
the denial cycle until ultimately death
right and I think that's again that's a
really good conceptual model as we've
done we kind of moving back and forth
between the individual human biological
example and the financial example and by
the way if you'd like you can transpose
this to the political side for example
but what would it look like for like if
this is denial what would actually look
like to face reality and what would the
changes need to be
oh okay just throw the maybe yeah yeah
this is something that I've been looking
at for now again about 15 years so it's
actually not that in some sense not that
mysterious I've already already laid out
most of it you know the first is to
accept you've got a problem let's do a a
like the AAA guys have cut it
and kind of wired first except you've
got a problem I'd stop denying that
you've got a problem
second begin the process of coming into
awareness and relationship with the
reality of the problem like begin the
process of actually stepping into
reality so in this case for example I
would propose it would be quite helpful
to have a collective conscious
acceptance of the reality of the
meta-crisis that I've been talking about
that the thing in front of us the acute
crisis is a symptom of a much larger
chronic crisis that has been ongoing for
a long period of time and to to reach a
level of acceptance of the magnitude of
change and in some sense at least the
qualities of change that need to occur
for example if I'm a baby boomer who has
been holding on to the reins of power of
particular institutional structures for
a long time I think it's time to
acknowledge the generational transfer is
an actual necessity I think it's time to
acknowledge that the reality is is that
I don't really know what to do
and that's okay it's not my job to know
what to do there are other people who
are younger than me that have grown up
in completely different environments
that better instincts have better
learnings about the reality that we
currently live in it's their job to know
what to do now I may actually have a
deeper connection to why if I've lived
life well and full and thoroughly that I
actually have developed invited wisdom
and I can start trying to present why
and this notion of we who we might be
like the deep tradition the deep
tradition is still carried in my body
and the way the young Google can't have
but the specific strategy and response
that we ought to be engaging in
okay boomer is a archetypal and
practical sign of the reality of that
case you're out of the loop you
don't really understand what's going on
in reality and yet you're still
clutching on to the reins of power with
lists my cold dead hands that's just one
example I don't mean to harsh on that
this is a very specific example to
if you have to be in charge of a very
large powerful institution it's time to
recognize that institution probably
needs to die sorry big too big to fail
banks the right responses you actually
need to go away that's just the reality
and I understand this is not an easy
thing to do it will be challenging but
doing it consciously intentionally and
deliberately rather than with our hand
forced by crisis coming from 15
different directions and by the way now
geopolitical movement of other people
realizing that weakness in crisis is an
opportunity to take advantage of things
it's just a better idea so if we had
back in 2008 recognized that the too big
to fail the response to too big to fail
banks was no longer too big to fail
banks in the world we would be massively
better off now so that's another example
and by the way education on a pick of
pick another poison the global education
system particularly the American
education system the right response
right now is to recognize that is just a
 mess
top to bottom and it's not as a matter
of trying to tinker around the edges
with different testing work
methodologies it rarely is the time to
say okay wow I've actually got every
American school child is no longer in
school and possibly for the next six
months
now it's the time to really think about
hitting a reboot on the whole thing and
can we rapidly click pull together an
entirely different approach to education
here's the thing again if you're running
the education system you don't know what
the to do you've been focused on
trying to figure out how to maintain the
patient for so long that you maybe have
real amazing expertise in maintaining
the patient but by definition that means
you happen to spending a lot of time in
yourself working on the way that you
think about things and how to respond to
new possibilities but there are other
people who have been I think salmon
burger actually put it I think very
precisely the only appropriate response
right now is hand the keys over to
people who are both smart and brave
[Music]