hey folks welcome to the Dark Horse
podcast i am brett weinstein your host
and I am sitting with John Wood Jr who
is national leader and media director at
better angels John welcome to the Dark
Horse podcast it's great to be back
Brett well I say great to be back of
course folks will not know that I am
back at this point they will not know
I've already started us on a tangent
Evan I you have started us on a tangent
yes we in fact did do a prior
conversation which i regarded as
absolutely excellent but it was our
first conversation in the studio and the
studio did not function up to par so I'm
sad to say that that footage is not
rescue able hopefully this conversation
will be just as good it's gonna be hard
but but I'm hoping we can get there I
feel like this was that was probably my
fault somehow in a grand karmic sort of
sense I have a reputation which my wife
will happily corroborate for you of
being the person around which technology
tends to malfunction for no particular
reason at all and so you know I put on a
watch it tends to break for no
discernible reason within two or three
months hence I do not wear one internet
connections seem to slow when I'm around
interesting times yeah I mean you know
this this is this may be some strange
kind of you know static electrical
signal I'm giving off or it might just
be a function of the fact that for
whatever reason Murphy's Law suggests
that because I need to use technology so
consistent meaning in my life I cannot
ever get it to actually work well
because I'm destined to be frustrated in
that relationship you know in an
everlasting way and to frustrate other
people around me in the process
so no particular reason for it I can
come up with but feel free to blame me
their interests for explanation Murphy's
Law has never worked for me which I find
interesting technology isn't pretty good
I'm fine around tech so probably that
was you and not me I find mirrors don't
work they break upon you so I don't know
what that's about exactly but it's
either an aesthetic issue or an honesty
issue
yeah it's one of the two are both
actually possibly could be yeah all
right well let's talk a little bit about
we could talk about better angels or we
could start with some of the larger
larger issues maybe tell us a little bit
about better angels right yeah so better
angels is the nation's largest
bipartisan grassroots organization
dedicated to the work of political
depolarization in the United States and
we're a volunteer group we have
thousands of members dues-paying members
across the country now have about a
thousand volunteers scattered across all
50 states and better angels is a group
that is best known or at least best
covered in the mainstream media
for a program that we have called a red
blue workshop where we take small groups
of folks from the right and from the
left or Reds and blues as we say in the
house bring them together for a session
in which they don't argue and debate
about politics per se but rather we give
each side the opportunity through
moderated exercises to speak from the
vantage point of their own of their own
personal or lived experience so to speak
in terms of why they see politics the
way they do so folks we literally apply
marriage counseling techniques to
political conversations which you know
seems probably like an appropriate
metaphor for what's needed in the
context of our political dialogue today
but what folks are what but what the
vision of better angels increasingly has
become is one in which we seek to take
the values and the culture of
interaction that is established in these
sorts of gatherings and to use that as
sort of an initial peak experience
whereby we are able to route people into
participating in bipartisan structures
in their own communities excuse me that
allow them to pursue advocacy over
issues and and policies and community
projects that reach a certain consensus
within a local better angels alliance
what we call basically local better
angels chapter to empower them
work collaboratively in local
communities and in building off of that
to highlight this work through a digital
media presence that's meant to sort of
take the norms established in these
local relationships and scale that up
into a national narrative and so our
larger effort is to is to essentially
spearhead a heterodox movement in this
country that is able to sort of turn
back the turn back the tide in terms of
our increasingly fractured narrative
understanding of America's being split
between two tribes we're trying to
consolidate the notion that there is
sort of a unifying bedrock of values and
and spirit that exists within the
American people to stabilize what is
currently a very unstable social and
political climate in the United States
so I do think that there is a heterodox
movement I haven't heard anybody else
point to it that way obviously heterodox
Academy is mm-hmm
spearheading the sort of effort and
Jonathan Hyde is on our board of
directors it's better angels but I
didn't know that it doesn't surprise me
at all that he would be and of course
Peter Boghossian and James Lindsay's
book about having impossible
conversations has just emerged and I
can't tell you how many times a week I
hear somebody talking about either their
despair about the difficulty of having
conversations about things that matter
or the hopefulness that they see and the
fact that some of us are managing to do
it so yes it's a it's a moment when this
idea is ripe and and the place that you
and I first encountered each other
better angels which frankly I had never
heard of before you guys contacted us
had Heather and me in a was it a debate
is that what we called it or was well
okay so going back in time a little bit
actually that was not a better angels of
it that was a bridging our divide says
so I became a better angels because you
were the moderator I was the moderator
what better right and so Shiloh reached
out to me for that to moderate that
conversation with you Heather and a
couple of other individuals representing
a sort of social justice
perspective I think he's saying that I
was on the social injustice side if
there are the social injustice
interesting you're not the first person
to throw that allegation yeah so I
Shiloh reached out to me because of my
position better angels to moderate that
conversation that's what brought us into
the same sort of orbit but of course I
was very familiar with you and Heather
because I had been tracking the
intellectual dark web space as its and
actually at that time I'm not even sure
that phrase was even in vogue but it was
evident that there was a space forming
that that at that point I think and so
in any event that's how we wound up
finding our way into the same universe
all right well my apologies to Shiloh
and his organization for conflating you
all with them but in any case working in
a saint working in the same spirit stay
in the same spirit and I think there are
a lot of us fellow travelers looking to
bridge divides yeah various kinds so in
any case I'm glad that it did bring us
into contact yeah but when you'd
moderated that debate I was simply very
impressed by not only how deeply you
understood the issues but how deeply you
seemed to understand people and that you
know that I can't recall if it was
portrayed as a debate but the fact is it
was the sort of pairing that might have
result in a contentious discussion but
the way you managed it I think we were
productive but there was no rancor of
any kind and that's you know the way I
think those of us who understand what
this heterodox movement is about prefer
it right yeah yeah I mean there's um I
think there's there's there's kind of a
starting point assumption that I think
we want to bring to communication with
people on a on the other side of a
particular issue or a broader worldview
that has the potential to sort of not
only allow for civil discourse to take
place but to allow for an actual kind of
felt bond of connection to be
established
at least with respect to a common
recognition of the human dignity that
exists on either side of a divide and
that's just the Assumption going into an
exchange like that that there is some
humanity and that other individual to be
found and so this actually it brings me
to something I'm interested in exploring
with you a little bit because I sort of
perceived there as being kind of a
broader sort of heterodox culture
percolating you know in the United
States and certainly beyond that and
I've been very interested in the sorts
of very empirically grounded
conversations that have taken place
you know centering around yourself and
sam harris and other folks in the IDW
space and so forth it seems like in one
area there's this focus on the power of
reason to sort of transcend our tribal
divides which i think is which i think
is real in the space in which I've been
working better angels and the sort of
you know small constellation of
organizations like living room
conversations and bridge Alliance and
media sites like all sides and so forth
there's been this emphasis on kind of
empathy as the starting point for
constructive dialog and this also
therefore unfolds in a very heterodox
sort of sort of place because in our
programs better angels were focused on
bringing people into relationship with
each other and so it seems to me that in
in these two sorts of somewhat parallel
kinds of spaces there's a common concern
with wanting to bring people together
across these divides but sometimes I I
listen to folks having these
conversations in the digital dome and it
seems to there seems to be a recognition
of the fact that you have to speak to
the emotional center of another person
to be able to to move them and yet the
focus sometimes tends to be on the rash
the power of the rational exchange to
move people into a you know into
alignment across tribal divisions and I
wonder in the kind of
intellectual dark web space if there
isn't a sense sometimes that there's
there's there's a limits to the efficacy
of focusing on the rational component
but it's succeeded in sparking a broad
audience whereas in our in in in our
space the depolarization sort of
something we focus on empathy and it
seems to be effective in establishing
close close intimate bonds of
communication but it doesn't seem to be
a theme that has kind of translated
towards a broad kind of popular
following you know we tend to be a
constellation of small organizations
doing deep work that isn't that hasn't
quite scaled and so that's that's my
focus is on figuring out you know how do
we get the best of both these worlds but
I want to Park that really quick just to
see if if one if if you see something of
a little bit of a divide and you decided
that I don't know how much of a window
you have into the space that I work in
on a consistent basis but if you make
anything of that differentiation Oh
indeed okay so you have done what you
typically do which is you have you know
introduced what you present as a small
point that will be discussed and of
course what you've done is you've opened
a topic that could easily occupy us for
10 hours I don't know but there's a lot
of I beg your indulgence no no I like it
um I'm quite pleased by this topic and
I've done a lot of thinking about it for
various reasons yeah one thing I would
say is I sometimes hear people talk
about the humanity of the person on the
other side and I also heard you say
something that I've never heard anybody
talk about which is the how did you put
it the sense of camaraderie that arises
when you do manage to cross one of these
gap which I feel very personal yes and
I'm not sure everybody does I can hope
so but I know that I feel a little bit
challenged when somebody is out of reach
yeah and that if I succeed in crossing
the divide it feels very good and not
just like a victory it feels like my
circle has broadened in some way that is
rewarding but I do think that there's a
caveat here and I think the
via will help us get where you're
suggesting we need to go which has
something to do with the admixture
between the rational and the empathic
and emotional so the caveat is not
everybody on the other side is reachable
and while it is sort of tempting to go
into the realm of well you know there
are sociopaths out there who aren't
really attempting to accomplish the same
thing I think we can stay out of the
realm of guessing what the motivation is
and we can just simply say if somebody
is not interacting in good faith you
cannot count on crossing that divide no
matter what toolkit you choose right
they will pull a fast one in analytical
space and they will abuse your trust and
all sorts of things so what I like to do
is figure out whether or not the person
on the other side strikes me as
interested would they be interested in
discovering that they are incorrect
about something for example are they
interested in bridging a divide if they
are incorrect in their assumptions about
me would they be pleased to discover
that things aren't as bad as they
imagined or would they be disturbed by
that discovery because it makes what
they're doing harder so if we can put
aside people acting in bad faith and we
can say there are lots of reasons to
disagree
that don't have to do with bad faith and
those are the divides that are a
bridgeable and be worth attempting to do
it then the question is well is
rationality the tool and certainly for
some people it's the way in is it
emotionality and an empathy for other
people that's the way and for some of us
it's a bit of each right it's a an
exploration and to the extent that you
detect somebody on their side is
intrigued and interested in making
progress then you can sort of go step by
step sort of lead climb you know I'm
going to take the lead and they take the
lead that sort of thing and as for you
know somebody in your position where
this is now your job where you're
attempting to lead people into these
conversations where they do discover the
humanity on the other side and maybe
discover that the other side has a piece
of the truth that they didn't have
um what should that admixture be would
be 60/40 rational empathy
I don't know last thing I will say
before I turn it back over to you is I
have a concept in a related space it's
not exactly the question you asked but I
have been saying that in a policy
context in order to make a compassionate
policy you have to have a dispassionate
discussion
this is counterintuitive to people but
I'm quite convinced of it so in other
words if you want a policy that
addresses homelessness in a
compassionate way then you have to do a
game theoretic analysis which is not an
emotional feel-good analysis at all
right you have to understand why it is
that a city for example can't solve this
problem right so what i am trying if
there's one grain of truth at the bottom
that i would like people to walk away
with it's do not assume that because you
hear somebody engaged in a dispassionate
analysis that they are deaf to suffering
for example it may be just the opposite
it may be that they take suffering
seriously enough that they're willing to
go dispassionately at the problem and
see if they can address it yeah right
well I agree with that and I think that
one of the fundamental challenges of
policymaking in policy conversations is
the fact that and actually this goes
beyond policy this just goes to other
parts of our lives where in order to
view a complex problem in all of its
dimensions you literally need to
maintain the space of mental focus to
see it clearly over a sustained period
of attention so as to imagine the ways
in which a certain issue might be
impacted and the emotional reactions
that we have to particularly the human
substance of a wicked social problem is
such that we can feel ourselves stirred
towards solutions that might be socially
gratifying for whatever reason or
emotionally or symbolically gratifying
right but that don't actually get to the
heart of a particular problem and so I
mean I think one potential example that
might
be the the wall idea on the southern
border I don't think we're ever gonna
get that wall but even so and I also
don't think that the proposal of it was
really a serious policy degree in with
but that's just the point though that
our politics tends to lend itself
towards symbolic gestures meant to
appeal to our need to see something done
and actually on the Left I think that
you know I mean sure folks would push
back a bit on this but I think that some
of our some gun control measures that
people have proposed are also similarly
more symbolic than they are serious
efforts you know and impacting a deep
deep problem and so it's funny because
you have this mismatch between the
emotional vigor with which we express
our concern for a problem but with much
more subtle but potentially
corresponding lack of intellectual
seriousness with which we express our
concern for the substance of a
particular problem you know because just
just just to your point a person who is
particularly concerned with actually
impacting a problem as opposed to
signalling concern for a problem as a
person who's going to is a person who's
going to control him or herself enough
to be able to look at the problem and
it's nuanced dimensions and communicate
effectively in terms of you know what a
serious resolution to an issue might be
but this draws us right back to the
starting point here which is essentially
how do we create the conditions in which
we are able to govern effectively and in
a way to where we're able to impact
problems that are significant and the
answer to that has to be I think
predicated upon a certain level of
social solidarity which brings us to
this question of oh how do we accomplish
that if we're fractured into our tribes
and so forth one thing is stacked upon
the other right we cannot govern in a
stable way unless our social fabric is
is firmed up alright and so you know you
come back to your the question of what
is the admixture of reason and empathy
and so forth to be employed there and
I have more to say about that obviously
but I'll just note that I frequently for
the most common criticism I find myself
getting is that when I talk about the
need to the need to see the dignity in
the other human being to go into a
conversation with good faith and to
understand the emotional origins of
another point of view I only get accused
of not saying anything at all in saying
that you know because I think that for
some people there's a sense that
substance in any argument has to be sort
of you have to be able it has to
translate to quantifiable terms you know
yeah and and yet I think that that
virtue in aspects of character that
animate the sorts of good faith
conversations and and and sober analyses
that were striving for our qualities
that are observable definable
describable but not necessarily
quantifiable and obvious empirical sort
of sort of terminology and the reason i
introduced that frame here is just to
say that you know we look at I've come
to sort of appreciate a little bit more
the importance of a lofty kind of
political and social language of
idealism particularly in the age of
President Trump by I have to say where
we've seen the absence of much of that
and that is because a lot of what sounds
like hollow substance and political
rhetoric in the past has really been
from you know Lincoln Kennedy to Reagan
to Obama you know take your pick of you
know impactful American statesmen has
really been the language that has sort
of affirmed or reaffirmed the kind of
transcendent substance of you know that
the moral values and an idealism that
kind of holds the social fabric country
of social fabric of a community and of a
nation
together so this idea that we believe in
liberty we believe in equality we
believe in justice before the law and
you might weave into that you know the
substance of the nonviolent tradition we
believe in loving loving our enemies
loving the oppressors if you will you
might listen to that language and say
wow this guy's talking about much
nothing you know cuz what does that
trans woman do it her to me to think
that because I agree with you not you
but I mean but money business this is my
point you and I are able to have a
productive discussion in part because
neither of us would think to make that
leap but I agree you're pointing to
something really important people do
make this assumption that either it's in
the the analytic content of a statement
or it isn't right right and that yeah
and that's just not it's not the case
right right
but there's something and but but I
understand the difficulty people have of
that because there is something that is
sort of axiomatic in in an effective
interior moral framework right you sort
of have to I mean how do I demonstrate I
can demonstrate to you in practical
terms why it is efficacious to love your
enemy I can say that look in loving your
enemy you do you do two things right off
the bat it's just borrow from the
substance of dr. King's philosophy you
know well for the opponent has the
potential at least to touch the better
angels of that individual's nature you
you are able to redefine yourself
potentially in that person's eyes as a
person who is not a threat or who at
least is not trying to be a threat and
in so doing give yourself you open up
whatever window might be there to speak
to that person's conscience and at the
same time even if that person's window
of conscience is so small that as you've
said some people just are not interested
in being available to that kind of a
connection at the very least you're able
to unshackle yourself from the from the
Albatross of interior animosity or
hatred towards your opponent because
that is a psychologically debilitating
thing to carry around with yourself as
so many people and activists in our
country do but in me making that
practical case
love and empathy as a starting point for
our interactions with people on the
other side whatever side you're starting
from that is not necessarily a
sufficient means by which I make I can
communicate how it is you establish that
starting point to begin with right so in
other words I can tell you it's a good
idea for you to love your enemy that
doesn't mean you're gonna feel it when
it's not a good idea it depends on your
enemy well but I know what you're saying
I know exactly what you're saying but
the reason that this falls on deaf ears
I believe is because when you say that
many people have the experience of some
enemy with whom that will not work
sure and so I believe it needs an
asterisk on it in order to win over
those people who have ears to hear this
point but have some experience that
tells them oh you can't do that every
time because you'll end up you will sow
the seeds of your own undoing
if you attempt yeah I think that um the
well first of all I agree with that
point because it's it is the pushback
that we frequently get which is well
what are the limits of this right
because there's got to be there's got to
be a limit ultimately because some
people are just unavailable to that sort
of sort of love or sympathy or
what-have-you
so again I know we're not disagreeing
but I don't think it's a limit it's not
like you know love your enemy but only
so far in fact the word love implies not
that at all right that's right what it
means is there's a boundary it works
within some zone pending certain
assumptions that we're not going to be
able to specify with precision you
should engage in this at least as a
start and if what comes back doesn't
match then you know we've learned from
game theory actually that a benevolent
starting point tends to sow the same
seed on the other side but if what comes
back is defection then that tells you
well I don't want to be a sucker in this
interaction but anyway let's put that
aside for the moment you have
unfortunately done it again to
soliloquies in a row and you have
introduced another
and hours of stuff that we might talk
about it I don't want it to get all lost
Joe so if I can go back and just point
to a couple things that I heard you say
let's do you talked about love and a
common starting point what you didn't
talk about which I have a feeling
belongs in that very same conversation
is a patriotism yes which I would argue
has a four people on the left it is a
very uncomfortable connection to love
but that is because the discussion about
patriotism has been polluted with
nationalism many people regard them as
synonyms I regard them as essentially
antonyms even prior to Trump I think
there was that sense of the left sure
and so you know those on the right tend
to see those on the left is unpatriotic
because the left has a an arm's length
relationship to patriotism at best but
patriotism really is the willingness to
sacrifice for something generally a
nation but I would argue patriotism and
be true for you know an organization
that you believe in you know your family
gets it automatically and we call it
love instead of patriotism but but the
willingness to sacrifice for something
is a key feature of human success and
the idea that what you are when you have
a divide that seems unbridgeable you are
attempting to tap into a sense of hey
actually even if we disagree
fundamentally even if we can't resolve
our disagreement about which direction
to head maybe you and I think we should
be headed in opposite directions but we
both think that we should be headed in
those directions for the good of X right
for the same ultimate right we both want
good things for X and if I knew that X
was going to be served by what you are
suggesting rather than what I'm
suggesting I would go with so is that
fundamental agreement about wanting to
advance this cause or shut down that
cause right these things are about a
kind of agreement that is not analytical
right yes right exactly exactly and so
and then right and so this is the power
in my view of moral language properly
done because it's it's got to come from
I feel like the the point at which we
make the case that we should be not just
loving loving our opponents but that we
ought to believe in some overarching
value in the American experiment that
binds us as a people that there is such
a thing as we the people to begin with
it presupposes not just you know
geographical proximity it presupposes an
actual kind of you know sort of
metaphysical and idealistic connection
between people something that is
potentially woven and heritage and
history and experience and would have
been far more obvious to prior
generations right so the first thing and
for various reasons but just to just to
make the point yeah but it's something
that has to be claimed I think you have
to sort of come out the bed and say it
because I can I can argue that it would
be practically beneficial in a
utilitarian sense for us to craft this
narrative and in the sort of
depolarization space there's been a lot
of attempts to kind of think through how
do you craft a narrative that works
right that's able to compete with the
you know the left-wing narrative of who
we are as a country the right-wing
narrative both of which are invested in
making demons out of the other right and
so that's their two bad faith narrative
two bad faith narratives exactly but but
part of what makes them well what makes
them compelling though is that in half
in each having you know some aspect of
truth to them they do resonate in an
emotionally real and true way with much
of the experience of the people who
consume those narratives but their
stated in a way toward their just stated
as matters of fact like just it just as
a matter of fact America is a country
founded in freedom and the left is
trying to take that freedom of a way as
a matter of fact you know America is a
country you know founded in racial
injustice and folks on the right are
trying to perpetuate this into a new era
of dutiful it's like hold all that
usually exclusive exact use but and but
but efforts sort of you know in the in
the kind of I was gonna say in the
center it has that I want to put aside
the ideological or you know yeah that by
Senator conversations in the center
rather than about Thomas
Ka'ala see conversations in the center
have
not been able to produce a narrative
that is similarly sort of self affirming
in a morally powerful kind of way
because it's all about well how can we
piece by piece construct a narrative and
can we can we kind of test drive it with
focus groups and so forth to see what
people respond to it is not a
first-person kind of statement in terms
of this is who we are as a country and
why that is similarly sort of weighty
all right so I have to drag us into the
analytic layer for a second because I
believe that what you've just described
can be can be placed in analytical terms
that are very that are so accurate that
is worth having the model right on the
table that we are wired as products of
evolution we are wired for both games we
are wired for the bad-faith game and we
are wired for the good-faith game and in
fact we play these things simultaneously
right you have some group with which you
assume good faith and then some other in
which you don't and you you play the bad
faith game in places where you expect
bad faith to dominate and you play the
good faith game where you think that it
can dominate but the good faith game is
fragile mm-hmm and so the fact that you
have these two narratives and I love the
way you described them these two
narratives about what the United States
is right both of which have some truth
the truth to them yeah right so but
because they are compelling and mutually
exclusive they signal we are in the bad
faith game and once the brain detects we
are in the bad faith game it doesn't
play the good faith game because to do
so in the bad faith game is to be a
sucker right and so what I'm suggesting
to you is we who do love the country for
all of its flaws would love to have the
replacement good-faith narrative but we
are frustrated because it is too easy
those who would like to play a different
game to win at the expense of others
are they have the advantage because it
is much easier to break the progress
that leads to patriotic alignment than
it is to establish it just for reasons
that are very much analogous to the
reason that entropy dominates order
mm-hmm
so we it's an uphill battle not because
the vast majority majority of us would
not benefit from coordinating over our
shared love of you know if not the
country itself in its particular history
but the ideals that it was clearly set
up into foster right here's a way I look
at success in this in this context
because I think that we we tend to think
of the efficacy of social movements is
being reflected in their ability to
scale and indeed this is a space this
this both that both the the the
narrative that we're hoping takes place
within within the crossfire of these two
competing polarizing narratives and also
the community that forms around it we're
looking for both of these things to
reinforce each other and to amplify and
to expand in the context of our country
but I think that part of what a powerful
narrative and story does is in
resonating in the experience of the
people who who hear it it also provides
the basis upon which an in-group is able
to form and the phrase in-group I think
can can carry with it some oppressive
connotations for people who here because
we think well if there's an in-group
that that means that that in-group has
no human concern for people in the
out-group that it becomes self-serving
and corrupt and and and obviously that's
that's something that is can frequently
be true but I think that in establishing
a core culture around these principles
that becomes compelling and powerful I
think that what we can accomplish is
holding a space within the country a
center space that can grow they can
challenge the narratives on each side
that will not necessarily the exist of
the existence of which will not
necessary
they immunized the larger country from
the consequences of some of the some of
the past that it's on
I mean look to your point earlier there
are a lot of folks who aren't going to
be interested in you know this this more
unifying storyline and certain things
are already in place now to where I
think regardless of who wins the
presidential election in 2020 Donald
Trump will either be reelected and
certain things that are problematic now
will continue to be more problematic
into the future or President Trump will
lose but will likely continue to be
active as a very powerfully sort of
subversive you know force in other parts
of American life and I'm not putting it
all on Trump because the issue is both
Trump and the reaction to Trump in my
view it always and always has been since
these since he's come along but as the
consequences I think of the negative
directions in which we're heading in
other areas becomes clear so too I think
will the both the practical necessity
but also the emotional appeal of the
existence of a structured and organized
community loosely structured but a
community that is heterodox that is
trans partisan cross-cultural that is
rooted in a deep faith in our transfer
transcendent ideals and principles I
think that that that becomes a project
whose appeal is potentially real and
scalable to a degree in the moment but
that would also become more appealing
over time even simply on the basis of a
burgeoning recognition over time that
this is what is necessary to preserve
the American project in material terms
at the very least alright and so I think
that I think that you might be able to
look at a couple models I do think that
the civil rights movement the nonviolent
movement in particular represents
something like that I mean most people
in the United States never became
adherents of the nonviolent philosophy
in any formal way but a certain
substantial portion of Americans did a
minority but a consolidated enough
minority to shift the national
consciousness
in a powerful way and the broader sort
of cultural ripples that came from that
have been pervasive in our sort of in up
until our up until largely our modern
time in a way that is redefined the way
we look at ourselves as a nation even
for people who are never at the
epicenter of that movement or don't have
a direct sort of memory of what the
substance of that was so the ordinary
conception of a social movement is
something that explodes quickly that
hits the national conscious like a like
a like a tidal wave and is able to break
a bunch of things and allow for things
to be rebuilt in the aftermath
potentially or reformed but that
conception is also an unwieldy one
there's another view of what a social
movement can be that is more like a tree
that you nourish with seeds that begins
to grow and over the course of time
become sort of a mighty oak in the
middle of in the middle of the landscape
something that is stable and enduring
and to me that's kind of how I begin to
conceptualize what the substance of a
deeper more morally rooted and again
sort of you know heterodox and
cross-cultural movement that to me is
sort of what success in that vein begins
to look like over time okay mmm I agree
with what you said
the hidden tribes report which you are
no doubt familiar with reflects this
Larry is a vast group we do not live in
the middle but we come together in the
middle the exhausted majority and their
to the exhausted majority that group is
real I've met them you've met them
anybody who plays the heterodox game
will discover that they exist in large
numbers the problem is we have an
antagonist the thing that you're talking
about this movement that is struggling
to be born to replace the toxic mutually
exclusive narratives with a cohesive
galvanizing narrative and we have an
enemy and that enemy is something that
wishes to keep us divided and has for
quite some time it actually depends on
our division in order to continue to
maintain a sort of power that it
did not win honorably and does not hold
on to for any reason other than that's
what powerful entities attempt to do so
the question really to me is can those
who are struggling to regain the
patriotic Center defeat whatever force
it is either by bringing them on board
with the patriotic mmm narrative or by
overpowering them can we rebuild that
patriotic Center and I want to return to
something you said earlier which I think
has a great deal of meaning to it you
argued something about people signalling
with their policy preferences more than
actually attempting to change something
and I've seen this as well and I think
it has to do with another pattern the
expression of concern as opposed to the
substance of concern right and so if to
use the the language of the heterodox
movement they're virtually signals right
and virtually signaling for the point of
some personal social gain rather than
yeah and it's a phenomenon of right and
left just it's a phenomenon of both
right and left however I believe it
arose from something and we've seen
evidence of this in the recent political
past people do not relate to the fact
that they collectively have any power
people feel powerless and they're not
wrong to feel powerless they have been
largely powerless for some reason that
nobody has quite put their finger on the
policy of the nation seems to continue
on even as the administration in power
flips from one side to the other
something has created a an unstoppable
train that heads in the same direction
almost no matter what Trump being one of
the first things to disrupt this in
recent memory but in any case the fact
of being powerless of being asked to
vote as if it was very important and
actually having very little impact when
you pull the lever means that people
have started to utilize the opportunity
of an election for something else
they're venting right and so one of the
things we
particularly with brexit in the UK was
that people voted for brexit and then
many of the people who voted for it were
shocked their sense was yeah and you
know I think this happened a little bit
with Trump - were very angry about the
Democratic Party having handed them
Hillary Clinton and I was one of those
people who was angry about that but the
I did not vote for Trump but many people
did vote for Trump thinking well he's
not gonna win they effectively thought
they were casting a protest right and
then holy moley they've put this guy
with his finger on the button and that
doesn't seem like a very good idea good
news guys your vote counts there's good
news and there's bad news your vote
counts and your vote counts but but
anyway I think the sense of we are
hovering in a space where in general we
don't have any power but our power isn't
actually zero and so every so often
people are exercising their power and
they're discovering well I wanted to
vote against the European Union I wanted
to thumb my nose at the European Union
but I didn't want to leave it right I
meant to tell them I wanted to leave it
they were like storming out threatening
a divorce that they didn't intend to
carry through with or something but but
anyway so that's the question a can we
fix the political system so that we can
stop for - signaling because if we
actually did have power it would cause
people to sober up with respect to their
virtue signaling which has gotten out of
control
mm-hmm so anyway I'll leave it there and
let you as well yeah and so I think that
the I've always I've always looked at
polarization you know the vicious
affective polarization that we're
experiencing this country today tribal
polarization manifesting in political
divides I've I've always looked at that
as essentially the the core the central
structural problem in American politics
and maybe just society more broadly
speaking and this is a connection I
think it's important to make and a very
basic one and easy not easy to
understand what you what do you think
about it
some folks are not concerned with the
problem of political and social
polarization because they feel it's more
important
focus on the structural issues affecting
society you know the oligarchic way in
which special interests run our
government regardless of the votes being
cast problems with systems from criminal
justice to health care to you know
corporate relationship between any
number of things but regardless of
whether or not your issue is climate
change immigration gun violence etc any
enduring sort of policy solution to
these problems is going to depend on
there being a consensus between people
of different points of views and
partisan affiliations and that consensus
is itself going to be subject subject to
the relative social consensus and unity
that exists within the American people
sufficient to be able to motivate
politicians to vote and interact with
each other in a collaborative sort of
way and so you can't solve in a nutshell
you can't solve global warming unless
you get a broad cross-section of the
people on board with a palatable policy
solution and you can't do that unless
you have a cultural shift that makes it
possible for us to see each other
something other than enemies is
something something other than villains
so I certainly you know one starting
point for beginning to consolidate this
movement is by making the intellectual
case that even if we're just looking at
it as a practical matter you know we
have to we have to be serious about the
question how do we establish you know
social consensus and what is the
relationship of that to the actual
social bonds in a in a society but I
think that if you accomplish that you
said the you set the the preconditions
necessary for the establishing of a new
center of leverage to begin to begin to
move the existing structures around in
such a way or to reform the existing
structures in such a way that
counteracts the sorts of trends that
you're that you're identifying so you're
identifying this high level structural
problem where people feel as if their
participation in democracy doesn't count
and all we can think to do is to throw a
wrench in the system what I'm saying is
that if we were to rediscover our deeper
bonds with each other on a social and a
social context
we could establish the unity necessarily
necessary to begin to leverage that
against some of these existing
structures because as you say they're
predicated on division and so you know
you robbed them of that advantage then
the equation changes but again it's a
catch-22 because how do you do that
given the fact that they have the
advantage already and I think that
that's precisely what it is we're
alternately trying to work out here so I
have thoughts on that but is there
anything in that Oh jump on so much so I
think we are in an interesting pickle I
don't know if I've mentioned this to you
but years ago my good friend David Lodi
and I wrote a paper on the evolution of
morality and morality is a bit of a
puzzle because morality essentially
involves people not taking opportunities
that to a first approximation look like
they would be Ellucian airily profitable
right not acting on impulses for example
the paper was titled the better angels
of our nature
obviously alluding to the same quote
photography different Abraham Lincoln in
any case the paper put forward a model
in which essentially as the threat to an
entity grows the tendency to put aside
the ability to profit at the expense of
others within the entity grows with it
and as success is achieved the tendency
to behave benevolently to other members
of that entity decreases right so in
essence sorry I was actually as we were
writing the paper I was explaining to
somebody who asked me what I was working
on and they you know somebody without it
was not scientifically oriented and I
described this model to them and they
said oh when times are good people are
bad okay
once again evolutionary biology
rediscovers folk wisdom but the point is
why are we facing peoples why given that
times are actually quite uncertain now
our people
the power model would predict they would
be more patriotic rather than less
patriotic that they would put aside
their differences and pull in the same
direction as they do during war but
here's what I think is going on that you
have two things in play how much
jeopardy do you feel like you're in but
we feel a lot of Jeopardy right and with
whom are you collaborating so in other
words what you have is a thing that's
patriotic over in the red space right
fighting an enemy which is the blue and
the blue folks are patriotic against the
red they see an enemy within America and
they are fighting it even though this is
nonsense not nonsense but the the enemy
that each one sees on the other side is
actually a very tiny and consequential
thing it's not the core of the people on
the other side um there's a germ of
truth in the perception but it's been
magnified into this bogeyman that's out
of proportion to its actual reality I
think in each case so the upshot of this
is to do any of the more you believe
that the more true it becomes but but
right it's a positive feedback so the
point is the more divided we get the
heart of the job gets of reversing
course and collaborating at a larger
scale and this is in part I think why
the radicalize one another yeah we
radicalize each other that's that's
right this is why though the right has
the particular misapprehension that it
has about I don't want to say climate
because I think the climate puzzle is
complex but about sustainability so when
I talk to people on the right and I say
something about a sustainability crisis
they hear climate right they are primed
to hear those things as synonymous I
can't escape it man my feeling is I know
we have a sustainability crisis I
believe we have a climate crisis but if
the climate crisis isn't real we still
have a sustainability problem right and
we're you know if the climate crisis
isn't real we got lucky on the climate
front it's not that we didn't behave in
a way that could have caused a climate
problem but the core of the problem
remains right the core problem is we're
behaving in a massively unsustainable
way and this will not go on very long we
will destroy ourselves through one
mechanism
or another no matter what we do and so
of course that should galvanize not only
Americans across left and right it
should galvanize the world right now if
you're on the right the idea of an enemy
so large that we would be forced to
galvanize at a global level is a bit
frightening because of frankly some very
real fears that exist for meaningful
reasons on the right about you know
global power structures so to the extent
that you fear government as the right
properly does to the extent that you
fear government the idea of bigger more
powerful government at larger and larger
scale is even more frightening the
solution is almost worse than the
problem or maybe nice and you know there
are many cases in which the right is
actually correct about this that the
solution is worth worse than the problem
and it's not that the problem isn't real
it's just that there's a way it is
inevitable that if you attempt to build
if you attempt to architect solutions
you're going to create unintended
consequences that you didn't see coming
so because of that one has to be
cautious in the building you have to
discover what those consequences are you
have to figure out how to mitigate them
and sometimes you have to realize out
solving that problem wasn't worth it now
in the case of a global sustainability
crisis I don't know and you have a spare
planet somewhere because if not we have
to deal with that one musk is working on
it I think no he's not sending us to
Mars which is an escapist fantasy I
opinion that is going to set us back
with respect to fixing the earth now
like a real-estate prices are more
affordable I am certain they are
although you have to like the color
scheme right so I should say too in
fairness to musk
I think musk is on balance a positive
force I like his visionary streak and in
principle I'm not against the idea that
it would be wise to get some people onto
another planet just in case the problem
is that has to be done very carefully
and the meaningfully getting people to
Mars getting people to Mars in a way
that it's actually some sort of a
fail-safe mechanism for Humanity we are
so far from
that goal that's selling people that
fantasy now is dangerous because it D
motivates us yeah planet Earth doesn't
really seem like a short-term solution
to our problems and I mean any of it
right yeah it's not yeah it's nice not
inconceivable that it could work but I
think there are many hundreds of years
away well but you pointed to something
earlier which I thought was interesting
enough to flag because you said that
given the uncertainty in our society
right now you might think under normal
circumstances that people would be
consolidating and uniting to face
commonly appreciated threats and yet the
threats that we appreciate are all
loaded on one side of the partisan
spectrum or the other thoughts you know
perpetuating our division but I actually
think that what we're seeing is probably
more in accord with the predictions of
your model than not that you knows times
are good people like bad and so forth
because there's the strange sort of
there's this strange sort of paradox I
think in the way we see and feel life in
America today which is which is both
contradictory and yet true in its
contradiction which is that things are
precarious and our institutional
stability and credibility these
stability and credibility of our
institutions is teetering in a very kind
of frightening way and yet the vast
majority of us are materially secure you
know I mean the vast majority of us are
eating everyday homelessness and housing
is it's a big problem many places but
you know problems are all always
relative right relatively speaking you
know the the the ordinary American
experience is not one of material of
private absolutely and so you have this
moment in which on the one hand we are
in Steven Pinker's world and Steven
Peter obviously wrote a book called
better angels as well right now you know
Pinker's thesis is that this is the best
and most prosperous time and not just
American history but in human history to
be alive right and that seems to be true
across many dimensions I think and
ending the most obvious sorts of sorts
of material once again most of us most
of us are safe
but we turn on the TV and we see
incidents of mass violence and it makes
us feel incredibly insecure those
incidents are real and they point to
things that are that are more troubling
most of us most of us are eating but we
have a heightened sort of consciousness
of the injustice of income inequality
and poverty that triggers I think a
vicious moral and emotional response to
these to these issues
it was the most prosperous of times it
was the most perilous of time right
it is simultaneously both bankers world
is not wrong right but there is a an
awareness about the possibility of it
turning around and so it becomes sort of
I guess a reality in which the the the
formula for catalyzing or motivating
virtue signaling on a societal scale you
know becomes powerfully reinforced
because on the one hand you don't really
have the immediate kind of material
deprivation that might motivate us to
collectively look more soberly at a
unifying problem and rediscover our
internal bonds in terms of how to deal
with it but you do have all of these
emotional triggers which in addition to
all of the ways in which technology and
mass communication kind of sparks our
reactions as laid across a broader
landscape of just demographic shifting
and you know social fracturing for other
reasons you have all these other things
that are causing us to engage in in
moral warfare because well we're not
really feeling we're not really feeling
the pain in our stomachs so much but we
are feeling the pain in our hearts in
some real way you know we're not
starving to death but we're nevertheless
starving for some sense of broader
meaning broader purpose broader
connection and we're arriving at it in
our tribal animosity towards one another
and in that in so doing we wind up
making more real this sense that
civilization is on the verge of some
broader collapse
in in Pinker's formulation shouldn't be
really because things were too good but
the fact that we are sort of operating
at something of we're malnourished in
some more kind of psychological level we
are emotionally and maybe
philosophically starving right it's
causing us to destabilize society in a
way that will ultimately make good on
our assumptions that things are just
that bad I worry a lot about a tendency
for various processes to bring about
exactly that I think that they claim is
going you and I have really been talking
about self-fulfilling prophecies and a
destruction sort of all the way through
here yep you know and there is something
you know whatever it is I do feel a kind
of kinship with you and a few others but
there's a sort of sense of I don't know
maybe I've mentioned it somewhere else
before maybe maybe I haven't but there's
a are you a fan of the Hitchhiker's
Guide to the galaxy
man I've never read it I read it's great
I know but there's a at the beginning of
the book I don't want to spoil it for
you man oh go ahead
okay I'm gonna spoil a little tiny bit
okay okay the earth is actually I
promise to forget okay good
wonderful the earth is a an attempt to
solve the riddle of life the universe
and everything right so there was a
computer that tried to do it and it came
up with okay 42 and that didn't satisfy
people so they the earth is designed to
explore the question and the earth is
about to be destroyed to put a
hyperspace bypass through the sector
eminent domain right exactly galactic
eminent domain yeah so anyway the earth
is about to be destroyed but of course
the earth is this project to discover
the meaning of life the universe and
everything and that meaning arises in
the mind of a young woman who suddenly
realizes what the meaning of life the
universe and everything is right and she
picks up the phone to deliver the
message right as the earth is destroyed
so the idea is that
how it's maybe even cosmically destined
that upon discovery mm-hmm
information won't even get out or maybe
that's dumb luck but but anyway my point
is there is something resonant in that
story for me because I feel like you
know maybe I'm wrong maybe we're much
better off than I think we are but you
know I'm not just guessing that we're in
trouble
mm-hmm I spent a lot of time studying to
figure out how complex systems work and
this complex system is in grave danger
for very simple reasons because of the
amount of power we have at our disposal
relative to the amount of wisdom we have
to control it right yeah I agree
so the point is if you are somewhere on
earth and you've spotted that problem
mm-hmm then it's like you're on the
Titanic hurtling into the North Atlantic
and it's not going to last and the point
as well is there anything to be done
about it or am I gonna end up picking up
the phone with the answer to life the
universe and everything and right well
right well so we mentioned the the
dynamic of self-fulfilling prophecy at
play in all of this if you're on the
right you know my feeling is that the
left is not as bad as you've been told
if you're on the left I would say the
right is not as bad as you've been told
but the more you think that that is the
case about the other side the more you
are going to treat them accordingly the
more they're going to react to you in a
way that's going to make them more
sympathetic with the worst the worst
angels let's say or with the demons of
not only their own nature but it's going
to make them more sympathetic with those
people in their groups who are already
particularly radicalized
and who are maybe as bad as you might
think and so you know the polarization
pushes people on the right closer to the
alt-right people on the left closer to
mt anti-fog so forth all these
gradations and then of course on the
other in the other context you know the
world is not as bad off as we think but
if we assume that it is you know that it
is this is just the most in just time to
be alive in America or the United States
there we're going to act with the sort
of desperation you know
yeah that is going to cause us to virtue
signal to put solutions on the table
that are meant to polarize and not to
solve things that it's going to push us
towards all the negative inevitabilities
that we imagine but become more and more
real on the basis of our fears but this
is why I started off actually by talking
about the importance of a unifying
narrative being something that is
ultimately declared in sort of a
first-person kind of way because I do
believe that there is a positive
reinforcing cycle to be triggered in
much the same way and you know I I
understand if this comes across in a way
of if this comes across as me saying
something along the lines of you know I
was from a faith-based perspective if
you believe something you know it'll
become it'll become real you know we
just need to manifest and attract a
better America and so forth but there's
but there's a more grounded way to put
this I think which is to say that in my
conversation here with you Brit and I
think it is substantively important for
me to put this in personal terms
actually but you know I'm a if we're
just speaking on the levels of level of
labels you know I'm a black Christian
Republican you know and you are a
progressive I don't know if you refer to
yourself as atheist or agnostic I don't
say a theist I don't say agnostic yeah I
don't give you a label that does not
hear if it doesn't fit but certainly
skeptic it would that be would that be a
real I don't believe there's anything
supernatural going on in the universe
most people would call me an atheist
understood understood
so a person who other people might refer
to as an atheist you are politically
politically progressive I think you're a
white guy as well okay some days I am
and I'm not it depends how people feel
about Jews I guess right exactly
I for me though you are a person who and
believe the point of this is not
flattery as a matter of fact just for
people listening I am lying in this
moment just to make a point but you are
what is best in America right hell yeah
I knew it somewhere deep down I knew it
that's why I said I was lying to be jump
off the mica never know how I really
feel but I mean you're you're an
individual who genuinely does believe I
think
in in Liberty and you have your
conception of what that looks like in
practice but you believe in the ideal
you believe in the idea of equality and
justice before the law but on a kinetic
sort of level there's nothing in our
labels or our appearances that keep us
from looking at each other and just sort
of intuiting pretty quickly on the basis
of little bit of conversation that
there's a deeper bomb there that you
know even without even having any
sustained personal interaction we can
tell that there's a level of there's a
level of commonality that allows us to
be basically trusting of one another
enough to explore deeper levels of
friendship and collaboration and even if
we never got to that point
person-to-person it's because the groups
that we come from all these different
label differences right while there are
differences between all these categories
we exist within a larger sort of
cultural and historical context that
allows us even without thinking about it
I think as Americans to make something
of an assumption day by day
and and again this is less true for some
folks and more true for others but
certainly in my case and yours I think
that we're largely predisposed towards
thinking that you know I walk into a
supermarket with a bunch of people who
look like Bret Weinstein I don't
necessarily have the sense that anybody
in there
is someone who isn't basically
hospitable to my to my better interest
and me me towards them right because now
these labels signify to me signify any
level of difference that would overwhelm
the larger sort of category of
commonality that comes with us being you
know certainly fellow human beings but
more particularly Americans who have
some basic sort of consensus over the
importance of these unifying ideals
you know beneath what I would like for
the label American to actually mean
and so in in declaring that you know
part of the the the power of politics
and statesmanship well done is that it
introduces I think kind of an axiomatic
language of moral and cultural saw
garetty that needs to be filled in right
I mean you know the the lofty rhetoric
needs to be filled in with an
appreciation of historical context and
where idea our ideals come from
but even that is substantively suffused
by the experiences that we share in in
in debating over these things and
fighting for them and working together
to preserve these ideals that allow us
to cohere as a nation and as a people
and so forth and so I want to get people
back in the habit of not feeling such
knee-jerk skepticism or cynicism towards
the idea that we might share something
transcendent as Americans that you know
to do to greater degrees or lesser
degrees of efficacy at any particular
period of time as nevertheless always to
some degree served as the basis upon
which diverse people in this country
have managed to call here over times of
tremendously
you know dynamic complexity and
difficulty in order to be at the point
to where Steven Pinker's basic premise
is still right at this very moment we're
stand we're standing on the edge of a
cliff right but even so not having
completely gone off it yet just
teetering looking over we're still at a
lofty height in terms of everything that
we have to be thankful for both
materially and socially and culturally
as a country so I want to stop you right
there
there's something additional which is
that the the force I mentioned the force
that doesn't want us to unite that wants
us to be divided that force introduces
something into the conversation on both
sides which I consider particularly
diabolical and I know you will have seen
it too which is the implication that to
engage people on the other side is to
invite some kind of danger or to
contaminate yourself yeah morally and so
what that does is it causes people not
to be able to hear you not to be able to
detect your humanity because they fear
that if they were to give you a chance
that it would suddenly make
the enemy to the people on whom they are
depending mm-hmm and so in some sense
the the biggest hazard to the project
that you've been talking about the
creation of this heterodox central
conversation the biggest hazard is that
the normal mechanisms that allow us to
detect who we might have a productive
conversation with have been unhooked my
forces we can't see that would really
rather we not have that conversation
that's right
that's that well that's absolutely true
and it's why in a lot of our language
and better angels we talk about the fact
that we are that we are red and blue
together right look at our website
there's a phrase in there somewhere that
says that we are red and blue together
in a working alliance and but I'm from
from my vantage point it's why the it's
why the term American has to become
bigger and stronger and more powerful
more resonant than that in the phrases
you know Republican Democrat or
conservative and liberal again right the
it's okay for us to have these
categories but the only reason I even
mention your labels and my labels I mean
on a more fundamental level you know
we're Brent and John and that's what's
more that's what's more important the
labels are always faulty approximations
of what we really are in our in our
essence but the reason it was important
for me to mention those labels is to
demonstrate the fact just by virtue of
our being here having this type of a
conversation that there is a greater
sort of shared identity or soil of
values between us that transcends those
things and so in the work of better
angels we've highlighted we literally
have a phrase for it red and blue pairs
if you look at our social media
sometimes we'll we'll post testimonials
from people who have pairs of
individuals who have developed
friendships across this right-left
divide but the reason we do that sort of
thing is to challenge precisely the kind
of you know toxic norm that you're
pointing to which says that you are
sacrificing something in yourself or
betraying your team by daring to have a
friendship with or to otherwise see the
humanity in somebody from the other side
we're trying to make the case that not
only are you not selling out anyone on
your side but you're developing a more
accurate sense of just who your side
really is that is to say that your side
is a not to be if you're really going to
live up to the best of left or right the
American side and that American actually
means something this isn't just a
generic descriptor but you know but but
but I do think that the nature of the
project done to to create and motivate
and scale this this broader movement has
to be again in revisiting this question
of what makes us what makes us an
American people what is this nation
really in its essence and to introduce
into the conversational landscape and
the broader political conversation a
narrative that drills into this point
and is able to dislodge the the
essential sort of duopoly that you have
between these two polarizing status quos
and so in that in this vein actually
were we're currently launching well we
will be launching the spring of 2020 our
better angels 2020 campaign like we're
literally going to take to the road and
hit the stop and so from one part of the
country to the next I'll actually be
giving be giving speeches where I
attempt to the utmost of my power to
articulate a vision and sort of speak a
narrative that highlights what is truly
best and most powerful and transcendent
and the values that exist on the left
and on the right speak to some of the
cultural and social experiences that
exist on each side of this divide and to
weave these elements together into a
common story that seeks to dimension the
problem of and begin to provide the
basis for an answer to the question what
does it mean to be an American and who
we are and who are we as a country but
in doing that what we will also be doing
at these at these events across the
country is holding community debates
that precede these speeches were and we
invite people from across the aisle
the local community so I mean you know
we're gonna be and we're likely to be in
Los Angeles in Nashville and Minnesota
and and North Carolina and in different
places and in each stop we're going to
bring people together to have a better
angels debate on this question what does
it mean to be an American or something
to that effect and the the thing about
the the nature of our debate programs
that first of all it's a parliamentary
style debate it's not just people sort
of screaming at each other on a panel or
what not be a madam chairperson you
address your questions to the chair and
so forth and but our debates are
designed not to focus on winning and
losing or scoring polemic appoints it is
an invitation to the American people
ultimately the people who participate to
speak in candid terms about why they
what why they about why they believe
what they believe about a given issue
and the in this case what does it mean
to be an American but to also be honest
and upfront and comfortable reflecting
upon their doubts and their
uncertainties with respect to their view
or their opinion on this question and so
it's a debate structure that invites
reflection and focuses on intellectual
humility in a collaborative search for
truth that extends across the aisle
right and so our hope is to kick off
this larger conversation to bring the
American people into it in a direct way
and hopefully and this is our ambition
to ultimately bring the sort of
attention to this conversation necessary
to scale up this fundamental
conversation about who we are as a
people across the country in a way that
can impact what is otherwise going to be
just a terribly vicious presidential
election that something that has the
potential I think to rip apart what
solidarity we have left in the center of
our our cultural core as Americans so
the this is going to be an effort at
creating a centripetal force in our
social consciousness and it's it's all
hands on deck right but I think that the
moment that we
going into because it will take us
closer to the common sort of
appreciation of the real enemy that is
threatening all of us in this country
which is to say really just sort of the
worst angels of our nature ourselves or
our eagerness to tear things apart that
are valuable meaningful in this country
just for the sake of getting back at the
other side at the end of the day I think
that the moment that we will be in will
be perhaps paradoxically as things do
get seem to get bad right in certain
areas the most opportune moment for
something good to take place and the
take shape in the heart of that you know
and so I think that in what it is you
and I are discussing here this question
of how we consolidate this new space and
grow it I think that timing is also you
know a factor here because none of these
are static questions all these questions
are moving they're all in flow and flux
and I think that the intellectual dark
web space has done something tremendous
and providing a broad landscape upon
which we can sort of loosen the garments
of our partisan and tribal affiliations
in a common pursuit pursuit of truth in
a react we essence to the necessity of
reason and objectivity to allow us to
explore both deeper similarities and a
deeper understanding of complex material
and social phenomenon and I think that
what is left to be added to that
potentially is a unearthing of our
shared sort of cultural and moral sort
of sort of foundation as a people in a
way that takes a heterodox conversation
and routes this energy into the forming
of a consolidated sense of transcendent
identity and I think that if we can
accomplish that then regardless of who
wins in 2020 there will be a stabilizing
and grounded social and political force
in the United States that can begin to
establish some leverage over the over
the competing but also
firstly collaborative polarizing media
party and corporate corporate structures
in America that are so invested in in
sowing the seeds of division to maintain
their own power
I think the counterbalance could be
established over the oddly enough over
the course of the most divisive campaign
in American history that's what I'm
hoping for
I love this idea and I agree with you
that the what you have at the moment is
an unpredictable landscape and that is
the moment in which something new and
quite positive could emerge and if
nothing new and positive emerges I
expect it will go the other direction so
at a personal level as an atheist
adjacent person let me say Godspeed and
if I can talk to my audience I think if
you can hear what John is saying and it
speaks to you which I imagine it will
you should make a point of going to see
one of these events if it is in your
neck of the woods
because the sense of camaraderie that
arises out of a meeting of the minds
between people who don't come from the
same the same team is it is incredibly
rewarding and it is also incredibly
reassuring to discover that the
narratives we've been handed about other
people and their their failure to to
rise to the standards of humanity or
whatever it is that we're told about the
other that to the extent that these
events are designed to short-circuit
that process and to jumpstart a better
one I promise you you will leave smiling
yeah they can also be joyful I mean
there is a ridiculous amount of joy
actually in in this work there there
really is and you know so my fundamental
confidence in the in in the fact that
are in the idea that we can accomplish
this right stems from the fact that I
really do believe that there's just sort
of there's just
sort of I think an evolutionary momentum
that ultimately sort of attends to the
more subtle but also more durable bonds
of social consolidation that happens
through our positive connections I mean
you know hatred and fear and chaos are
very obvious phenomenons and social life
that quickly catalyze social momentum
but again it's fractured and it leads to
dissolution and deterioration but the
other but the the the antithesis of that
is sort of the the substance of good
will the webs of good will that allow us
to actually order ourselves socially in
a way that does not necessarily relate
chiefly on force in fact does not rely
chiefly on force but arises from an
internal motivation for us to treat each
other in a certain way because at the
end of the day we are also wired for the
good-faith game as you said and there is
something there's something simply
satisfying about rediscovering these
bonds and the idea that you know the the
idea that the the the spirit of family
let us say can be extended far beyond
the circle that you immediately inhabit
just so long as we're able to find
establish the the subtle connections
that already exist between us would go
unacknowledged that the discovery of
which can reanimate in our in our
broader sort of social social sphere Oh
totally agree and I must say I don't
know it's not exactly my job but it is
the world that I've been catapulted into
the last couple of years is one where I
am constantly in conversation with
people I'm not supposed to be able to
have a conversation with and what you
are saying about the the emotional
satisfaction that comes from discovering
that there is a rich world of people who
are ready to have these conversations I
can't emphasize enough how much better
no matter what our circumstance is no
matter how much peril there is it is
vastly more pleasurable more satisfying
and much less perilous feeling just to
know that there are great many people
with whom we are in it together right
that's right the America of today is a
product in many respects of the Cold War
and the civil and the nonviolent
movement right that is to say that the
America of today carries with it many of
the fears and anxieties that
characterize that long period of
American history and have flowed into
even many of our current ideological
divisions as Americans there's still a
Red Scare within America we still looked
at Russia with fear and trepidation and
they're still just sort of this this
broader kind of sort of McCarthy and
tendency for us to want to root out the
aliens from among us you know the the
under miners those people who are
subverting the which should be the true
and proper American order but we are
also the descendants of a more recent
tradition that calls upon us to see the
best in one another to go into
conversations with each other with the
conviction that there is some shared
heritage as Americans and some shared
dignity and values human beings upon
which we can build what dr. King
referred to as the Beloved Community and
similarly I think that the America of
our of our of our children's generation
you and I both have young children
you're about 50 years older than I am so
your kids are a little older than mine
I'm 50 years older than you that's very
a thing like no problems five or ten but
um the America of our children's
generation similarly is going to be a
product yes of the chaos and
polarization of you know the the Obama
years and the Trump years and so forth
but it's also going to be a product of
the types of conversations and
connections and and intellectual and
social and moral shifts that you and I
and so many others across this heterodox
spectrum
working on now and so it gives us reason
to kind of look to the future
with a realistic assessment of the fact
that appreciation of the fact that on
the one hand certain things perhaps have
already been done in our society that
will have to play out right I mean and
you know how what the fallout is from
from certain patterns we hope will be
substantially mitigated by the positive
things that we hope to engender but one
way or another they're just as there's a
momentum to the negative and the chaotic
things that are happening in America
right now so to our is there a momentum
to the constructive movements that are
swelling up beneath us even as we speak
and you know that momentum is going to
come to a head to something constructive
will come about and I'm confident that
it will endure to something that becomes
a legacy that we're able to leave to the
next generation of woods and wine
Stein's you know that comes along so
well can I go back you raised the
specter of communism yeah and I feel is
well worth saying that I am NOT nor have
I ever been a member of the Communist
Party no okay I was a little nervous
there so actually there's there's some
family history there where we faced that
particular McCarthy estat
but I do want to point out that you know
this conversation is now back about
things like communism of all that of all
referent ways of being and I want to
just put what I believe to be the right
answer here on the table because it's
better than fighting the caricatures
sure I think people's fear of communism
is on the one hand cartoonish and on the
other hand accurate enough I understand
what the fear is there's a way in which
communism simply doesn't function based
on game theory and that those who wish
to engage in that particular utopian
experiment are inviting a failure mode
or one of several on the other hand I
think this can be said
of essentially all of the named
ideologies that we find on the map and
what we are in fact discovering is that
none of these pure ideologies actually
work and that we are in need of a
nuanced re-evaluation where we look at
the agreed advantages that come from
certain perspectives a justice oriented
perspective is where communism begins
and then it ends in catastrophe if you
play it out but what we need to do is
figure out which portion of the truth is
held by which of these ideological
factions and then figure out again it's
a question of admixture how do you take
the values from this system and
disassociate them as much as possible
with the costs on that system and blend
these things so that we get a system in
which we get you're not going to get a
hundred percent of the benefits imagined
in any of them but you can get a large
fraction if you join them correctly and
so in essence that recognition that yes
the Communists are wrong right so are
the libertarians right the fact that
these entities are wrong is an
invitation for all of us to have a
discussion about well which portion is
correct and which portion turned out not
to be true and what do we do about that
knowledge once we figure out what it is
to me that is a very exciting moment to
live in if we can have that conversation
which is the one I hear you trying to
catalyze if we can have that
conversation then the future might be
very bright and we can figure out how to
manage this collectively in our in our
in the interest of a a productive and
humane a just future that we can access
together mm-hmm
you know with a the proper combination
of empathy and analytics and all of
these things so well here's the and
here's the the power and not just the
observation that you're making but the
implications of the apps
vation that you're making the idea that
there is that there is truth to be
discovered in all of these different
ideological persuasions that each of
them when taken to their extremes are
going to become corrupt but that the
process of sifting through these
perspectives allows us to arrive at the
optimal way of conducting ourselves
politically and in government's etc but
the truth of that points us towards a a
starting point that it's probably as
close to a 100 percent kind of sort of
like you know positive philosophical
worldview that you and I might agree
about as we're likely to find here which
is the idea that these structures that
allow us to compare these different
points of view in a way that channels
our emotional and intellectual
commitments to various positions against
one another and a constructive tension
that can yield that sort of output that
that that that that the the need for
those structures points to the validity
of the of the project of reasoned
discourse fundamentally and also within
that the sort of secular sanctity if you
will of the idea of a participatory
democracy a participatory republic in
the essential kind of aims that are in
evidence in the construction of our
constitutional system of the values that
went into our into our nation's founding
in the first place because I think that
within this question of what does it
mean to be an American has to be a an
element that points to our common what
has tended to be in American history and
then in some respects is threatened
today of course but that nevertheless
has generally been on left and right a
common appreciation of the fact that
self-governance as part of the heritage
of our people but our ability to do that
rests on our fidelity to the idea that
reasoned deliberation is the means by
which we are able to take subjective
experience
channel it into something approximating
policies arrived at for the common good
and there is a constitutional structure
which you know can be amended and we can
say that maybe it should be amended more
easily than it has been maybe not this
conversation to be had over that but
nevertheless on a structural level it
returns us to the idea that there are be
some fidelity expressed in our in our
society for the importance of the rule
of law for the importance of
constitutional integrity but then on a
more spiritual and idealistic level in a
social level there need be a similar
respect paid towards the idea that part
of the very substance of liberty and
equality itself is the freedom for us to
be able to interact with one another in
the area of reasoned discourse and
deliberation in in politics per se and
every other aspect of our lives which
lends meaning to the idea of equality on
a social level in the first place right
in other words reason is the in in the
pursuit of really the pursuit of the
pursuit of truth is part of the fuel
that animates the fuel that drives our
constitutional system and our democratic
culture and so when we ask this question
what does it mean to be an American I
believe that part of the answer to that
is a belief in the power of logic and
reason and conversation to allow us to
work together in a constructive and a
collaborative way so there is a
practical argument to be made for what
it is you're talking about the synthetic
approach to finding a more viable
philosophical way forward out of the
admixture of our various philosophical
and ideological starting points but that
process itself is something that I think
descends to us in part from an American
heritage that at its core is committed
to the ideals that that yield that and
so that's part of the story that needs
to be told is that we are a perhaps were
not always a reasonable people as
Americans
but it is in us to seek to be that it is
part of our heritage to believe in the
power of that you know this nation
nation was formed through deliberative
processes most those countries are not
in not in quite the way that that ours
were you know founded this nation by
committee yeah well as as well as you
know bullets and brawn and so forth you
know and that's actually a wonderfully
inspiring thing to imagine that men can
bring their ideals to a process to a
project of forming a community that's
structured in such a way so as to
preserve liberty and equality while
still allowing for subjectivity and
individuality and different perspectives
to compete with each other so you know
make America intellectual again that's
part of what we need to do so would you
would you join me in the sentiment that
extremism in pursuit of reasonableness
is no vice you would okay all right we
can move ahead on that basis then and
maybe force people to be reasonable we
also have the Weinstein for Senate
campaign slogan we do now yes yes you
just said it oh that was it okay yes all
right sure I didn't know that I was
running yeah you know well you know No
okay well you've been nominated it was a
bit better I hear it here than on the
street all right cool so um you have a
speaking tour lined up are there other
big plans on the horizon well I mean
they're always there always are
somethings are classified mr. Weinstein
you'll know about them know how to
need-to-know basis and I don't yet need
to know in due time yeah well I think
that what's interesting to me is just
the evolution of this space broadly
speaking I mean again there's sort of a
disparate constellation of organizations
and groups that are seeking to not only
expand heterodox conversations in this
country but to create the structures and
the processes by which we might
establish intergroup and interpersonal
empathy and social unity to scale these
these norms of civic decency if you will
up in a way that can create organized
structures by which we can challenge
your polarizing status quo and so you
know better angels as a bipartisan
organization working in this way most of
the depolarization groups with which I'm
familiar with tend to lean lean left but
I've been working with a group called
the American project out of the
Pepperdine School of Public Policy which
is a grouping of conservative
intellectuals and academics and
activists and some others who are
committed to the task of reforming the
conservative movements in a direction
that is in many respects more
communitarian and more broadly embracing
of the shared civic heritage that
extends across the across the the
political spectrum to embrace the left
as well as the right wing political
heritage in this country that makes us
all a part of a civic unit and I am in
my work I go from you know and then you
know the isolated efforts of people like
Cornel West and Robert P George to tour
the country and to demonstrate in the
context of their own friendship and
their own election dimension I'm inside
of what you said that's right people
forming partnerships well that's right
that's right so there's no lack of
creativity in this broader space what
has been lacking is the consolidation
what has been lacking is the sort of
centripetal force within the centripetal
within the center sort of area that
would allow it to coalesce into
something dynamic that again could
attain the sort of momentum that could
viscerally challenge the status quo that
exists now and so my you know my my work
is tended in the direction of trying to
tie those pieces tried to tie those
pieces together but ultimately I don't
expect to be I don't expect that that's
something that I am just able to do as
as an individual or you and I is as two
people I think that our greatest ally in
this in this course it's just the
momentum that is already in place
against the backdrop of the negative
momentum
we can count on to you know to awaken
people to the urgency of this of this
project and you know on the one on the
one hand it can be a bit dispiriting to
look into the future given the looming
shadows that we see I mean the house is
now moving towards launching a formal
impeachment proceeding of the President
of the United States and you know many
folks may think that that's a good thing
and I wouldn't I wouldn't I wouldn't
attempt to persuade anybody otherwise
but it does it is a foreboding sort of
Colvin
in terms of where this country is going
absolutely on a deeper level I mean I do
think what the President did is very
troubling that on the other hand mm-hmm
basically he famously speaks
off-the-cuff and says really apologize
and to take this one too impeachment
frankly I'm not sure what the right
thing to do is because it is obviously
very troubling to have a president imply
things in the context of an election
like this but Wow the drums of
impeachment have been drummed loud from
the vasila of his taking office and it
does seem like people are jumping at
something that might constitute grounds
where effectively it's not hard to see
mmm how this could end I mean but by the
thing you know terrible right but by the
way I'm conscious of the fact as we as
we touch on Trump here again that just
from a pure consumer perspective
probably a lot of people who who would
want to hear the part of this
conversation where it's like Brett
Weinstein and John Wood jr. on Donald
Trump and we spend the next like 10 or
20 minutes just talking about talking
about Trump right and that's Trump is
good for clicks and it's good for clicks
ratings and so family will add an amount
for that reason exactly we don't want
too many people know we don't want the
clip watching this video right we're
anti click exactly exactly that's how
against the grain we are oh so again
we're not even gonna put it on the on
the net exactly this wanna see it this
has it come this the tape there's an
inception thing going on here like you
know intellectual dark web
darkhorse podcast how much darker can we
get before people can't even see the
amazing things that that's what we film
French Roast
that's when we have reached true
philosophical commitment yes exactly so
I'm not gone completely dark exactly yes
that's what we're looking for but um
it's it is it is you know I think why I
even brought this up I mean I know why
it is it is interesting to note what
motivates people as consumers at a
certain point like the I look forward to
the moment where people realize the fact
that we do have the ability to sort of
shift this conversation in a way that
from a demand side of things is able to
sort of change the market viability of
certain messages and certain ideas and
certain certain messengers and so forth
right now Trump is a messenger for a
sort of you know sort of chaos and our
culture and our government and so forth
that derives support on some level from
even from his worst enemies because
everybody's so obsessed with them yeah
you know and one thing I would just
encourage people about his just not be
so obsessed with Donald Trump and look
it's not that he's not an important you
know figure in all of this he is and but
Trump would not exist if we were not for
pre-existing patterns is a symptom he
really is a symptom and and and some
people want to push back against that
but anybody who sees him as the root
cause of these larger problems is on the
one hand therefore I think going to act
in a way to where they're going to seek
a short-term solution to the problem of
Donald Trump which is likely not even to
be effective and that might be oh what's
happened I hear with this emerge this on
these these people are so focused on
Trump that they have the sense that if
we can just deal with that problem that
we will be somewhere and the fact is we
would be nowhere but even if but even if
they succeeded in that in that effort it
would likely result in a you know it
would likely be attended by more or less
the deafness to the to the broader and
deeper
concerns which brought him about in the
first place which will therefore lead to
a continuation of those subtlety and
trend will still be here 20 years down
the road one way or another because
somebody you know craft you're smarter
than the president saw and so forth will
come back the other way and I would say
a similar thing to conservatives who
believe that because look actually it's
precisely parallel for many Republicans
and conservatives including a good many
who would never who would tell you
pretty readily that they don't want to
they don't want their kids to look to
Donald Trump as a role model but they
felt that there needed to be a a strong
man you know who stood up against the
extremism of the left against the you
know the social justice lunacy that you
see it evergreen and that they fill as
is permeating the the culture of
Hollywood and the Academy and our major
institutions that our federal government
even that there needed to be somebody
who stood in that gap regardless of the
sort of social chaos and political a
governing chaos that he that he left in
his wake and for conservatives who think
that way I have the exact sort of same
advice you know don't don't seek a
short-term destructive solution to what
is a a longer-term sort of cultural and
systemic problem ultimately we need to
create the foundation for the solutions
to these deeper things and a consensus
arrived at within the American people
themselves there's a political
conversation about who we elect to be
had on top of that which I think allows
for quite a bit of room for disagreement
right you know but for there to be sort
of a revival in our democratic or
democratic culture a shift in terms of
how we see each other and how we work
together you know that is the foundation
upon which we will be able to absorb the
negative impact of any candidate who
might be elected to office who is more
or less off off kilter in terms of how
they choose to govern this nation
because the ultimate corrective force in
the country it has been and needs to be
the American people themselves you know
so putting our attention more on our
relationships with one another and less
on the shiny object that is you know the
shiny orange ah right he really doesn't
have a shiny head of hair to a unique
person he is a unique person light
bounces off of it like crazy but to take
our eyes off of the shiny object that is
Donald Trump or Alexandria Acacio Cortez
you know take your pick yeah that is a
necessary thing I think you know for us
to draw people's attention away from you
know the-the-the figures who arise as
kind of the caricatures of you know who
the enemy is on the other side or who
your champion is right and to return it
squarely to focus on the fact that
really this isn't a question of you and
Donald Trump this is a question of you
and your neighbor you know I see them
like that right this is the question of
you and your neighbor right and to see
the connection between one and the other
yeah I I love this framing I have
complex feelings about the president I
feel we are imperiled I don't really
feel like he's up to the challenge of
the office on the other hand all right
let me try reaching across the aisle on
this one Donald Trump accomplished
something that nobody else in recent
memory has done that he broke through
the duopoly and that required somebody
of a particularly unusual Constitution
and we are now left with such a person
in office which has been an interesting
experience to be sure but to the extent
that we were suffering from the duopoly
and something broke through it wasn't
Bernie Sanders Bernie Sanders was my guy
in this fight but he couldn't do it and
in the end he folded to Clinton which I
must say still leaves a bitter taste in
my mouth I think he should have stayed
true to the fight but Trump did manage
to break through the duopoly which tells
in fact that it is possible and that is
an important if he's done nothing else
he has done that service for us as he
has demonstrated that the story that
could not be disrupted by anything was
in fact open to be challenged by
somebody who was sufficiently
politically savvy which I think he is I
wanted to add one other thing goes back
to a point you made early in this
conversation about it was about the
content that is not analytical involved
in the discussions across certain
divides right and I've noticed the same
thing and in fact it's been a
conversation between Heather and me for
many many years in fact at least since
we Heather did her field work for a
dissertation in Madagascar and I've
traveled with her on several of her
excursions Heather for anybody listening
is the smart one yes but she is my
better half I don't know where we get
that fraction but anyway she she was
working in Madagascar and we had the
pleasure of traveling at a pleasure and
frustrations very frustrating country
that traveling but one thing that allows
you to see your own culture is travel to
a culture that is sufficiently different
from yours that everything has to be
engaged consciously and so one thing
that's true in Madagascar is that when
people meet they very typically say in
Volvo which means basically what's the
news and the response is Shmi fool
there's no news
um and it's just like hey what's up not
much right it's not a big deal it's in
fact not different from our culture but
because you're learning this language
that's so very foreign you hear people
saying what's the news there is no news
and it strikes you this is such an odd
tradition right but over time thinking
about it there is some value to
exchanging absolutely meaningless
systemic readings with each other and in
my opinion what the value of that is is
that it actually because there's no
content in it it allows you to evaluate
the state of the per
on the other side and so for example if
you were to meet a close friend somebody
you knew well and you said what's up and
they said not much very likely you could
detect if they were preoccupied with
something very serious if they were in a
frivolous mood you could detect that
because the content is always the same
which makes it impossible to hide the
emotional background and so anyway my
point here is that I suspect
evolutionarily people have traditions
that allow those with whom you have
established trust to read your mental
state so that they can be more empathic
so that they can you know if you hear a
friend say yeah not much is up but you
can detect that something is that bees
act come on but what's really up right
yeah so my point in the context of your
project is that it might be very
valuable to find some exercise that
actually doesn't have any political
content whatsoever but allows people to
sort of establish enough human basics
that you know I mean I I mentioned this
to Chloe Valerie I just saw well there's
something about the way people online
interact over pets mmm be it cats or
dogs there's so unifying thing on the
Internet completely our love of kittens
and puppies right I mean the fact is
somebody you know it it almost doesn't
matter what divides you when you watch
some dog do some particularly impressive
or noble thing you have a natural human
reaction that doesn't depend on what
culture you come from or what your
political biases are any of that stuff
so I wonder if there's not if there is
not some work to be done establishing a
set of traditions for the heterodox mmm
population that just simply I mean I
know I go to these parties and
gatherings where these people have
accumulated in some number and there is
sort of a tenor to the conversation
right
like we are not paying attention to oh
that's Robbie George he's a Republican
right nobody is thinking that they're
evaluating each other on individual
merits there are tensions there are
affinities all these things exist but
there is sort of a sense of like geez at
least that other thing isn't at this
party right at least nobody here is you
know wagging their finger at somebody
else because of who they voted for in
the last election yeah yeah well you
know we've had an annual convention for
better angels national convention two
years in a row now better angels by the
way uh sort of got its start in 2016
immediately following the presidential
election that's when we had our first
workshop but it didn't really mature as
an organization until it's all into the
spring or so of 2017 I believe and we
had our first annual convention 2018 and
then again st. Louis this year where we
had among others
Tea Party leader ray wor from Cincinnati
and Hawk Newsom of black lives matter
engaged in a conversation that went over
fabulously well with folks in the
audience but the well the delegates who
attended so we had 150 delegates or so
from each side of the aisle red and blue
come out to Barry come out to the
convention not just to listen to
conversations but to actively
participate in our workshop programs and
to deliberate on the content of better
angels 2019 platform which members of
your audience kin can read at our
website when we outlined the mission and
the goals of the organization in over
the course of over the course of 2019
and details some of the various
initiatives that we would be pursuing
that document was a product of a
deliberative interaction between folks
on both sides now you know you could say
that this is this is political but it
didn't really deal with political issues
exactly dealt with our attempt to shift
the culture the participation in the
programs gives people the opportunity to
dig into sort of personal subject matter
and so forth to establish these bonds of
connection but what
was most powerful really and
particularly as I listened to you speak
is for me to think about all of the
things that happened in the space
between those exercises and those events
because are coalescing around the work
of bringing Americans together resulted
in the small talk of bringing Americans
together right and so there is this
process of seeing a social language
begin to kind of develop between groups
of people who did not share one before
and in coming together across the the
Gulf in these perspectives are sort of
in the process of inventing it or maybe
in some cases rediscovering it and it's
hard to know whether it's more of one
than the other
but there is a process of generating
sort of the social language that ties us
together that is reflected in just sort
of the way we say hello or how's it
going you know or and that seems like
the least important part of what we're
doing might actually be the most
important part because as that starts to
congeal you see the the windows by which
we were able to develop an intuitive
appreciation for who we are and a level
of connection that allows us to sort of
begin to feel comfortable just kind of
taking it for granted that the person
with whom I'm speaking is somebody who I
share some level of humanity with and
some level of common interest that is
not just technical or material but
earnestly felt from one person to the
other
and so differences can arise on top of
that rapport but if you have that
rapport underlying it there becomes the
space for grace if you will to
accommodate you know the tensions of
disagreement that might arise and a
further conversation and so you know
restoring just sort of our our intuitive
social appreciation of one another is
every bit as much of a vital outcome of
the consolidation of this kind of
movement as is anything else because
again it's it's the little things that
sustain us and social interaction
and those are the easiest things to
forget and I think also I'm not 100%
sure I believe this but I think I do
once you have seen somebody else's
humanity once an individual you know a
person can fake it kind of a camera but
if you've spoken with somebody and you
felt their humanity it's very hard to
unlearn that lesson they might behave
badly they might disappoint you but you
don't forget that they're a person right
so in some sense establishing those
bonds may be very durable once they're
there and very very important well John
this has been a terrific conversation
from my perspective I thought it might
be yeah I'm glad you thought we might
pull it off I had no doubt now where can
people find you online well you can find
me in a few different places you can
find me on Twitter at John our Wood jr.
I think it's my handle find me John Wood
jr. or at John our Wood jr. if I'm a
better angels the website is better -
Angels dot-org just like it sounds and I
encourage any and all of your viewers to
come and board to join us as a member
because you will get updates on our
events on our programs you'll get some
of our media content including if you
don't mind me plugging my own podcast no
you should actually I'm you know I was
looking for it and I have to tell you I
had trouble finding it so it might be
that there's something could be okay how
do people find it who wanna write - it
well so it's so actually let me say this
up we have the better angels podcast
which is co-hosted by myself and my
better angels colleague here in O Connor
where we talk about the issue of
polarization itself interviews certain
high-level folks we've had Ezra Klein
and Arthur Brooks and various people on
the podcast you can find that at the
website you should be able to find it on
Apple and iTunes and wherever you get
your podcast but I'll make sure well
let's make sure the SEO stuff is working
I actually I'm launching a new podcast
I'm a bad self marker because I didn't
mention that before when you asked but I
am launching - John Wood jr. show where
I will be leaning in to basically the
this this project of articulating a
narrative of
we are as Americans that can evolve over
time right and so my my intention on the
John Wood jr. show is to speak to this
budding movement in the center of the
American consciousness if you will and
to tell a story about who we are that
leans a little bit into Who I am because
I do come from a biracial and a
multicultural and bipartisan sort of
family background and I've grown up
seeing people cross these divides
sometimes in ways that don't work but
frequently in ways that do and that
endure you know I'm sort of a product of
that my own kind of existence
and they'll be your focus on the John
Wood okay John McGraw of the John Wood
jr. show and as though it's not online
yet it's not up yet that's why I
couldn't find it oh you were looking for
the John I saw a link to it on angels
and then I went I tried to follow yeah
right okay we had a link to a little
promo for it it's not up yet right okay
indeed so you will see the John Wood jr.
show up in a couple of weeks if you want
to hear that come on board is a member
and and come on board with us for the
opportunity to meet people across the
divide and to develop a sense of shared
up and shared America with folks who you
wouldn't have an opportunity to explore
it with otherwise that's what we're
doing attempting to create the
structural hub of this movement that's
going to heal the USA and so be a part
of it everybody's watching wonderful
yeah alright John for my part I will say
keep your eye out on the dark horse
podcast we are going to be starting a
membership the podcast will remain free
but there will be some other things
available to people who want to sign up
and in any case I look forward to having
John back as soon as he's ready to visit
[Music]
[Music]