or the cloud okay so sounds good so as I
said you're the person that sparked this
project right the whole project of
reinventing dia logos and argumentation
and you know some of our core concepts
the cultivation of virtue and wisdom
because you proposed to me that what is
needed right now is a motorcycle
technology and so I'm asking you if this
project seems to be on track towards
addressing that yeah so the so the
context sisters worked back we had that
we had I think three things that felt
like they were all at the same level and
one one of them was a meta psycho
psychology and it's interesting right
now I actually have two we do the entire
conversation I cannot remember what the
three were but the absence the absence
of a meta psychology in practice was it
was a it was a hole right and so there
was a need to do that and and clearly
you were moving in that direction
so so so let's when putting the be in
context what what happens there okay so
here's the deal here's the context the
big picture or the context we're sitting
in we have a lot we have to do we have a
enormous amount of work more or less at
the level of culture that needs to be
done and by the way you can put like
scare quotes around that or boldness
because I'm speaking it in a way that we
don't really have words to describe the
magnitude and we don't have much time in
which to do it we're trying to in fact
it invent or design a culture a whole
culture right a whole thing that holds
the totality of humaneness in
relationship with nature and we're not
doing that over thousands of years or
hundreds of years we're doing it in a
couple of decades or maybe three
generations but with a lot of
we're happening early and that is
definitely not even ever being vaguely
done before so it's it's novel we're not
we're not even doing it for the second
and third time we're doing it for the
first time so one and done one shot this
is kind of thing vast in scope
short in time in the context by the way
where the reason why we're having to do
it is that the thing that has been
holding us together at a very high level
of entropy you know there's this thing
that has moved just up the ladder from
subsistence agriculture to billion
people that can kind of be held well by
if you drop far you don't drop that far
has taken is really high we've got eight
billion people now with very with vast
supply chains that have 15 different
levels of Technology between the mode of
production and the actual mode of
resource connection you know bandwidth
flying everywhere the you know a complex
civilization structure and that thing is
know is breaking evidently
self-evidently
and we can talk of course we can talk at
nauseam about why what that looks like
and how that's happening but the point
is that things breaking so we have to
invent or design or co-create or gen
create the seed crystal allows the
autopoietic development of this new
thing bra rapidly in the context of the
thing that we're currently sitting on
top of collapsing rapidly which that
creates all kinds of entropy and and
little earthquakes in the environment
they're operating under okay so that's
what's that's what's working against us
some of the things that are working
against us this is not happening all at
once you know you talked about the
demeaning crisis for example and
beautifully so and we are all exponents
of having been in the result and the
consequence of the meeting crisis for
generations yes so we are deeply
suffering from being having having you
know centuries of a building meaning
crisis and the and the socio technical
and psychological consequences there up
so the individual beings who are trying
to do
problem are very broken and the ideas
and concepts and words and operation
methodologies that we're working with
are very broken okay that's all what's
on the scale up against us what do we
have on the scale that's for us one of
the things we have on the scale is for
us is we actually have eight billion
minds it's a lot of minds more Minds
we've ever had and all those Minds can
in fact communicate with each other in
principle any given conversation more or
less like at least six billion could
happen instantaneously well that's super
super new like at the level of
possibility space if I just did a
network effect at the metcalfe law of
how much capacity lives inside that
possibility space it's actually
substantially larger than the scope of
the problem okay that's a very simple
geometric proof if I want to solve the
problem I have to have something with
the possibility for solution is larger
than the size the problem that's
straight cybernetics right it's some
sense of the size of the problem I can
say well categorically nothing that we
currently have can solve the problem is
there anything in principle that could
well okay at least in principle if I
could figure out how to get these minds
able to interact you know in some kind
of fashion where the possibility is not
fully collapsed meaning the coordination
structure of well I'll just use the
language collective intelligence is not
vastly lost and you can pair the
possibility of what could happen so
that's the question that we talked about
what is a meta cyclic Technology trying
to do a meta psycho technology is trying
to do that and it's trying to do it
recognize them that it's a bootstrapping
problem meaning computationally we boot
load a little bit but that bootloader
creates an ink up gradient in our
capacity for the next iteration to load
more upgrades our capacity the next
generation to load more and there's
hopefully a high enough positive
exponent in that expanding sphere that
the the capacity to the actualized
capacity reaches the point of being able
to respond to the problem domain in the
time that we have
so some of the some of the design
constraints we can't have
we can't require too much change in the
psycho-spiritual cognitive capacity of
humans we can we can't can expect and
and should require some degree of skin
in the game like I'm I will commit to
being transformed I will commit to being
transformed by this and by the way that
transformation will be a transformation
for the better for myself I will feel in
myself and up gradient and my own
personal well-being and also
synergistically my capacity to
participate in this larger story and so
I am boomed with a local and a global
increase by participation but we will
not have expectation so can I have
expectations that human capacity at the
individual level will go from call it 2
to 9 right maybe from 2 to 3 or 2 to 4
maybe 2 to 2.5 write something in that
zone meaning that this meta psycho
technology needs to be the kind of thing
that people can do people as they are
can begin to engage in it and and as
they engage in it they should become
more capacitance as individuals and by
the way then as groups check check check
I see a lot of that I mean I certainly
see that the things that you and Chris
and the conversations that you're having
and to the degree which I'm
participating in they're happening
there's a large chunk of the population
can perceive it and can begin to be
transformed by it and and then begin to
participate in it at least go ahead
I enjoy partaking because they have this
almost a cathedral structure to them
like the way I like you almost mapping
them out in space you know what I mean
really appreciate that so thank you for
that it's why it's often very helpful to
talk to you for precisely that reason
yes I wanted to say yeah I appreciate
observation on our guinea I mean it's
not scientific evidence it's anecdotal
evidence but that's all that we can get
right now that because what I'm doing is
I'm teaching online the meditation class
the contemplation casts so what I'm
doing is I'm giving people you know some
basic mindfulness instruction and these
principles about building an ecology of
practices right how do you get various
practices to complement each other for
strengths and weaknesses how can you
layer practices one practice on top of
another so how can I build Praja out of
meditation and contemplation and then
linking practices how can I take a
silent meditative practice and then link
it to discursive practice well there's a
linking practice called Alexio Divina
that moves people from and so what's
undoing that and people are taking it up
so they're there they're doing the the
mindful practices entering into lectio
divina and then follow up feeling it
almost called naturally in 2d above
those as a process so I'm starting to
I'm starting to get some of the
architectonic of it like these kinds of
connections like they say be the sort of
the looping connections where you find
you things are put together in
relationships of complementarity mutual
constraint of mutual can four affords
because they have you know they have
trade-off strengths and weaknesses and
then you are layering how you can you
know you build this practice and then
this this practice can be layered on it
and exact it and then you have linking
practices how can I link between
practices that are giving infant this is
giving emphasis to perspective on though
and this is giving emphasis and how do i
how do I do the linking in something and
then and then if you notice what it does
is it's a progression that's designed I
hope to be as efficient as possible in
the in their sense that people are
building an ecology of practice but it's
building into the meta cycle technology
which then could feed back on the entire
ecology so that those are some of the
design ideas that are emerging in the
trying to actually put this together oh
man yeah like all I can say to that is
that feels it feels really good like
it's the feeling of so I'll just I can
kind of narrative my internal experience
my internal experience was as you're
speaking going yeah yeah that's
definitely the way it ought to be and
also as my mind tries to reach up I kind
of get ahead of it
my mind is noticing that I couldn't do
that like I know that is way beyond
above my paygrade
so I can actually look at it and
acknowledge okay yes good those are the
old rightness that right right right
right right and hallelujah
there's somebody who understands how to
do that is in the process of doing it
yeah there's really like I haven't got a
good metaphor for it cuz I guess this
kind of thing doesn't happen very often
but it feels like a collaboration am I
feeling in the context of collaboration
is a lot of feels very good like good
things are happening so there's a lot of
people that are there's a network right
and then that network is networked with
a growing community right there's
there's a Sangha that's forming around
the course but there's a discord server
community that's also forming around all
those and so it's it's very much I've
been I've been encouraged on how how
it's almost autopoietic its its self
generating in the way it seems to be not
just not just the traditional permeation
of ideas but it's almost like the way
you know crystals are forming if it's a
precipitation right of networks that
that's occurring so you get sort of this
interesting dynamic between a
precipitation on a network and then
people participated so the Pacific like
this Pacific precipitation participation
cycle that's actually spinning
thank you I'm observing it happen wow
that's really really interesting yeah
well it's interesting that you use that
particular metaphor because that's the
metaphor that I've used often myself
that's what it should look like it
should look like particularly the the
formation of the men way that I've used
the metaphor is the formation of ice on
the surface of a pond where there are in
fact almost certainly some n of of
crystal matrices that are in fact
forming that we don't know about and and
each each crystal seed crystal is
generating a zone around it which
increases the possibility of water
spontaneously passing through the phase
transition into ice which increases the
the surface area of that or the volume
but really the surface area of that zone
but what happens it becomes extremely
powerful is when one of those crystal
matrices comes close to the zone of
possibility of another crystal matrix
and then in fact you get this big chunk
like a big up level and sometimes you
may say that's actually what's really
happening between us I think up until
what a year ago I didn't I had no exist
you notice and even existed in the world
and I presumed vice versa and so
something happened where you were doing
your thing I was doing my thing our
things are clearly participating in the
same fundamental thing in very different
ways and there was a way for us to
rapidly be aware of that fact leap
rapidly into collaboration with a high
degree of vulnerability in transparency
and then and then you know something
much bigger happened like a significant
increase in possibility and capacity
opened up and that's what I think the
biggest hope happens is that that set of
basic characteristics of being able to
discern when somebody is how to
recognize you call this I call this the
the invisible conspiracy meaning if
you're if we're both working for the
same we're both working on trying to
make bring the same thing into the world
the fact that we don't know each other
makes it even more powerful conspiracy
like I don't know I don't I didn't know
my whole life I was secretly
collaborating with you but does it
matter right I am and and you have been
as well as far as I can tell right we
were clearly oriented towards a fully
aligned sensibility of the kinds of
things of what rightness looks and feels
like and therefore the possibility than
to bring those pieces together is very
high so let me drop it another piece so
the short answer is yes it feels good
one of the things that I noticed is you
were talking is to say okay it is really
the case that only a certain subset of
the human population right now is going
to be able to participate in the the
psycho technologies and particularly to
collaborate in the meta psycho
technology space that's being developed
and how do I say this
the right word the right way to respond
to that reality is to take a look at it
as a problem to be solved right not the
kind of thing to fit to be it chagrined
about okay great there's some people who
can participate in this they should and
we need to find a way to empower them to
do so those who are not yet able to we
need to look at the zone of adjacent
possibility which say who could be
brought into that and ideally the most
easily you don't want we don't we can't
lift a heavy load like we have to every
step needs to be the most elegant step
that we can take and there's sort of
three basic constraints one constraint
is the constraint of the individual so
does the individual have a you know a
cognitive bias do they have a trauma do
they have bad habits and what is our
zone of it was just call it healing or
wholeness you know so there may be
certain individuals who are proximal to
being able to really get involved in
this but there's something in their
developmental arc and and that that
might be able to be solved there may be
a way of producing a resolution to that
and many of the practices you've talked
about are practices that are healing
practices in some fundamental sense
right so that creates a great on-ramp
for people of that sort and if and if
and if and if the magnitude is large
then we can deal with that just means
that they're further away in time as the
zone of capacity increases
more and more people will be able to be
brought into a capacity to participate
then you've got something in the context
well in context like what's their actual
context so you may have people who are
plausibly able to participate but we've
got to work real hard to be able to make
ends meet or their social context has a
lot of energy like challenge chatter to
it so they're being pulled back by the
context that they're in so this is when
one of the things that is part of this
thing that I just announced yesterday
was this idiom project yeah yeah I am
was quite unable to shoot that darn
thing and the intent there is to say
look one of the things we've got to do
is we've got to create physical spaces
of living this where we can have the
possibly to basically control the
context and we can move people from from
contexts that are make it impossible for
them to really participate in two
contexts where they can subject of
course to the fact that when they're in
that new context they can and
unfortunately there is a strong
correlation between individual trauma
and hard context and there's only so
much we can actually help and so there's
only so much scheme that can be held but
nonetheless there are and I've
personally experienced quite a large
number of people who if given the space
to be able to participate would make the
commitment to do so and then we will be
able to go through the meta psycho
technologies just like the socio
technology the meta socio technology is
one of these other nodes and Scythian is
this meta socio technology which can
begin to operate in lockstep right
remember it's these things are going to
proceed by integrated holes expanding we
can do a lot of work in partial like
laying scaffolding we can put
scaffolding out there but then what has
to happen there needs to be an
embodiment of a whole triadic wholeness
and then that that creates real
expansion of capacity so what was the
third one I wonder
the connection between sort of the
ecology of practices the medicine and
the meta second technology and the way
in which that needs to be grounded in
the city oh I think it might be good at
some point you know just give a quick
you know the basic argument of the city
and right here I think would be but
another thing is because we had a third
thing that we were talking about about
how to try and bring about you know
comprehensive multi scale transformation
that you know reaches into the kind of
transformation of education that Zak is
talking about and you know that's when
we are also on this other project of the
religion that's not a religion I think
as you said it as like a game maybe
that's what drops in and that's the
living miss right that's the living
nosov the the meta psycho technology
it's the whole set of would be called
prosthetics really conversation went
through like they could try and you know
in gender and cultivate the Ilocos your
response which was very spontaneous and
it mentioned a minute way it had served
as weird effect on me but you said you
said that's what that's what church
should be like what good church should
be like and I thought ah so yeah there's
a connection here to the religion that's
not a religion and the rice one reason
why that had a personal thing for me is
my own relationship to church is a
deeply ambivalent one because I was
brought up in a form of Christianity
that was quite traumatizing but I
understood the intent of what you were
trying to get out of it so that's why to
my mind to read the me see here is okay
how do we get something that can you
know transform the way we think of
Education and the way we think of
enculturation because we've talked about
needing to really so those back together
again yeah that back is making Zach
Stein is making axe
arguments and doing excellent work on
that project and we've talked about how
we we need the comprehensiveness of what
religion can do but we need to break out
of you know the cultural column
cognitive grammar than the axial
revolution I gave up because that's no
longer appropriate for this new
revolution and I've been sort of doing
this isn't so good to people because
I've been saying we need something much
more deep but we need something deeper I
don't want the French Revolution I want
something like the axial revolution yes
[Laughter]
and so that's a way of all trying to
draw it together and say and so I've
seen these three things talking to each
other or needing to talk to each other
more Presidium which perhaps you could
look as they just give a brief synopsis
this whole idea of the ecology of
practices and the - like the technology
and religion because they feel like
they're trying to draw into each other
and mutually afford each other yeah yeah
I think that's right
and I don't know you know this the way
my brain works is kind of odd but I was
just seeing like a nine dimensional
hyper object which needed the three
points and the way they relate to each
other as having the stability they were
looking for so let me just do a quickie
on on the notion of Cydia because the
context you provided makes it relatively
simple simple so human beings have a
whole set of needs it's kind of it
simple as that and we need to figure out
a way to meet those needs and we need to
meet those needs in a way that is
sustainable in the context of nature and
we can't you know eat all the food and
then have no food so we have type of a
way of regenerative production of
satisfying our needs and we have to have
a way of meeting those needs that is
sustainable in the context of human
relationships and so you know massive
wealth in instability and wealth
asymmetry is unstable so the the set of
the ways we go about satisfying our
needs as humans is the subject of
obsidium and to put it more practically
the subject of CBM is things like
we just live our embodied daily lives
you know how do we get food how do we
put a roof over our heads how do we have
our vocation of working and giving our
gifts back into the world how do we
raise our kids how do we have friends
like all the stuff of human and this
thing that happens from the gnomon
you're born to the moment you die that
you'd like to have it be as meaningful
and rich as possible in physical bodies
and it starts at a very theoretical
level which I can just reference to the
18 or 19 minute video as I said of one
of the theoretical pieces behind it to
say okay we need to be thoughtful about
this this is a this is a turns out a
core problem so the underlying design
with the domain is called ontological
design the Endermen underlying
ontological design toolkit that we've
been using is a much apart as much a
part of the problem as other deep
toolkits so we need to do we do that at
the bottom level that work has now been
thought through at some level and now
the process is okay how to begin to
instantiate that but when you
instantiate it when you look at a given
City M you'll be looking at you know the
ordinary stuff like okay how do we
produce and disseminate distribute food
how do we make sure everybody has Forks
and toilet paper and all the economy all
that cool stuff again just lives in the
notion of what I would just call
socio-technical and by the way in a way
that is able to be very very very human
at human scale like maximum peg
nurturing at the human scale yet also
simultaneously global alright so you can
actually have a global coherence so
individuals any given location in the
city and mesh have a capacity to be in
relationship with individuals than any
other given relationship called a right
relationship with any other point in the
mesh and also of course the entire
system is constructed so as to be in a
regenerative relationship with nature so
not only not only reducing or reduce the
extractive dynamic that we've been
dealing with but actually opposite right
human being playing the role of a
partner and steward with our lived
environment so as to of course create a
human world co-creative dynamic that is
in principle enduring like in principle
could endure for the long-term is that a
decent summary or the pieces of it do
you think that are still usefully
obscured we're talking about like just
like I thought about the actual
revolution is creating a cultural
cognitive grammar you've thought of the
city as basically a Neolithic invention
that we're still using and it's part of
its it's part of the core the kernel
grammar of civilization exactly right
until very recently this is you know I
get this wrong it's your job please but
the thing about the city is right when
you bring people together you get that
you get this sort of nonlinear increase
in creativity innovation you know right
which is why we like civilization the
the price we pay for that is because
we're body you get a lot of people
together and a lot of people together is
mental ill-health disease right
pollution problems you know a
degradation of the environment because
you're concentrating people into a small
area etcetera etcetera so right we're
caught right it get that way and then
what you're saying is we can actually we
don't have to have the city as the
kernel of civilization anymore we can
pull those apart as we if we could get
this technology and the corresponding
cognitive psycho technologies
coordinated we could ramp up the meeting
of minds so we get all of the creativity
and meaning in life that civilization
right in its complexity gives us but on
the ground if you'll allow me that
metaphor people are living in Dunbar you
know environments that are very close to
the environments in which we evolved and
we as a species that 99.9 percent of our
existence and therefore are deeply
conducive to our biological
psychological and so
to health and so people could be living
really well reaching back to the
primordial placement like the primordial
kind of environment we're supposed to be
living in but still have access to
everything that civilization has
provided for us I guess yeah that's fair
well I would say access to everything
civilization has provided for us in
space right because the hypothesis is
that once you make this move really we
really pop this the thing pops out to a
big a big pop is it to reinforce each
other because if we have people living
as they've evolved to live and I would
say if they have something like the
religion that's not a religion and all
that stuff there that gives them the the
capacity the cognitive flexibility the
biological you know resilience to enter
in spend more time in hyperspace without
being right without being and then of
course in that creativity right that
they get the competent kinds of ideas
from you know that like the trading
networks and the shamans did way back
when you bring in and you can impregnate
your own group with things from
elsewhere in the world yeah yeah and
yeah absolutely that's all of it and and
so what was I so was think it says what
I want to do is I want to I want to I
want to kind of put a South in terms of
any sort of demoralization that somebody
might have in listening to this I was
thinking over the past couple of years
maybe five years gosh
I've had an opportunity to interact with
a much larger group of people in the
context of ideas like this you know
right right I'll write something down
and people who respond I have to admit
most of that has been highly
demoralizing the lack of discipline
intellectual and emotional discipline
that most people seem to apply in the
way that they interact with things is
sad but other parts of a bit empowering
and saying okay well let's let's
identify what are the types of things
that end up being blockers so I'll give
an example if one endeavors to put their
own mind to solving the problem that you
just
laid out the problematic that you just
identified as being the design
constraints of what this thing needs to
look like and what's possible if you get
there you will likely run into the
reality that you don't know how to do it
and that might feel bad like like oh I
don't know how to do this I feel
overwhelmed in the physiological
response it's a task that is vastly
larger than not just your capacity but
even anything that you could vaguely
imagine being in your any capacity at
all well then one of the defense
mechanisms that is typical in that
environment is then shutting down to say
oh oh project the impossibility of it
and then actually just live with the
dopamine miss right you have a cortisol
response ah and kinda put your head down
and move on but what I would suggest is
to say more like a literally just the
relationships you and I had just had a
moment ago like if I if I listen to you
talking about the thing that you're
about and I try to like own it I try to
take responsibility for myself I'm gonna
get overwhelmed real quick because
you're really good at what you do you've
been doing it your whole life and I'm
nowhere near as good at that and I've
been doing it nowhere near as long so
therefore it's a lot bigger and if I
want to try to own it and master it I'm
gonna fail and I'm gonna feel really bad
about it
but there is a way for me to be able to
listen to it and notice in myself
something like a yep yeah there's
something about like that's being done
well like just that like you can tell
the difference between somebody who's
doing something well and sometimes not
doing something well and you could feel
yourself like it's hard to explain but
the deeper sensibilities that you use to
guide your best work if you tuned into
those and you perceive somebody else
who's doing work you can notice whether
or not they're doing something with
elegance and artistry and if they are
you can have a thank God somebody else
is carrying this piece and we can all
look at this and say the problem is vast
well beyond anything that we know how to
do and that's okay and we're not trying
to solve it all at once we're trying to
figure out how to kind of get some sense
of the shape of the problem and what
what right direction looks like and
feels like and then be able to make
enough steps in in the immediate term
that the steps that we're making are
guided by that directionality but it's
gonna be a long time it's gonna be
generations before we get this thing
fully dialed in we're all everybody
who's currently perceiving this in 2020
most of you will be dead before this
thing
actually is is is rendered fruition and
that's a good way of holding it like our
job is not to build the cathedral our
job is to put a couple of bricks on each
other and imagine what a cathedral might
look like can I do one more things I
just landed and it also goes to this
this problematic that identify with you
which is the meaning crisis which is
that thing that ability to live deeply
in the practice if I'm putting one brick
on top of another and imagine what the
cathedral will look like that I will
never see is the most meaningful thing
that it's the solution to
meaninglessness is the ability to be in
that context to know that you're part of
a project vastly larger than yourself in
both scale and time that it is a project
that is worth doing and that is a
project you are contributing to in a
fashion that is deeply aligned with your
highest capacity and purpose
I'd never do something and it's meant to
to increase what's happening between us
it's not meant to be detrimental so I
was talking with Chris and I was trying
to think I would locate what our
particular issues we might get from we
talked with you and I've talked about
the problem of sort of the you know the
charismatic leader or sort of
misappropriate this and then another one
that came up with discussion with Chris
is you know one of the things that seems
to require at least for most of us it
does for me physical proximity of
sexuality hmm the city gives me this is
not a quarry but it gives me access to
right I would not have met somebody as
wonderful as the woman I'm with if I did
not have such a large population that is
so diversified so stratified division of
labor I would not have met her right and
now if I need somebody like that because
of my access to the you know the
Internet the hydrosphere the problem is
I'm going to fall in love with somebody
who might be living in China uh-huh and
that's gonna be that's gonna be
problematic it's gonna cause frustration
oh man let's do this the students this
is great and this is perfect like when I
said living this great mate selection is
pretty close to the whole point right
that's the very bottom all right but
this is a suitors contextualize because
here we sit at the the unfortunate
discovery that the sexual revolution was
not all free love and happiness in the
context of online dating is not
necessarily awesome I did swiping left I
don't have ever used tinder so I don't
know exactly what that mean it's the
swiping left on tinder does not lead to
an ending joy okay so design constraint
membership in Sevilla must
lead to a felt up gradient in the
quality of your how would I call this
not sexual but mating or pair bonding
that's better
your pair bonding relationality and must
provide an ongoing up gradient in that
particular domain that is stronger than
any other possible choice yes okay so
that's by the way this is sort of how I
do this thing I think about can I design
this kind of design the thing at an
abstraction level that is actually
necessary insufficient and then can we
begin to work backwards to say okay how
do we accomplish that and and if we
can't accomplish it perfectly we know
what the mountain looks like at the end
and we can start think about how do we
actually start taking steps towards it
so one of the things that I noticed in
the contemporary context it's funny and
I'm 50 so I I i and I and I've had like
two real significant pair bonding
relationships that have lasted long
periods of time so I don't have any real
connection with the Millennial or
certainly the Jen's II experience of
dating but at this entire thing called I
guess the pickup artist like the
invention of that and the fact that
invented it developed it became a whole
thing and that is already in a different
stage of development I think it's quite
telling which is to say that an aspect
of the meaning crisis is that we suck at
pair-bond and we've kind of optimized
for hookups like I guess it's called
even called hookup culture so in a large
urban area you have a very high target
rich environment for hookups but it
seems that we do a very poor job of
having meaningful relationships and we
need to be doing a particularly poor job
in having the kind of meaningful
relationships that can actually lead to
pair bonding like parenting families and
let's be very clear while it is it's
perfectly good and valid for people to
have pair bonding relationships that
don't lead to children a sizeable
fraction must otherwise the culture
terminates and by the way we could just
you know there's pair bonding over here
and there's also family and child
rearing over here and everything that I
just said about pair bonding is also
true of child rearing even more so right
this must be
Cydia must be a context that is so much
better than anything else that's out
there in terms of raising children both
from the point of parenting and from the
point of view being the actual child
like that's like the center of
everything that's that's like the ground
zero is that okay
so what does that sort of thing look
like so as we've discovered we have on
the one hand in the virtual environment
I will be an impossibility to begin
relationship with everybody on the
planet this has advantages that my
target rich environment for interactions
and relation ality has gone way up it
has the disadvantage that I may fall in
love with somebody who's on the opposite
side of the world that's gonna make for
a lot of poetry that's gonna make for a
lot of Abelard and Eloise style romantic
stuff and it'll be powerful rich and
heart-rending for sure and I would say
by the way it seems quite likely that
frequent transnational travel will
actually go down
that's my guest most of human history we
have been brought up in an aberrant
point in history that is probably coming
to an end
yeah and one of the advantages of CBM is
it provides sort of a natural structural
design defense against pandemic yeah but
because of that because of the always
background threat of pandemic yeah
transnational travel is gonna go
probably going to go down yes so there's
gonna be something like a gaseous to
such an interesting thing look at me if
you look at the literature on on
pair-bonding that the reality is is that
long term successful relationships tend
to be within a very specific zone of
cultural lineage heterogeneity not too
close and not too far and that makes
sense right because you and I both been
through relationships that have failed
and relationships that have been built
on the basis of trying not to fail and
it's hard right this whole thing of
being in relationship with another human
being
in all of their reality and their their
their singularity you know every
individual human being is infinitely
different and all you know particularly
the kind of Simon the whole--the of
complexity this is loading rapidly you
know in the past up until the middle of
the 20th century for the most part we
had the advantage and a disadvantage of
running traditional cultural code so for
example my wife is Croatian and I have
had and the Croatian culture even like
the expectation culture is still running
traditional cultural code for the most
part it's beginning to break apart as it
always will and it moves into a
cosmopolitan space like the United
States but you can you can receive it
you can see how there was like a
religion that had a whole bunch of like
it you went through all the Catholic
moments and if you sort of took the sum
total of the community you took all the
Catholic moments and that was more or
less your whole social time so if you
weren't going to a wedding you're going
to a confirmation so I don't know my
Catholic Zachary pardon catechism right
and that combined with a couple of sort
of more secular events like a big pig
roast or a soccer game like that was the
social life and that was a faint fabric
and a framework that did things like
introduce you to also possible other
mating partners and make it very simple
to know a how to go from possible mating
partners into being married then
actually held you in a context that made
it you know adequate context to keep the
marriage together long enough and stable
enough to produce children so the
culture could reproduce right so every
traditional culture is that I would say
minimum viable boundary condition to
satisfy that set of characteristics so
we're an interesting situation where on
the one hand the explosion of post-war
neoliberalism and post-modernism and
capitalism has has has and this critique
is correct has shattered many of those
around the world and a big piece of the
meaning crisis is precisely that people
thrown into out of a cultural context
that made their life held into having to
figure it out for themselves which
can't do human beings are no ways
capable of figuring out for ourselves
and so we do an increasingly shitty job
of it we have the advantage that we are
no longer constrained by the traditional
culture that we used to be in which has
all kinds of salience in particular like
I can definitely have a lot of salience
landscaping and get get laid and take
drugs and all kinds of cool art and you
know the bohemian lifestyle is very
attractive and in lots of positive ways
but so I'm liberated from the
constraints but I'm also liberated from
the constraints which means I have to
take responsibility something I can't
take responsibility for it and become
increasingly sad and you know I grew up
in just far enough down the immigrant
cycle that I was had almost no
traditional construct so I grew up in
the suburbs and I then raised kids in
the suburbs and I noticed like the PAL
city of our traditions like Halloween
like how did you do Halloween and the
notion of like in California in
particular where most of the people were
immigrants to California didn't even
grew up in California at Oakland is Lee
and most were actually second or third
generation Serban suburban nights
so this very very thin gruel of culture
and it's like it's coughing sputtering
engine that's right kind of reached the
end of its capacity to hold things
together
okay so sorry that's that's like kind of
context of where we are so the challenge
is to say okay traditionally if you had
on the order of like 15 to 150,000
potential mates or potential people that
mates with potential people in reality
think about just the sheer math there's
a boundary condition of the number of
people who are you know even
theoretically potential mates you could
interact with . and there's an even
narrower boundary of those you could
explore the possibility of courtship and
of course a much much smaller number
that you could actually really
meaningfully experiment with it so if
you get outside of that boundary
condition of the first order anything
larger than that is waste it's not
useful now we'd like to do is we'd like
to actually have the interior of that
bad just let's say by hypothesis an
average human could kind of me
we explore the possibility of courtship
would say 10,000 people and just like
literally just in interactions in social
environments encountering people like no
no yes possibly no oh wow amazing right
men okay well you'd like to do just like
to have that 10,000 be really really
high-quality that's what you want you
want to have the number the people
you're interacting with are are healthy
they're psychologically mature they are
engaged in joyous activities they're
there good wholesome people right you
want wholesomeness to be the context of
the possibility of relationality then
you want the end to be high enough that
you're sort of supersaturated with
possibility and then frankly inside that
zone the likelihood that you're going to
have a vastly better than right now mate
selection both in terms of good fit and
in terms of the larger context of the
whole arc of being a relationship of
actually you becoming meaningful
partners supporting each other your own
personal development the context of
friends who are all supporting each
other in the context of a larger
community that's all supporting each
other then eventually potentially coming
to actually choose to become parents
you know once once you've kind of
Psalter that that that minimum viable
and then you focus all the energy on the
wholesomeness of the context and of
course you have to have some meaningful
amount of heterogeneity right so imagine
what happens is that when you're like in
the Middle Ages when you're like 14 or
15 you must leave your sid 'i'm context
like it is a obligation and you go to
some place which is end distance right
so not you know your neighbor but you
view in fact good at china or you go to
you know germany as a teenager as an
early teenager when the whole this is
the thing your problem this is the
mission of teenagers is to figure this
thing out that's why what a de lessons
is really about you should definitely
not be learning trigonometry when you're
not Alessa you should be learning who
you are and how you may be coming to
effective relationships with other
people okay and that's kind of the work
and maybe the work is actually even more
profound what happens is you actually
create heterogeneous nomadic groups that
go deep into things like neh
try to like build things together and
you're really focusing that period of
time on the on the optimal arc of
development and then you have a choice
then then what happens is those
particular nomads must then choose which
CVM to bring their young adulthood into
which they may choose to be with people
they are interacting with in that in
that Hajj or it over they may of course
be bringing a more mature personality
into this new context where there's
going to be a high enough end that the
possibility of finding natives recently
is good like it's a very solid context
since to see what I did there I actually
I had to bring in a couple different
elements I didn't know them of like
education development in general oh man
I think I just shoot I got three minutes
ah sorry I'm glad I'm glad I didn't roll
over well you know what this is that's
like you raise those are good questions
I took charismatic leader as an error
you know sex and love and relationship
and mating and parenting is even more
fundamental you know if you get that
part right the charismatic leader x
becomes vastly less important people are
too busy living healthy lives to worry
about somebody who's trying to charm
them into nonsense but we can we could
maybe that's another conversation
because I could tell you're building
momentum right on Pete of a minute see
you okay