[Music]
hello you found the portal
I'm your host Eric Weinstein and we're
here today with my good friend Sam
Harris Sam thanks for coming by thank
you it's great so first question are you
in any trouble that I don't know about I
don't think so I think you know what
trouble I get into as I get into it I
often look to you for well Kaley I get a
call from you and you say I'm thinking
about getting about all the way sort of
trouble who locked me out of it yeah try
and if I if it happens that I'm not
there for an hour and a half I get
another call saying too late yeah I
remember one that a vacation that was
unraveling and I was calling you from
literally poolside is why yeah the one
vacation I take with my family in a year
and I was I was poised to ruin it and
and ruin it I did and and I don't blame
you for it but whatever counsel you gave
me did not did not prevent the
unraveling of a vacation well I'm here
to afford you the opportunity to to ruin
a future vacation but let's try to avoid
it if we can
I'm just curious for stuff first of all
I've taken your advice and Tim Ferriss
is and Joe Rogan's and started this
podcast you were actually the first
person i sat down with but i had so
little idea what I was doing that we
blocked out the windows we had an
uncomfortable table and friend the
finger the function wait was completely
alright we had an Addams Family podcast
exactly so we're trying things I'm
learning a little bit but first of all
any in any time you want to flip the
tables on me I'm game to what is top of
mind for you at the moment or should we
show I can go into some topics that I'm
curious know whatever you want to go
this is your show okay so one of the
things that I'm starting to think about
is doing a little bit of retrospective
work trying to think about where our
world our country is we're going to
another electoral cycle and I just think
this is the most bizarre age imaginable
it doesn't behave like any previous time
and I hear that we're at peak this and P
that but I don't see any signs of the
what I increasingly see is the
incoherence slowing down are you also
perceiving a world that is kind of
intellectually unraveling or are you
seeing new kinds of formations that give
you the idea that something is actually
filling the voids that have been opening
up when it comes to coherence well well
I I worried that this is a kind of
cognitive delusion that the to think of
the time you're in is always sort of
newly chaotic or incoherent or you know
the civilizations on the brink in some
new way in your time but I but I I'm
taken in by it you know you gotta be
kidding me yeah this this has never
happened no no I mean this is this is
that but there's got to be some name for
this where it's just you know it's it's
a some kind of recency effect or I mean
clearly there have been periods in
history where things really have been on
the brink and in some new way oh I don't
mean to suggest that like this is the I
mean in general no no I don't mean like
world war two is about to happen you
know World War three is about haven't
but the I do feel like we are witnessing
several sea changes which you know I
couldn't have honestly said that you
know 15 years ago over 20 years ago I
mean something you know something has
changed and it's some things have
clearly changed change for the worse and
maybe maybe there's a silver lining to
this chaos but I would be hard-pressed
to find it at the moment well so what
I'm started thinking about what kind of
chaos were we're in and using the fact
that you and I agree on a lot which I
think makes our disagreements more
interesting because I don't like the
ground-level he said she said kinds of
disagreements I don't think they're that
interesting for me the big thing that's
really new is that I can't think of a
single institution I trust there's no
place that I can go to for ground truth
this is an example so that you take the
New York Times and you and I whinge
about the New York Times a fair amount
I've been watching you transition yeah
oh yeah yeah yeah I've grown pretty dark
about the paper that I drew yeah yeah
years ago you were somewhere else yeah
but but I guess I'm wondering whether
the cohort before us 20 years ago had
this same litany of complaints about the
New York Times or whether something
fundamentally has shifted well I I was
on I've been on the New York Times since
the 80s okay so you were early to this
part yeah I was very early to this party
for nothing has changed so it's this is
this worse than the 80s it's a good
question depends it worse isn't the
right word in my opinion the way I would
play with it is I'd say that it's
problem has always been the same which
is narrative driven journalism and the
first clear indication I have of this I
think was a story about Woodstock in
which the paper told the reporter how
old are you you're not that much older
than me I was in my diapers no no no I
don't remember this as 69 yeah yeah no
no it's not that
I remember reading I will clarify I
remember reading a story about the
journalists being sent who was sent to
cover Woodstock by The Times being told
right about the filth and the hippies
and the unkempt miss and strangely
that's a bias that I now share I at one
point I had a the the I there was a
point in my life in my in my 20s where I
kind of recapitulated the 60s for myself
okay and had nothing but you know
nostalgia for the 60s that I missed but
now I have a fairly Joan Didion look at
you know the the slouching toward
Bethlehem a moment that was it just the
level of dysfunction and in the non
acknowledgement of dysfunction it was
pretty shocking so but look it declined
okay okay
the what I recall of the story was is
that The Times had told the reporter
what sort of story to file and the
reporter called up two times and said I
refuse I'm seeing something different
I'm seeing something inspiring
you're and heart opening and I'm not
going to file that story so if that's
what you wanted and I have cholera and
I've color so I think that the narrative
aspect of the New York Times has been
both its structural reason for its
importance and the fatal flaw that in
essence it carries these very long
narrative arcs that come from the editor
the editorial function at the Times and
that those are written in some sense
before the facts are known and so the
facts are then fit to the narratives and
then when the counter narratives occur
the times really either doesn't report
the story as and they really couldn't
handle the the situation that happened
with my brother because it was exactly
counter narrative more than they distort
based on the idea that they need to push
things back into the narrative so I
think that has always been present and
there are particular kinds of stories
that The Times writes that I find
absolutely
now I'll go so far as to say borderline
evil and what they do is they crowd out
whatever natural inquiry process would
be happening so I'm happy to get into a
couple of examples about that but I
would say I think that the problem has
been there at the New York Times all
along there are some new things that I
see as happening there like a conflict
between the old-line journalists with
the new line yeah of sort of you know
Brooklyn based writers who are telling
us they haven't had to think yeah what
well you make you I don't know if this
the time is maybe an exception here but
I think generally what's happened in
journalism and there's just been a a
clearing out of real journalists right I
mean the business has gotten so bad and
again the times and the post and the
Atlantic there's a few outliers here
they're doing well in the age of Trump
at least you know sort of well Trump is
saving their business yes yeah I mean
they would actually they weren't doing
great before Trump but now they're doing
okay but the rest of journalism has been
gutted and now we basically have the
blogosphere and you know it's kind of
what the Huffington Post did to the
landscape where you just had a lot of
people blogging for free
you know propping up a a an ad based
clickbait business model sure with the
again that the I'd I guess what I want
to play with is is there something
special about institutions imagine that
you can get all the interesting articles
that you like somewhere and somebody's
saying something interesting you can
piece them together but the fact that
there's no institutional home where you
can trust that like a you know the
Office of Management and Budget or
something or but it's not what I'm
saying to be a bad for journalists about
journalism in general is that what you
think of as the institution I mean just
like the veneer the front-facing website
is not even an institution in many cases
it's like a you can it's a hard to
differentiate what is a blog and what is
an actual journalistic resource that has
editors and fact checkers and copy
editors and you know for certain sites
the distinction is it's apparently
non-existent meso like you know people
used to think salon was real journalism
or at with the Guardian I mean the
Guardian has like I kind of the blog
side and then write the Guardian say you
can't tell the difference you're just
reading what somebody wrote and well and
you find the same people on Twitter yeah
yeah and then everyone it's nuts on
Twitter what whatever their reputation
right really is you know or should have
been well but you could just see their
bias like they're not hiding it on
Twitter and then they hide it when
they're in their journalistic frame well
that would argue that on I'm fairly
forgiving on that point because I feel
that Trump has made the hiding of ones
so-called bias a irresponsible
essentially it's like you can't you
can't pretend that this is a normal
president doing normal things no you're
gonna be a normal journalist without an
opinion I agree with that although I
would say you and I are very split on
this so should put a placeholder maybe
we'll get back to it maybe not that I'm
more worried about the loss of things
like nature and science than I am the
New York Times I'm now worried that
there is nothing and even in the hard
sciences almost the
stand up to the onslaught of political
pressure creeping into everything that
has to be able to say no then we've lost
the ability to tell people to screw off
if they're wrong I've certainly been
creeping up on us in the life sciences
it's been true of the social sciences
for a very long time yeah it probably
you know physics and math are gonna be
the last to go
but I've even seen a little bit of it in
roads there and so I I find the loss of
nature and cell and the universities
terrifying effort differently from the
New York Times like this is this is a
few layers deeper and more dangerous do
you not perceive that oh I think it's
they're just different problems I don't
know which is more consequential I think
the I think the the failure to have a
fact-based discussion and the incentives
to avoid one I think that's a just the
scariest thing we have going apart from
the the true monsters love you know
pandemic and nuclear war and things like
that well those are now increasingly
relative with the you know vexor and Eve
X or you know but but there's the self
refereeing like one of the things is
really important to have a decent
discussion in my opinion is you have to
agree what a discussion is and what
constitutes an illegal move and
increasingly I feel like we're having
these combat sports where we can't agree
on what rules like is biting an ear part
of boxing maybe it is maybe it isn't
who's to say well that's an imposition
of your views on mine who can still self
adjudicate well I think if you wait long
enough you see the failures of hypocrisy
right means you see people try to
enshrine
a new set of rules that proved
unworkable in some of the context you
know or they they just can't live up to
them because of it's impossible I mean
we're now noticing
it's been you know widely observed that
more or less if you wait around long
enough everyone's gonna get cancelled
now you know it's like the repurposing
of the Warhol quote you know we'll all
be canceled for 15 minutes to be 15 and
it's Melissa would just you know just
before we started this podcast we were
joking that you know Justin Trudeau has
yet another black face photo of himself
apparently appearing online and here's
you know one of the most woke and
sanctimonious enforcers of this new norm
of just you know political correctness
you know stretching to infinity and he's
he's got not only black face in his past
but a apparently a positive passion for
blackface that's a recurring issue yes
so it's it's I mean the hypocrisy is is
so delicious but it's just it's just the
yet at least there's these new norms of
not being honest about facts just can't
scale I mean they're going well people
will be tripped up by them and so and
it's not say you can we can't do a lot
of harm to ourselves in the mean time or
in certain areas I think we're trying to
do harm to ourselves yeah I think that
the idea you know sometimes I think
about Trump as the doctor has to break a
bone that has miss been miss set in the
hopes that it can finally heal properly
and this is one of the places where you
as a doctor who doesn't know which bony
hasn't hand and and isn't actually
intending to heal you so well he's like
it's the happy accident of the doctor
happens the mad man who happens to have
a hold of the right femur and is
breaking it for the wrong reasons but to
good effect right or you know as a
doctorate in folklore and from some non
accredited university so it's already
keep segway on you but I know you have a
passion for India I remember once
traveling in India and seeing somebody's
a doctor's it was actually a dentist's
shingle
and it was say you know western-trained
dentist and in parentheses failed but
but having just haven't made the attempt
was enough to put that on the on the
shingle oh that's good yeah I mean that
does hey so I I think you get Trump
wrong right and it's not I see what you
see and I it's maddening it's driving me
crazy I the idea of spending four more
precious years of my win dling life
talking about whatever Trump last said
or tweeted or worried that I don't know
what would happen if we actually had a
five-alarm fire in the US that had to be
handled do you think my model of his
mind is wrong or my model of the
consequences of him being in office is
wrong well I think that you were slow to
give him his due I mean of course as you
know I wrote this essay on kayfabe right
anticipating that professional wrestling
was going to turn out to be incredibly
important and in fact I thought it was
going to determine the presidency that
was a belief I had that understanding
how lies play within the mind and how
époque recei works and then a concept
called namespaces out of Python
programming like how we compartmentalize
led me to believe that in essence we
were I had seen these other candidacies
in other countries in which people seem
not to be able to distinguish an actor
from the character that they played you
know and whatnot and so I I believed
that the system of lies within
professional wrestling told us what was
possible and Trump actually sort of came
out of the WWE through his association
with with the McMahon family yeah and I
believe that he actually understood deep
things that psychology departments will
wake up to 20 years from now yeah well I
guess there's a I suggest I've suggested
by analogy to the Chauncey Gardiner
effect or the evil Chauncey Gardiner
effect well but it has rational yeah I
think I think but it's hard to
that could happen I mean it's like that
right it's definitely falsifiable my
theory is falsifiable he could prove to
me with a string of utterances that he's
the evil genius that i haven't imagined
him to be but he said I mean if you and
I had a couple of old fashions between
us
and we sat down with a thousand of his
tweets we could figure out that there
were current structures and we could
write analyze a program to generate them
to tangle Democrats I think that there's
much more method to the madness and I I
don't have to go full Scott Adams that's
Scott I know you're out there somewhere
to say that everything is intentional
and brilliant I just think he's got a
you know it was for years I said that if
he wanted to win an election against a
Democrat you just would talk about the
nuclear family well let them correct you
to nuclear right and then you'd win
because you come across an ass yeah
right exactly so I think that there is a
certain amount of method that you were
slow to give you give him credit for but
I think you're probably inching towards
the idea that if he's not an evil genius
he has some evil genius I think it's
just again I am enamored of my Chauncey
Gardiner analogy all right well here's
another analogy that is even simpler and
easy easier to confirm it's clear
there's a method but I think it's just a
very simple method that the power of
which is an accident of the context so
it's like an Instagram model has a
method right you know they just if you
have a great body show it to great
effect on your Instagram channel and
then wait around for people to follow
you right so there's a very simple
formula there's no question it works
it's there's not a lot of method to it
but in the rallies that he likes the
rallies are a feedback mechanism right
so he know he knows that the feedback
that he's getting from the press in
general has a constant distortion and so
by holding a rally he can figure out to
something there's like constant a be
test but it but it doesn't have the fact
that he wasn't cancelled for one of his
sins he was no but if the fact
the fact that there's enough there are
enough people to insulin he has enough
fans of this style of communication and
living that he's he's uncountable right
the fact that we have 40 pencil no note
that we have 40 percent of the American
population that fundamentally does not
care about any of the things I care
about in him I disagree with the Sam I
think you're getting this wrong this is
what I think it might be interesting I'm
happy to be okay I'm happy to be wrong
to you so you think they so we're at
what point I think we're still in the
stage of being so angry that Bill
Clinton ISM yeah that we just want to
know you're not owned we want something
that convinces us that it's not taking
orders but but we're completely in SU
tient on the point of you be potentially
being owned by the Russians when that
begins to get leaked
believe me I think about this I don't
know I haven't followed all the details
it's possible he's compromised and under
direct control well let's just bracket
that we don't let's say we don't know
but when that's begins to become a story
and a credible story
zero interest from the people who are
worried about him being owned by the
usual you see you don't carry the same
anger and passion that I do for getting
rid of the rot that was the American
Center in other words I believe one of
the things I find very confusing is is
that you and I I think would normally
have been called centrists right but
we're not crypt that we're not klepto
centrists I mean I've never been in a
position to you know to loot the
Treasury from the position of being a
centrist right so the interesting thing
about the center is that the center
produces the the blank canvas of America
on which we get to paint so I'm not
really super excited to get a politician
that makes me swoon I want somebody to
just gesso a canvas so that we can build
all of the you know companies and
nonprofits and do all the beautiful work
that makes this country amazing I'm not
trying to
get my entertainment from government the
thing that crept in to our system with
Reagan and Bush giving way to the
Clintons back to Bush and then bestop
bizarrely I thought Obama was gonna be a
break from this that thing induces a
passion in some of us to get rid of it
we hate it and I don't know that you
carry that passion and what I think it's
harder for you to understand it and I
carry it not from a right-wing
perspective I carry it from a
progressive to center-left position well
and some of this comes back to the
hypocrisy point I was making before so I
have that trumpian module in my brain
that feels just the pure schadenfreude
of seeing Justin Trudeau get who is that
Khloe stood on his own petard right so
here's this sanctimonious enforcer of
woke culture just pandering to the left
it's clearly unsustainable it's clearly
dishonest it's and unworkable and you
know we offline we spoke about just that
moment where he's he's admonishing this
this elementary school-aged girl when
she says the word mankind which is a you
know I'm it's great to hear a sixth
grader use a phrase word mankind they
says no we say people kind maybe they
say people kind up in Canada I haven't
heard that but you know even just saying
human kind there and and and enforcing
that that taboo there was just
that's the elitism the goofy elitism
that that if it's not the elitism it's
the fact that these people have been
picking our pockets and they've been
divorcing us from each other I'm just
saying I get the let's just watch these
fuckers burn a stream of pleasure that
you can get coursing in your brain right
and that that explains a lot of the the
Trump phenomenon where it's just on some
level they don't care that he's the most
odious liar we've ever seen they being
his his fan base they just love to see
him wind up the lib tarts are they
love to see her as a samurai I'm really
trying to get at something I may be
wrong so forgive me if I'm if I'm going
off on a tangent but I really think that
there was something much more evil it
wasn't just that these people were
sneering at us over crudité you know
it's like it's that they were picking
our pockets they were divorcing us from
each other they came up with a bullshit
ideology if you will of the Davos flavor
that said you know we are the world and
divorced us from each other in terms of
our obligations to fellow countrymen
above our obligations to people who you
know live abroad when that was really a
cover for figuring out how to make money
when we were largely in many ways
stagnant and so you had a class of
people who probably blew out the Gini
coefficient for the u.s. without getting
to the real issues of the fact that
we're a country that we put people in
uniform and you know send them into
harm's way that we have a higher duty
and care and most of our minds to each
other than we do to equally deserving
people overseas but for the most part
that the left was the political party
that that I mean everyone was part of
that same extractive economy but the
left at least paid lip service to the
virtue of spreading the wealth around
well you know there's this poem by Lewis
Carroll about the walrus and the
carpenter' and one of the Alice sagas
and they're both going to trick a bunch
of oysters into following them and then
eating the oysters and one of them is
quite clear about his desire to eat
oysters and the other one makes a big
show of how sad it is that they played a
little trick and all of them were eaten
and the key question is which of these
two figures is more reprehensible and I
always disliked the one it was terribly
sad about what they'd done and I think
that's the left yeah there's something
to that but I think there's also the
all-too-common phenomenon of
people motivated by actually good
intentions even incredibly noble
intentions causing a lot of chaos that
they didn't intend right so let me take
is that is that your model for what was
going on well it's it's it's my model
for part part of its he said me take
someone like Emily take you know Mark
Zuckerberg and Facebook right well yeah
I don't know mark you know I don't know
how mercenary he's been from the
beginning or and and how out of touch
with the possible harms he might cause
he's been but I can well imagine that
here's somebody who could honestly say
can you know connecting people is an
intrinsic good I'm just gonna do that
better than anybody and the you know the
wealth will come and this is all good
for everybody
right and then only at the eleventh hour
you know long after many of us have have
noticed a problem he begins to trip play
catch up with a problem that's that's a
fairly charitable view of what he was up
to or the you know the Google guys you
know don't be evil like I don't think
when they said don't be evil they were
you know twirling their mustaches and
and winking at each other knowing all
the while they were going to create a
juggernaut of instability for and and
also get fantastically wealthy and
anchored to a an extractive and an
ultimately unethical new kind of
surveillance economy that you know we're
going to be you know hard-pressed to
change I don't think at at what point
did they grade into having consciously
bad intentions or consciously intention
intentions that were so mercenary has to
be unethical but it but a pure case of
this for me falls in another sector not
economy but foreign policy you look at
somebody like Samantha power right who
you know who wrote the famous book on
genocide a problem from hell
she you know she drew lessons from our
failure to intervene in a place like
Rwanda right at that we were morally
culpable in some basic sense for not
having intervened right week
have stopped the bloodshed we didn't it
we even had you know Navy SEAL Teams I
mean Jaco you was just on this podcast
Jocko I think was offshore you know at
the time and we would you know he'd
drawn the lesson from Somalia seeing our
you know the the Black Hawk Down
incident seeing our soldiers dragged
through the streets that we just can't
get involved and what happens when
you're the the one superpower and you
decide you can't get involved well then
people you know butcher their neighbors
and there's no way to stop them so I
think with the best of intentions she
and many others drew the lesson that we
really do have to be the world's cop on
some level and we have to get involved
and we're morally culpable for not
stopping up a rape in progress or a
murder in progress and but now we're on
the other side of that you know you
shaped horror curve where we now know
what it's like to get involved with
however mixed intentions and we and it's
it's a thankless job right like a bill
nation-building is not it's not a job
that we're gonna want for for a long
time and for good reason I actually have
some weird backstory on that one no I
I knew Samantha power at the Kennedy
School and she and I sat down I mean not
well I think we sat down at a meal we
had friends that connected us I asked
what you were it what what are you
interested in and she said well I'm
obsessed with the Red Sox and genocide
yeah that's a good icebreaker um and she
said well you know the rap on me is I'm
all genocide all the time but nobody
cares and I you know I've got this book
and I can't figure out the answer to the
question why is there not a resolution
that we will never why is never again
not a resolution and every time I try to
get a state to sign up for this or
somebody to take this seriously there's
this weird wall that comes down it's the
clearest thing in the world
that we should never let genocide ever
happen again right and she was convinced
nobody's gonna take her seriously this
was gonna go nowhere and then
progressively somehow this thing started
to catch fire and I
for a period of time I was emailing her
like do you believe it now do you
believe it now but this because I I knew
this thing was gonna get huge I also
knew that it wasn't gonna work because
it just it comes from this beautiful
place that is not really deeply
beautiful I mean it's sort of
meretricious its appealing but it
doesn't understand what the forces are
the create genocide because very few
people want to go that deep on that
question and in that case I saw a human
being who I can just vouch for they'd be
this was the purest of intentions
early on and then it that the complexity
started to reveal themselves she became
and meshed in a very difficult series of
Tralee problems or you know Charlie like
problems right I believe that that
partially happens in places like
Facebook and Google but very often I
think it's your theory of mine that I'm
gonna take issue with which is that I
don't think people are is unified in
their thinking they very often have a
mercenary part of their brain and a
beautiful part of their brain and they
have a partition that keeps those from
talking to each other then one of the
ways in which I found this out was when
a group of people doctors actually in
New York City wanted to sort of used me
as a consultant from my mathematical and
analytic mind and we went out for a very
fancy dinner and they said I said what's
the topic and they said
reconceptualizing medical debt I knew
nothing about this and essentially what
they told me is is that if you go to an
emergency room and you agree to have all
sorts of things done mm-hmm you don't
feel like paying exorbitant inflated
bills later because you feel like that
was an emergency
I had no ability to actually think this
through shop around yeah exactly and
this is extortionary but if you give
somebody the ability to say okay what
what if you pay us 82 cents on the
dollar and well we'll let 18 cents go
then suddenly the the the performance of
that debt skyrockets
and a phrase came out which was when
they talked about reconceptualization
they said it's a beautiful thing and I
realized that I had heard that phrase in
New York whenever people are up to no
good it's a beautiful thing
what's a beautiful thing you know it's
just and so I then put out this thing in
my group which is did you notice that
when people in New York do bad things to
other people they always say it's a
beautiful thing and sure enough it
caught in people's minds whenever
anybody started to say it they realized
oh my gosh I mean a part of my mind that
recognizes that I can transfer wealth
from somebody else to me largely without
the other person knowing it in a way
that results in benefit from me and some
harm that's been externalized I think
that people both know that they're doing
tremendous harm and carry the idealism
that propels it and that's it's the
combination of these things and the fact
that they don't talk to each other yeah
well I think people are you're not gonna
get me to disagree there that people are
impressively split or at least can be
and I think coherence generally speaking
it or at least striving for it is good
I'm I think I live in an examined life
in part is is is struggling with those
discoveries of incoherence and and
figuring out how to to get this Congress
of mine as you call yourself to actually
go here but you're getting them to
cohere yeah no so but I but when you're
talking about the normal person who I
think it is a frequent phenomenon to be
to have you know normal than the normal
range of good intentions to not be a
sociopath to want to help the world to
be in philanthropy for instance right so
to actually to be this I mean you're or
if you're devoting your life if you're a
you know a smart person who you know got
a good degree who could work more or
less anywhere but you decide to work for
for a charity right you're already an
outlier you're already somebody who said
no to Wall Street or no to Hollywood or
no to something and now you're working
for the you know
the Southern Poverty Law Center or
something like you want to just stop
racism right so you're already one of
the good guys
right and but see I mean you know this
is a example dear to my heart that I
flog at every opportunity the Southern
Poverty Law Center is you know I think
was probably consciously started for the
best of intentions operated under the
the you know that the the blindingly
brilliant light of those intentions for
a very long time but something flipped
and one thing that flipped is that it
and it's probably unbeknownst to to
everybody there's a bad incentive
problem here I mean the the only way
they survive as an organization is to
continue to stay at in this sort of long
emergency mode of there are nazis
everywhere right everyone it's like this
is a problem
it's a four-alarm fire give us money we
now have a budget of whatever it is you
know thirty million dollars a year I
mean it's got to be huge and you know
the fundraising drive never stops and so
what happens to an organization like
that when you begin to run out of Nazis
well then you gotta you have to find
more right like you can't yet the
incentive is to never recognize that
you've gotten a handle on the problem
right it'd be like you know in some you
know epidemiological space where you
know you're curing smallpox but you
could never admit that you've actually
cured it you have to pretend to find
smallpox everywhere now I'm not saying
obviously I must say and white supremacy
or white power or anything has been
cured but what has happened is you have
people who probably were true outliers
in their in their ethical scrupulous 'ti
who are now behaving in appalling ways
you know different people's reputations
calling them Nazis when they know
they're not not so well let's be let's
put a finer point on it they are now
more likely to let the genie out of the
bottle because of their bad behavior or
to you know huff and puff on an ember
that is the pathetic Ku Klux Klan of
2019 right to actually create something
that could they could turn into a
roaring fire I mean
this is a general feature I often talk
about this in terms of magnetic and true
north where the angle of declination
that separates them is very small at the
equator you know in northern Canada you
know it it's very large
yeah right and and at the at the pole
and South is everywhere well that's
right yeah right and so it's just the
problem is is that the institution I
mean look I've made this point elsewhere
so regular listeners will have heard it
but the concept of the embedded growth
obligation the ego of an institution
which is it has to do work and grow in
order to meet its mandates that is the
thing that has metastasized throughout
our institutional structure and so it's
not the Southern Poverty Law Center I
mean that's particularly egregious but
the entire university system every
single measure you can take on that
thing looks like an intergenerational
wealth transfer right down to the
nondischargeability of student debt and
bankruptcy whether the loading up of
every university by administrators and
the monopolization at the moment almost
100% of our leading institutions are run
by a baby boomer whereas the average age
in a different era of a university
president we could have most of them
under Gen X control and some of them
under millennial control there were
university presidents in their 30s who
had a huge impact I mean that is a
system which has gone totally metastatic
yeah you know that may be an outlier I
mean this is the way the word it's the
worst large system of its kind yeah I
mean the way costs have gone up there
way outpacing inflation medical pacing
medical and yeah yeah it's it's amazing
and the fact that you can't discharge
your debt in bankruptcy yeah and the
fact that net you know many of our
friends have spent a lot of time
complaining about this but the fact that
you have whole fields that are
essentially you know sham
fields right that are in the humanities
where it's just a pseudo knowledge is
being imparted to the next generation
and it's not only its own it's Walter
Darden of Sudan ology it is a
disparagement of real knowledge like so
the anti science you know moral panic
that is happening in the humanities it
is a fit mimetic complex
well it's apparently it's fit its fit
thus far I mean this is producing new
graduates yeah well and it's colonizing
things outside yeah I mean there's aa
black journalism Tech Human Resources
anything which is a high leverage but
often poorly paid for the level of
intelligence usually required or the
amount of training usually required
becomes attractive so there's a perverse
incentive when you can't pay journalists
or scientists or even technologists at
appropriate levels I know people will
scream so you have no idea how much
money tech people get paid and I really
don't believe it I think that those jobs
are supposed to be even better
compensated because of large-scale
tampering in the sector what I believe
is is that we're looking at the
difference between truth and fitness and
if you recall when I went first one in
your program I said I care about four
things truth is one of them but I also
care about meaning fitness and grace
this is a great example where fitness is
out competing truth but we have a hand
in there so we can tune the landscape
right it feels like two of us yeah
that's why I call you Sam what the hell
is going yes uh a relatively small
number people can do it it's not it's
not it doesn't take seven billion people
or eight billion people that's got no
but like you need to convince the top
you know three thousand people that one
way of talking doesn't work right and to
align Fitness and truth more faithfully
you know this is I'm not used to
disagreeing with you this much good as I
came here where I look at my get loaded
alter ego yeah
Sam I think we've screwed up a lot worse
than you're imagining in the past and
that that is the fodder for the twin
evils of trumpism and woke ISM but just
just grant me the the possible sea
change effect of the three thousand
people the right three thousand people
fundamentally getting their heads
straight on these issues or any issue
right whatever it is so you're talking
about basically all of Hollywood all of
journalism and all the science that's
public facing if we could do that yeah
okay in some some thought experiment
yeah I guess what my feeling is first of
all is is that my head is so filled with
malware I've got I'm running so many
nonsensical programs put there by other
people that I don't even know or
nonsense where I can detect you have a
sense of what direction to point where
you're gonna find the nonsense well so
for what you're worried about
yeah well so we're currently sitting in
a room with reflective glass and
anechoic tiles that deaden sound hmm if
I echolocate buy things that I am
absolutely positive would sell
newspapers that aren't printed that it's
like okay you're echolocating and
instead of hearing the reflection off of
glass you're hearing a an absence which
is anechoic tile and so if I just look
at Google Trends which tells me what
people are searching on if I look at how
Google autocompletes
which tells me what they want me to see
is what other people are searching on in
the search bar if I look at what stories
aren't being run all of the dead stuff
is astounding to me it right at the
moment like I know for example that
people are fascinated by the Jeffrey
Epstein story mm-hmm and in general like
you know we just had it so normally I
don't love talking about current events
because it dates the program but we just
had Kevin Spacey's accuser reported as
dying I don't think that that is likely
to be part of some super evil plot so
just so people can calibrate it's not
that
that could make sense because there's an
incentive I chalk up to it a conspiracy
the Jeffrey Epstein thing is totally
different and you and I both met this
guy for 15 years and he's the only
person I've been saying this with
conviction about for 15 years I had one
meeting with him I said he's a construct
somebody hired a person probably named
Jeffrey Epstein to play a role
super genius mega billionaire
philanthropist I wasn't buying any I've
never bought it and I've talked to
everybody in our sort of mutual network
and I always used one word because I
want to make a huge bet that when the
time came I would say he's a construct
and that I would be revealed to be
correct and that everybody was s what do
you mean by a construct right okay do
you need to have you clarified that on
your podcast before probably not I I I
recorded an entire Jeffrey Epstein
episode which is just me soloing for an
hour right but I haven't released it
because I'm terrified
I've had one ambiguous dinner where
somebody sort of quasi threatened me and
I wasn't entirely sure what they were
saying was a little bit creepy well this
is a strand of human complication that
you're way more in touch with than I am
I don't deny that it exists right so
like I think there are real conspiracies
and then powerful people occasionally
you know do what powerful people are
occasionally sociopaths and then they
then they do what you would expect or
conspire to do what you'd expect so I
don't have a strong feeling about well
it's just takes livelihood that Epstein
was was had a facilitated suicide I
think the likelihood that he was
murdered is low but I submit suicide I
don't have a I'm agnostic about that
whether whether some people stepped away
so that he could do the thing that he
needed to do whether there's some
vanishing probability that he actually
isn't dead I don't know I didn't I put
that at at very low I put that very low
odds as well yeah but I saw you but no
I'm a fan of zero odds soon well I
wouldn't I know enough about probability
and to put almost nothing in zero huge
huge difference between those people who
insist when I hear somebody insists that
that problem
d b0 I kicked butt and that person is
smart but effectively effectively zero
I'm a zero in the sense that we don't
have I worry about I waste no time
thinking about it at the moment right
but I'm happy to have my Bayesian priors
tutored right okay
so I I just don't have a amazing you
know I'm taken in or I utilize this
homily that you shouldn't ascribe to to
malice what can be explained by
incompetence or whatever that the
formulation and I find that that's a
interesting heuristic for somebody it
says it's usually I think it's usually
true right so it's like it works much of
the time and then it it fails but it
fails in a case where you get more
information and then you update you
that's what that was review it was
exactly my point that the Kevin Spacey
thing I would say is in the realm of
Newtonian mechanics right and then the
Jeff Epstein thing is like relativistic
quantum field theory whatever your
Newtonian laws are we're not in Kansas
in right but I had no lie so I mean you
put me in the same room with him so I
should probably clarify that so I had I
found myself but you both apologize
nothing happened yeah yes right
I found myself at a lunch with him at
the TED conference and had no insight
into him or what he was up to
apart from the fact that he you know my
sort of creep detector went off and iris
piked like crazy yeah I mean I just he
was someone who I didn't want to spend
any more time with because he had this
sort of schlock e rich guy but with well
no know him it's just but like when you
see a I guess he was probably you know
close to 60 at this point and you know
he's with a you know 21 year old you
know it's like it's like that the optics
of that are all with it means that
obviously the many rich guys who do that
you know and they're many certainly many
people in Hollywood to do that and you
know that's just the way people some
people roll when they have the
opportunity to roll that way and that
okay fine but he there was just a I have
a kind of a level of you know
judgmentalism around that right you know
it's like at minimum that's a a an
attractor on the on the landscape
of well-being that is not all that
interesting to me and so when you see
someone captivated by that like this is
like life is going great because I'm 60
and she's 20 right like that I have one
variable that there was how much about
his labor Guinea Oh exactly right okay
then you've you know you've bored me
already so but I had no more insight
into him than that I maybe I didn't read
not three sentences from one meeting
I've been talking about him for 15 years
right you end up because this was like a
ten person lunch okay and I had maybe
you know three sentences exchanged with
him you know so mine was at his house
right I'm assured into a waiting room
he's got some super complicated
electronical electronic art I get up I
look at it I said wait is that is that a
camera inside the art I first think I'm
a genius for finding cameras I think my
next thought is I'm supposed to find the
camera inside the art because the the
can't the art is supposed to draw my
attention I'm supposed to see that I'm
being recorded I'm called out to a room
and back with a huge longing sort of
exaggerated dining table with a giant
American flag as its tablecloth so that
any food or drink that is served on it
may spill onto an American flag and I'm
just in high alert like fuck you who are
you and he comes in he's got this
attractive again over probably 20 to 23
year old woman I think she's introduced
as an heiress or something right and
he's bouncing around as me in order to
get my attention there's some other guy
says nothing during the meeting I have
no idea what he was doing and I think I
won detail I'd like to add here in
defense of the many people and the many
scientists who were in this guy's orbit
and who didn't know how unseemly his
life actually was some of these young
women who you'd meet in his company
we're not just you know bimbos or
strippers or me that some of these
people were going to medical school and
these were like smart young women well
and identified incredibly important
distinction I don't think
news media's done a good job of teasing
it's very attached to the idea pedophile
Island and Lolita Express right and that
lazy sensationalist journalism is
crowding something out which is that in
general from what I understand it so I
met him in 2000 I think 2004 maybe 2003
but before his Florida incarceration and
charges
most people that I knew who met him met
him with young adult women and so my
theory is that he was constructed to be
the sapiosexual Hugh Hefner right and
that they stupidly hired probably and I
guess I don't know this Humbert Humbert
for the role and that that dichotomy
explains at least a lot of the initial
willingness of the science community to
play with this person that I mean I'll
be honest I'm not particularly
judgmental about consenting adults even
if it's probably ill-advised you know to
have a 50-year spread between two people
if somebody's 20 and somebody's 80 and
there's a completely different thing
it's very easy to see that if you've
seen this guy be sort of the womanizing
schmuck right and within the bounds of
you know total legality and he's
surrounded by 20 year-olds and you know
he's got a 40 year and everybody his
party to the game and you don't think
about money you whatever you would never
suspect this other thing about him right
okay so that is not a fair defense after
the Florida situation the Florida
situation changes that structure you
mean his his prosecution or well a lot
of Miami Herald thing that came out like
a lot a year ago no no the prosecution
right so a lot of people continue to
talk to him in part because then I think
this is something that hasn't been
teased out he was supporting a older
style of science which this is again
something's can be super complicated was
much more disagreeable now the woke
movement has seized on this as well
that's the cowboy oppressive science of
mail assholes but he was supporting a
network of people who might not have
been supported otherwise to somewhat
break out of the mold and because the US
government had stepped away from that
work and in in large measure in my
opinion you know people were so
dependent on him that they were eager to
look the other way and there was also
the hint I think that this wasn't really
Jeffrey Epstein that this was really
something else funding hmm I don't know
about that I mean I think the the
relative penury of science is a
corrupting variable and the fact that we
did we under fund science yeah and that
it matters that when the rich guy comes
into the room write to scientists
because they're so starved for money
that's just that's just corrupting look
this is I've been on this is gonna get
us into the immigration question which
is that the in the mid-80s under Reagan
the Science Complex particularly the
National Science Foundation under Eric
Block through the National Academy of
Sciences and a subdivision called the
government university industry research
round table GUI RR conspired to destroy
the bargaining power of American
scientists by flooding the market and
what they did is they did an economic
analysis with both supply and demand
curves to say that the wages which you
can calculate when you have two
intersecting curves we're gonna go above
six figures for new PhDs and then let's
get a lot of Indians in here and and
well it's four cut it was four countries
it was China India Taiwan and Korea and
China went from zero to 60 and like no
yeah they were sending us nobody and
then their I think they were like over
25% of all graduate students and of
course graduate students aren't students
they're workers
so there's a cryptic labor economy
inside of the universities and what the
university system figured out was is
that in order to get this work done we'd
have to have this misclassified students
who do the work imported as foreign
workers and what we would do is we would
take the economic analysis which they
secretly did in 1986
and they'd subtract off the demand curve
and they just do a supply analysis based
on the demography of the baby boom going
into the baby bust which is our
generation Gen X and that demographic
alarm was sounded to get the Immigration
Act of 1990 passed which has like the
h-1b is one of its most famous features
so that's that's the whole story
about how the actual workings I'm the
guy who uncovered that and I chased that
all the way down to the person who wrote
that secret study that was never
released never dated never authored
right that thing was the stepping away
of the federal government from its cut
its commitment through the Vannevar bush
endless frontier agreement to fund the
kick-ass blue sky research that this
country has done better than anyone else
but now how is that distinguishable from
what on his face seems to me to be a
rational policy which is why not try to
attract the world's best and brightest
and incentivize them to start their
businesses here settle here you know
what once you've gotten your PhD at
Harvard you know you you've got a green
card and you know here's your here's you
know selecting valleys over there you
know I mean so what when you start
speaking I feel like I'm hearing the
Stars and Stripes forever I've got one
hand over my heart and the Statue of
Liberty is in the background with Emma
Lazarus's poem at the base actually
believe it no but no but no but my point
is that strikes me as a good policy even
though that would create more
competition for you know so-called
Americans right because we're we're now
open for for the world's business but if
you actually wanted to maximize you know
creativity and industry here you would
want to import Indians and Chinese and
Taiwanese and Koreans well I mean look
I've married the maximum number of
brilliant women from the developing
world who came here to do stem that the
law will allow right right so HAP's
guilty you got your wife and then you
want to close the border what yeah well
first of all that's how country clubs
work right right so the idea is that
when you get a found with country club
when you get into a country club you
don't instantly say well I don't
understand it would be immoral for me to
close the country club I mean so it's a
very weird thing for me that people who
are very steeped in what you were just
talking about which is this interesting
mimetic complex that got pushed out hmm
don't tend to think critically about it
of course we want the best people in the
world to come to the u.s. selfishly I
mean you know we're not everyone doesn't
I mean the person who has to compete
with the best coming from India and
Taiwan and China yeah that person let's
say in in you know software engineering
that person has fat it's now suddenly on
a much more competitive playing field
and yeah this is this is so what I was
told about this I'm just not I'm not
saying that it's not without cost to
somebody's it's definitely costing
somebody something right like the bad
people the people no no no not the bad
people but just it's it's like I don't
even know how to go into all of the
things that are like really funny and
wrong about this like one of which is
well are you afraid to compete with
somebody from India well maybe I'm
afraid to compete with a hundred people
from India you know like the the issue
is what do you write that when you're
compete on this podcast you're competing
with people from India I'm you're
competing with you know there are eight
hundred thousand podcasts no you're
competing with with 799 because it's not
a uniform style because it's not a
uniform product Sam no but you're still
the only land no when you talked about
software uh-huh right right
most of software is glorified foreign
while loops let's not you know you
invoke a library you code up the class
you can add source it yeah all right
well no it's just I'm just saying that
most of what it is is you're just
writing code yeah it's got a kind of a
mystique about it because a lot of
people haven't done it and it's too
symbolic whatever it but its plumbing
and its plumbing yeah and a lot of
science is plumbing yeah and so a lot of
the stuff
the best is not very relevant if you
wanted to take the stuff that's really
distinguished you know like you've got
Ramanuja coming from India yeah you know
you've got you know Ellis coming from
South Africa whoever it is that's really
amazing we have plenty of room for the
tiny number of people who are absolutely
non-homogeneous super contributed so
you're just saying you want to set the
bar higher I'm not saying that I'm
saying a lot of different things one is
that people in the country have rights
and they have asymmetric rights to their
own labour market that's a large part of
what it means to be a citizen of a
country if I start to talk about your
rights that are perhaps your most
valuable economic possession if you
really think about the American workers
most valuable economic possession is
asymmetric as access to the American
labor market if I say you know your
right is not an asset but is instead an
impediment it's a barrier and what we
need to do is get rid of the red tape
and I'm not gonna pay you for it because
it's not an asset I'm going to take it
from you and I'm gonna say that that's
what the free market is well that has
nothing to do with the free market I
wrote a paper called migration for the
benefit of all mm-hmm that pointed out
you're free to securitize people's right
and pay for it right and then everybody
wins yeah it's not what we do okay so
but that's that's something we could do
though we could we are not in an
economic that would be a Cosi and rice
on right now it's called a Koshien
solution right and the funny part about
it that the hysterically funny part
about it is that no capitalists who
claim that they're interested in getting
rid of the inefficiency that comes from
being forced to use your own labor are
interested in the model in which you
actually pay people for their
securitized rights because the real
thing they're interested in is not the
tiny inefficiency which is called the
harbor core triangle there's a giant
structure below it called the more Hoss
rectangular chance furred from labor to
capital the amazing thing is you've
referenced this several times over
cocktails yeah in the last two years
yeah well but
my point this is because I'm sorry
chatter no but I say sorry I see it
differently same I see your comment that
well don't we want the best and the
brightest where you don't reference wage
competition it sounds more like
intellectual competition right when you
when you when you open a border and
selectively only in certain fields it's
like opening a window in an airplane and
it specifically affects the seat at
which it's opened differently than
everywhere else in the plane right right
so the the problem I have with this is
that it's a large mimetic complex and
get it popping back up to the Jeff
Epstein issue the entire University and
scientific complex was built on this
incredible embedded growth obligation
right that is the thing that caused the
system to have to rescue itself with
immigration so it's really not about
immigration or brown people or I don't
want to compete against the best in the
brises the issue was we didn't have
enough people to feed into a pyramid
system and what you could do is you
could you could reference a poverty
differential between Asia which was
training people except ibly well in
technical subjects but had at a lower
level now that's changed some to fill in
the bottom of the pyramid and so that's
really what it was it was an economic
exponent that has nothing to do with the
best and the brightest or the color of
one's skin it was just a way of saving a
pyramid scheme well so clearly there's
room for innovation on all these fronts
and we should be eager to do it and we
should be certainly eager to find Ponzi
schemes that we didn't know where Ponzi
schemes right like well yeah I think
it's we again this cut touches where we
started when we're talking about
Samantha power and other and the
Southern Poverty Law Center I think
there there are systems we set up with
the best of intentions and you know
projects and and meme you know mimetic
complexes we launched you know upon the
world with the best of intentions and we
don't see the way incentives will align
or though or they you know the knock-on
effects or the externalities of doing
those things
and it's just the world is more
complicated than we realize well and
that's what was so that's like the thing
that scares me a little bit remember I
said that I have malware in my head yeah
my belief is is that a lot of the
beautiful things that you were thinking
about about being open to the world
training the best and the brightest
keeping some of them for ourselves
distributing some of them back home to
grow the pie for everyone at cetera et
cetera
that's a memetic complex that I I
associate with malware it's not that
there aren't aspects of it was moved but
I think it's close to the right program
so for instance you know like if you say
yeah it's it's the fact that I am NOT
thinking when I say that about the I
forget how you put it but the may be the
difference between the local case and
the imported case right you know in the
but by analogy you know opening the
window on the airplane or just the fact
that you know that you you've got people
here who are paying taxes to help build
out local infrastructure that some then
some Titan of industry is going to
leverage and globalize right and you
know that money is not coming back to
right who are paying taxes games the
totality of these games is what got us
very angry at the clinton-era people
guys is that the the the bread DeLong's
and Paul Krugman's and jugdish bug
booties and Bill Clinton's of the world
all these people pushed out this idea
and we didn't know how to how to oppose
it but what they were doing was allowing
a slice of our country to continue to
grow its slices of the pie
mm-hmm but again it's just easy to find
the non nefarious not malignantly
selfish what happened I'll give you
another example which which I think is
you're totally familiar with but well
seem less sinister or at least it seems
so to me so you take what happened to
the music industry right so it's like
you we have a a breakthrough in
technology we go from vinyl to CDs and
then
you know we suffer those jewel cases for
about a decade and then we get pamphlet
threes which open the door to piracy of
a sort no one has anticipated and then
we managed to close down the piracy we
have the you know the iTunes Store and
people are but but because of this this
explosion of piracy and now the prospect
of just you know now it's all bits it's
not atoms anymore
we have a just a fundamental devaluation
of the product rightly the music then
the music the value of the music has
basically gone to zero right because my
using a copy of it is not it's not
taking two things
it's an exhaust ability and
excludability right ideas that if I buy
a vinyl record one my use of it will
eventually wear down the grooves that we
used to do in the old days and to my
having the record means that you don't
have a probably yeah and that the the
per the unit cost is not just I can't
copy your record for free yeah that is
this issue about private goods and
services became public goods and
services and even the die-hard
economists who a free-market have to
recognize that if something is
inexhaustible and an excludable price
does not equal value and therefore it
cannot command its value so that was
clear to many of us just as but I'm
saying there's a non nefarious account
of what happened there where your iTunes
right your Apple you open iTunes for the
good of all right bu you obviously want
to make a profit right this is a
fantastic business but what when if
you're the musician right now who's now
whose catalog is now worth you know one
tenth of what it used to be worth and
now you're you have this sort of life
change foisted on you we're now the only
way for you to make ends meet is to tour
but you're you know 70 years old and you
you know you felt your touring was
behind you right all of this looks awful
but again nobody was thinking about that
guy when they when these changes
bullshit well it's easy to see that most
people weren't thinking where no one no
one had
and intentions toward that remember
information just wants to be free and
free like beer and all that I thought
that stuff was just like moronic at the
time the same thing with NAFTA right the
claim not it began so what you had in
your sights was not you can't yeah I
don't think you're the wrong theory of
mind if you think everyone was aware of
what you were aware of and just had the
same ethical no switch flipped in the
other direction the class the economic
class teaches public goods in every econ
101 textbook right they also teach trade
they have two different names for what
happens to improve a society in terms of
how its measured one called Pareto
improvement which is that everybody in
the society is as good or better off and
the other one called Caldor Hicks which
is some people get hurt some people get
helped but were you to tax the winners
to pay the losers everyone Getty Pareto
improved okay when you ask these people
in real time why are you talking about a
Kaldor Hicks improvement in Pareto term
so this is the technical esoteric
conversation why is your exoteric
description of this at odds with your
esoteric alright this is pure Strauss
e'en cryptic bullshit mmm
they said well we can't really say that
and we hope that somebody it's not our
job it was this wall of total nonsense
and it wasn't that this wasn't being
said in real time what the number of
people I'm sure you can find the people
at the conference who were I mean it's
you know they have they have one way of
speaking to the profession and one way
of speaking on the York Times is one of
the reasons why you and I split on this
seem to leb I stood shoulder-to-shoulder
with the seam during the total nonsense
called the Great Moderation in our
financial structure in before 2008 and
this I the only reason why I've split on
the seam is that
he just wakes up one morning and you
know off his meds and attacks me for
reasons I can never but it's NASM would
so it's like it's totally personal like
oh it's um it's intended to be personal
it's not that I take it personally I'm
actually I don't even think it's
intended or be personal but he can
correct me on that but it's apropos of
nothing like I've been you know I've
been sleeping when he was sleeping and
then I won Twitter and I see that he's
attacked me by name for some reason when
my phone lights up and it says there's
no intellectual Kongo and it says Nassim
Nicholas Taleb he's been my friend for a
long time
I literally shake like I have to hit
right right yes but that's a problem of
his personality that he's exporting to
the environment no you're part of the
environment look nassim is not an inside
cat he just isn't I see the things he
does and I get I get a lump in my throat
and I think am I gonna have to defend
this I know I know what he does but I
think people don't understand him so at
least let me offer up an apology for the
seam to lab which he may rip my head off
for saying and the seam is constructed
around things that are much larger than
what other people are considering and I
don't I'm not saying that he does
everything well I obviously have a
totally different tack than he does so
I'm very uncomfortable with his methods
but let's at least say what they are and
steel man it to the extent possible
other people say you you you Joe are
misusing statistics nassim would say
there's a problem with statistics
yeah and it's constructed to be misused
and it's misused all the time in the
same way and if you do anything that you
were normally taught to do in statistics
class if you have a PhD in statistics
you're part of the problem and I'm gonna
hold you personally responsible now this
is very disconcerting to people yeah
except I mean I I don't think we should
spend a lot of time on this but they're
they're areas where I am not qualified
to fact-check him throughout the areas
where I am where his opinions are just
as strident it's just just a deluge of
bullshit coming from him so like you
know the stuff he has said about
religion and science is not even I mean
the truth
it's not even wrong it's like its
incoherent it's not like he's got a a
counterpoint that I still think is wrong
but you know it has to be argued again
look I've got just this vomitus look
I've gotten there too I can't stand the
style because it just hurts me like I'm
very uncomfortable by it however there
are plenty of times when I thought he
was talking nonsense that like at first
it sounds like he's making a sensible
objection then I'm just like convinced
this he's going off the rails and then I
pushed further and it turns out there's
even more of a point so I have learned
to be very cautious around him not
because he's the person you want around
for most of the time but when we were in
the middle of the Great Moderation
and I I punked out because I was I was
with him and I was giving talks about
Epstein and Madoff there was a -
mysterious functions in New York right
and I used to put slides up about black
arts capital it was sort of a play on
like black stone or black rock and the
idea is we tell you what we're doing but
we'd have to kill you right the we we
just didn't know and I got Madoff wrong
I thought he was front-running his
legitimate business which attorney that
was just a Ponzi scheme
but I knew Epstein was very likely to be
something totally other than he was
nassim during this period of time that
we were both discussing the nonsense
that was the supposed Great Moderation
mm-hm
was the other guy who would take as much
punishment as the community would throw
at him and they were just humiliated
it's like oh he made one lucky trade in
1987 the guy's an idiot he's a blowhard
he's a fool and I couldn't take the
pressure from giving this talk that
obviously we hadn't banished volatility
and I think around 2005 I was about
three years in and the sium says you
know you're gonna regret getting out of
this early you should see it through and
it always stuck with me that I didn't
quite have the courage or the strength
or the guts of the disagree ability to
continue at least to hold the
intellectual position I couldn't time
when this thing was gonna blow but it
was you know I wrote this thing on
mortgage
back securities with Adil Abdul Ali in
2001 mm-hmm
this was nonsense and it was a world in
which almost no one was willing to call
it out and so the singularity in my in
my world about Nasim has to do with he's
willing to be one person against
billions he will he will literally just
stand up against any crowd okay well so
that's that's often a bug and you found
the one case perhaps where it was a
feature but it's I mean first of all
we're all like that to some degree I
mean we're all standing up her on me
right and yeah but I mean III do it you
do it but yeah you don't get weak-kneed
I get weak-kneed what yeah occasionally
but it's it's there is a kind I mean
again I'm and not to psychoanalyze him
but there's there's a sort of trumpian
level personality problem layered on top
of his intellect where I'm not disputing
the guy is smart he said there's no
question he's smart but there's just
there's so much personality to get
through and wrangle with to interact
with whatever whatever smarts are
showing up for depending on the topic
and again with some topics you know I
haven't found the smarts but I'm not
disputing that the guy obviously he's
intelligent it's just he's so there's no
one more enamored of his intelligence
than him right and it's just it's like
that level of egocentricity again it has
a kind of trumpian you know peacock fan
quality to it and in in the cases where
it's warranted it's still extra and his
bullshit and it's annoying when it's
unwarranted it's embarrassing and he has
zero sense of where he is on that scale
I hear what you're saying I do have the
sense of the number of floorboards that
I can hide under when the storm troopers
come for me a very few and far between
that I can count on
mm-hm and I can count on his okay we
don't need a deranged on that you're
already in a high price on person I get
well no I'm loving about on on personal
loyalty yeah well but you know Sam I
honestly I find the same thing about you
Gary if I'm in a storm you're one of the
tiny number of phone calls I can place
and it's very odd for me
I would want you to I would want you to
feel that way I did a and absolutely so
what I call pick it up and yeah yeah
okay but not you need not shudder at
what's coming but getting getting back
to the to this large so with all of
these very dangerous and disturbing
topics I start to understand that you
believe and I I think it's correct that
we can often get to Hell through a road
paved with good intentions
yeah I don't disagree with and and the
converse is also true you can have you
can have good effects of bad intentions
and that's and you shouldn't neglect too
highly there you know because like that
the I think intentions matter for the
most part I mean tensions are the
operating system so because like if
you're if you're iterating on your
intentions if you're if you're error
correcting right and cueing back to to
the the outcomes you actually want right
that is those are the people we can
collaborate with it you know when
they're when they're ethical the the
people who are right by accident or
producing good things by accident are
it's how it's how we encode this that's
so interesting to me like when we order
veal we just saved the word via we don't
think about what it is that we're
causing to a current I want that I want
the three-minute video before I eat the
veal exactly right like very few of us
do that when I think about like how
Debbie Wasel that's why I don't order
veal right that's a difference at a
certain point
too much information has a consequence
right like I I'm not comfortable with
veal or foie gras right yeah so it's
like if and it would matter if you said
well here's veal but this is veal this
is pain-free veal right this is veal
that was you know synthesized in a lab
no animals involved the the problem goes
away so that's that that's the fact that
there's you'd want there to be a
difference there you wouldn't we well
take the most extreme case you wouldn't
want to be the person who would pay more
for the veal if you knew there was more
so suffering associated with it rightly
you wouldn't what we wouldn't wouldn't
want
the per it would be the person who for
whom the suffering is part of the
pleasure right
that's see there that's clearly a place
on the moral landscape you don't want to
be and yeah and you don't want to be
associated with right so if that's at
all unsavory then there's there many
gradations of better than that right so
let's get back to my issue about orcas
are either the best or worst species
yeah nobody I didn't mean to derail yeah
but it matters like we need to unpack
the mimetic complex and get it what's
inside and it matters if we if we fail
to it's there's a lot inside and we're
unaware of it sure know that that
matters okay how often are we just
saying veal but a very lower example
what I remember when Debbie
wasserman-schultz was being interviewed
about super-delegates and she said
they're not super-delegates their
unpledged delegates and delegates and
why do we have to have them and I think
she said something to the effect and if
I'm getting this wrong I apologize
something like well you wouldn't want
the the people who aren't regular party
workers you know just being able to take
over the party something like this I was
thinking oh that's what we all think it
is that it's a primary and that the
people who were registered Democrats
should figure out who they should
support as a candidate her point was
what we have to have a thumb on the
scale otherwise democracy might happen
right yeah and like that thing is how we
encode the badness we encode it by
creating some different way of talking
about it how we encode it or we fail to
encode it how it becomes operable or how
well nobody's a bad person in their own
mind most of the time yeah most so when
I do bad things I encode it differently
so we were just in a in a situation
where we were waiting in a very long
line of cars for an off-ramp and our car
you know sort of zoomed ahead and then
asks somebody's you know understanding
we would cut in right towards the exit
so we're sort of high-fiving like cheese
we almost got caught in that really long
line later in the day
somebody cuts in front of us much less
of it yeah probably can you believe that
guy and so this this way in which we
sort of see ourselves the permanent like
good guy protagonist in the first case
being savvy yeah but so don't you think
living a good life is in large measure a
matter of
squeezing the the Delta between those
two states among you think that that's
true yeah that's why it was a leading
question I know I know but I think that
it's actually much more tricky um so
let's take the the antithesis what if I
told you that I thought it was a matter
of getting broadening that Gulf right so
to be more extremely at odds with
oneself depending on what side of the
table you're on and those I think you
would have been less likely to cut in
line mm-hm but if you did cut in line I
wonder if you'd be less likely to notice
it and talk about it the way I do so I
think that your morality and my morality
differs slightly I don't think you're
giving me and you're giving us seem to
lab to much credit and you're not giving
me enough those right so so I am well
she was pretty consistent in a lot of
ways yeah what I aspire to be is to to
cut in line the right amount okay and to
be appropriately non-judgmental when I
see someone else cut in line right
that's very odd I'm pretty close to that
yeah I mean I so I don't have too many
illusions about what it is to do it and
what and but what it is when somebody
else does it so I don't I'm not as and
when I catchment when I occasionally
catch myself in that that mismatch
between you know who I'm capable of
being in one moment and how judgmental I
am of somebody else in that same mode
noticing your own sort of issues makes
you a better person if you can port them
more generally so in other words if you
say look I I recognize that you know I'm
not the I'm not the best around food or
something but yeah I am very conscious
in some other area like being timely
well if you can recognize somehow
somebody else's failings as akin to your
own in a different area and port that
right that's a way in which like being
in touch with your own hypocrisy I think
makes you a better person and I worry
about people who are trying to rid
themselves of their hypocrisy rather
than but first noticing it and then sort
of minimizing it so that it's less
garish but yeah but to be to truly want
to minimize it you have to be in touch
with it right so there's nothing you run
those that's the two pieces of software
you're running at the same time but I
think it's more like I don't see any
prospect for ridding myself of it and
other people say oh I caught something I
have to get rid of it you know it's like
you can imagine state that they could
but more or less that you can't live
with that we because you're not a
unitary thing right like you aren't a
unitary thing right and most of us yeah
even though we know that we still treat
ourselves as unitary things which is
bizarre yeah well you're you're in it I
work hard not to do that I yeah but I
don't have an app and I don't do do
these practices but I'm still very
conscious of that the fact that I'm not
I'm not unit area know that I mean that
if you follow that a little bit further
that becomes very interesting because
you're not eight but that doesn't mean
you there's not there's no norm you want
to to aspire to follow right like you
can be there are phases of your mind you
can prefer to others and you and you can
and there's also something that happens
when you're when you cease to be taken
in by your your different selves and all
these different modes right to the to
the normal degree then you can actually
then there's a kind of freedom to to
navigate to it to a kind of a happier
but confrontation but there is some way
in which what you're talking about is
that one of your Parliament's of selves
is that your meta self which you're
probably getting as close to identifying
with unitarity as anything else well
it's just there is in the morning the
subroutines you would probably call Sam
Harris
well would a it's it's it's more
diaphanous and that may ultimately
stress consciousness I mean the only
thing that can supervise anything is or
be aware of anything or experience
anything is what I'm calling
consciousness now that's not when you
really pay attention to what that's like
it doesn't actually answer to the to the
name I or me I mean it really it's just
it's just this open space in which
everything's appearing including
thoughts and intentions and desires and
emotions and there it really is a
cacophony but the cacophony changes the
more you fall back to this position of
just witnessing the show right and so
you know it's like you're you're I get
that make one analogy that's actually
fairly apropos is the difference between
dreaming and lucid dreaming right the
more you lucid dream the more you
actually can kind of change your dreams
I mean that's what it is the point yeah
but it's like but you're still you know
there's a consequence to being lucid and
in your end being perpetually lost in
thought being prepared of noticing not
noticing thought as thought being
identified with every intention that
that surfaces in the mind is really
deeply analogous to be to being asleep
and dreaming and not knowing you're
dreaming well you're in a situation
you're not recognizing well it's
interesting because sometimes I can't
actually use the information so for
example when you went into the don't we
want the best and brightest thing right
I thought oh my god Sam is gonna drag me
there and that way he's a guy who
believe well no because because there is
no thing called Xena philic restriction
ism which is what most of us are
certainly I am in in my belief structure
and the idea that every single news
organ is ready to call any restriction
as to xenophobe I'm thinking oh my god
Sam is dragging me to this place he
doesn't even know it and I'm starting to
get angry and agitated and excited and
there was nothing I could do to actually
I couldn't find any control knob but so
it did come back to - to earth where
you know because something more concrete
than pure consciousness the I'm aware of
the potential hypocrisy in judging
people I said take you know I just kind
of shit all over and now seem to live
right
I am total I so I don't believe in free
will
yeah I know he didn't invent himself
like there's a place in which I'm
totally non-judgmental of him and these
you know he can't do otherwise right
he's just he's just being the perfect
version of nothing to live as his Donald
Trump right like this just and in
Trump's case the thing that I'm
judgmental I'm not especially judgmental
of him you know I mean he seems like a
malfunctioning robot to me he's just
what I'm judgmental of is the larger
situation of all of this happening and P
and half the population seem to be
pretending that is something optimal
about right that's like that that's
that's so terrifyingly risky to me that
I think it's appropriate to be in touch
with the the outrage module rather than
the non-judgmental all we're all in and
nobody invented nobody created
themselves module and but I I pick and
choose my moments of outrage and I get
off the ride as soon as it's no longer
as soon as I noticed there's no reason
to be on that's no longer adapted yeah
so it's like how much time am I get so
now like we in my use of social media
like I'll get on Twitter I'll see
something outrageous
I'll get triggered by it but I mean I'll
get off 30 seconds later and it's over
right whereas if I if I were to do the
thing that entangled me you know it
could you know could take up much more
of my life and so it's very interesting
to me that you've gotten off Twitter as
you become more focused on the
meditation and mindfulness part of your
offering right I mean I there's the
juxtaposition there may be somewhat
accidental but the the the vividness
like the
it there was a spell that's been broken
for me okay back to social media like I
I admit and actually I had paid lip
service to this and just didn't know
that it was just lip service but I had
been talking about Twitter and social
media generally is a psychological
experiment that we were running on
ourselves to which no one had consented
right we just enrolled right half of
humanity and this thing and we're just
you know let's see what happens and it's
it's clearly having effects that are at
best non optimal right you know at worst
you know catastrophic and I would I was
talking about this and thinking in these
terms but still totally embedded in in
the activity of taking Twitter seriously
and and feeling that it was a
professional necessity and on some of it
was just it was just sticky enough you
know emotionally like this is you know
because I'm getting a lot of my news
that way I'm following smart people I
want to see what articles they're
reading and there's an opportunity for
conversation and then somebody like
Nassim Taleb said something you know
outrageously stupid that is pretty you
know directed at me right and it goes
it's going out to hundreds of thousands
of people and so you know it's an
opportunity for me to tell them to fuck
off and so I find some way to say that
and this thing begins playing out and to
the degree that I've stepped away which
is like 95% now when I come back and I
see a you know some of my friends I see
you you know embroiled with you know you
know Claire Lima and or somebody and it
does look like I'm now in touch with the
do you saw that get diffused yeah I know
that and I think the skillful diffusal
of those conflicts is its own public
good that well Italy is I try to
maximize yeah there are people that I
could diffuse because I don't think they
want the thing diffuse like you got into
some you went on this person nice mangos
podcast that would talk about a no good
deed going you know there's just some I
did my best to launcher podcast there's
well if there's something wrong with
that account because there's many ways
in which it seems quite reasonable
yeah there's rated into mental
well there's a personal there's a
personal nastiness about it that just it
doesn't let up yeah and a lack of
charity and what I find is that there
are certain things I can do to slow down
that kind of negative experience and
then there are certain diehard actors
some of them are quite polite and
charming and funny who just will not
like their thing is they will ride this
to the most negative place if they can
get there and that sub-community I've
been talking about in terms of we have
diversity and inclusion which I'm
willing to that say is a good thing and
then it needs a different function which
is interoperability and exclusion
because there are certain people can't
be at the table for a conversation if
it's going to progress and because their
their interest is in dear alien now I
got into some weird thing just now do
you know the singer Billy Bragg I know
there's like a progressive you're kind
of like a punk arlo guthrie
how did Woody Guthrie rather yeah and
like he turns out he wrote a book and
he's talking about Eric Weinstein an
investment banker who is a fiery speech
you know champion won't meet with I
don't know some hole he's got a whole
story in his mind and only so he took a
shot at you and in his book he went on
sam cedars program well there's a venue
that is not gonna select for well i just
opinions I spoke to Sam look there's a
problem with the Saul Alinsky thing
where salt you know so little radical
the focus on ridicule I think it's hard
to remember like Country Joe and the
fish was ridiculing a bad war in terms
that are ridiculous you've now got a
group of people who if a mathematician
says you know that in in different
arithmetics you could have an equation
like two plus three equals one and so
then you get somebody saying I don't
know what they're smoking over there at
Princeton but yeah well that's ridicule
but you're ridiculing something
you strum and and didn't understand
right because the person actually was
making sense and so what I see is that
the left and in particular the Sam cedar
crowd has a doing that with abandon well
it's willing to do two separate things
sama is quite willing like there's this
whole thing but when you talk to Sam
cedar well you would debate Sam cedar
and my feeling is I would debate part of
Sam cedar the part that just is focused
on the ideas but the part that is kind
of like nasty and ridic in ridiculing
and doing the Alinsky thing I don't know
what to do with it I'm not interested
I've spoken to Sam cedar and the phone
is perfectly reasonable made sense to me
we disagreed on on positions but well
the the line that gets crossed for me
always with these guys and again it's a
it's disproportionately on the left is
the the line of conscious dishonesty
misses serious your brother's aphorism
bad faith changes everything fit changes
everything and I mean these guys are in
bad faith they know they're lying about
in my case my views my actual beliefs
and not all of them that there's just
too much information or pachtman
no David Pakman is fine I just did his
podcast yeah I know but David Pakman
said some pretty non charitable things
in some parts that seem kind of
ridiculing and amazing I think you me
other people though I haven't whatever I
haven't I have never seen him
misrepresent my views and I think that
made again I don't know I'm I just did
his podcast once but he seems like the
he seems like somebody who if I said
listen you got me wrong here
that would matter and he would he would
make an effort to that's me and that got
me right which is the problem that we
have increasingly is that the tactics
that are being used in what are called
progressive circles have been confused
with the content so that is the
objection to the vehicle which might be
Saul Alinsky's rules for radicals with
ladies with a totally unethical program
for smearing people dishonestly well
like you think technology well no it's
no
it's you're just it's an ends justify
the means that's the big problem on the
left yeah so but that ethic is is flawed
right so like so for instance it means
like with me and Trump like there's
nobody who you don't denigrate Trump as
avidly as I do but I am super careful to
be honest right so like I it's not that
you can anything you can smear him with
is fair because you can be saying I mean
the problem was all these guys can be
Sam cedar can be honest on his show and
still have a show right nobody's gonna
cancel him because he was too honest no
I I think that there's like this very
weird other I mean I don't to get into
the same cedar thing in particular first
of all because he can do a entire show
we know you just never have said hey but
I'll take these quotations and no but he
see he has Paquin's ability to reason I
mean I guess there's a banality of evil
right like there's not that many evil
people right there's just a lot of
people who are functioning in some
normal mode was with with normal
incentives and they become assholes
because they're not heroes right but so
it like it takes some work not to be an
asshole when you are incentivized to be
one and and all we're all vulnerable to
this but there's some people who have
just dude hashed into no for that
nonsense on the left makes me crazy
because in part it just feels like all
of my ideals turned into some pieces
yeah we're of the left not only the left
man I came from a farther left part that
I don't even I don't even know where you
started but yeah no I meant that I've
never been tempted to be anything other
than a Democrat I've never even said I'm
gonna be an independent because you know
the Democratic Party certainly if I can
if I can if I could move to another
party that made sense I'd do it yeah
yeah anyway I think that what they I
think that what we don't really
understand is is that there's a
homelessness problem that is really
significant if you are the sort of a
person who needs to attach to some kind
of institutional structure in a time
when there is no institution that
actually holds your perspective you're
gonna start to do very bizarre things
the other thing about you and and and me
is is the to some extent and I don't
think we can do this long
we're okay with being homeless right you
can remember first principles try to
think your way out of stuff but it was
very tough for most people and I think
that there is there are these sort of
collection points in the adaptive
landscape of politics would you would
you would disagree with it yeah well one
thing that seems important is the
connection to science I mean we're not
spending a lot of time talking about
science in this mode but the the the the
dispassion and self-criticism that is
the like is the only rubric under which
real science can be done bleeds into our
thinking about all these other issues
yeah I think that's that's got to be a
relevant variable this is it's like it
like you either have a scientific cast
of mind or you don't and when you don't
I have both right but when you when you
don't you're see you're not seeing the I
mean it's not even you're not even seen
intellectual dishonesty for what it is
right it just it's just like like
motivated reasoning it isn't a bad thing
right wishful thinking isn't a bad thing
confirmation bias isn't a bad thing
these are virtues this is in religion
well faith right this is this is you
know what is the issue with our friend
Jordan Peterson which is that when he
gets really far out there in the I know
people that called mythopoetic I don't
know the lingo yeah you always wondered
are you still maintaining a
fact-checking ability to bring you back
to earth and so as long as those two
facilities are present and in dialog and
as long as the fact-checking
you know what we what we call the
scientific method is in some sense
inadequate to me to explain how science
has progressed right all the mad
thinking and then the spirituality of
coming up with breaking new ground
doesn't give us ramanuja in about an
hour ago yeah so he's having dreams
about the goddess lakshmi handed him
theorems well there's there's that you
know the careless school of astronomy
that came up with infinite series before
newton and leibniz
was doing it in religious poetry you
know it Ryan died thinking over there in
Kerala so there is a there is a kind of
madness that you have to invite to break
new ground and there's a kind of sanity
that you have to invite to wrestle with
the madness and our friend Dan barkay
came up with this idea that science is a
two-front war but that most people are
have only been deployed to one front and
I think that that's a really it's a
really nice image I do worry that in
part the activist mindset particularly
on the left has a very clear idea which
is that yeah it's really a shame and the
number of people have to get hurt for
justice to be done and that is a highly
conserved idea that I had not understood
was was broadly distributed yeah but I
mean that that is a an ethic or a pseudo
ethic that we have to just relentlessly
criticize because it's so much harm it
gets done I mean that that is the the
thinking that allows good people or
otherwise good people to create immense
harm just like let's yeah throw throw
them off the rooftops because they you
know the purge is on and it's sorry we
have to break these many eggs like this
omelette but partially the question is
how do we spend enough time together to
get past this problem like I really
think it's quite serious that well part
of it is is that we're not actually
doing much of this face-to-face
like I've never met nassim I've never
met Sam seed or I've never met it they
shouldn't have been in the same sentence
a very different problems but if if I
had if before any of this had happened
says Sam cedar I think has done probably
a dozen shows or I mean I'm always
getting hit someone's always sending me
a video that he's made that you know I
don't watch by I log the fact that
there's he yet another export from his
world where he's he's attacked me
the if I had had lunch with him before
any of this ever a but he ever took an
interest in me there might have been a
very different well actually it's the
fact we've never you know we're this is
this is why I anchor to civility and you
you know you now seem as a friend of
yours so you have a you
there's a kind of a loyalty effect or
just a fact you know you have a
different relationship to his flaws
knowing him as a person and I the same
things happen to me like the fact that
I've hung out with Jordan or Ben Shapiro
who you saw heaven with Claire let's
talk let's talk about the Claire
situation okay that would have been
different had you never hung out with
Claire or it might have been different
no I think there was a more serious
issue and it just didn't do the flip it
around it was more of a betrayal you
know or seeming betrayal given the fact
that you had hung out together it wasn't
just coming over the transit rail in
part was was my betrayal of Claire I
just didn't know it well whatever I'm
just saying no change if you know each
other right and make a different point
right when somebody you know behaves in
a way that is very most unexpected right
what I try to do is I try to slow it
down I say I bet we're watching two
different movies yeah and your story in
my story or not the gears are not lining
up and so if we just push on the gears
the teeth are gonna pop off and it'll be
the end of everything and so with Claire
what I tried to figure out is why are
you repeatedly sort of coming at you
know do you need to burnish your
credentials that your objective that you
don't have tribalist loyalty that was
one set of issues there was another
issue which is that Nasim had gone after
Claire and I was silent I didn't want to
get involved I didn't like the way Nasim
was going about doing what he was doing
absolutely couldn't couldn't take it
didn't like it detested it on the other
hand I have a particular bug in my
bonnet about IQ and race which is that I
I think it's an absolutely dangerous
topic that's being explored in a really
bad way even by good people right and
that in part I IQ has this curse that
I've said it's a pretty good measure of
intelligence it would be much better if
it was obviously terrible or really
terrific but it's in exactly the wrong
place that it does tell us something
about intelligence and not nearly enough
so you can be a genius with low IQ right
that problem you know was being teased
out and
neither of them the reason I stayed out
of is just like I didn't believe in
Claire's position as I understood it and
I didn't believe in the seems tactics as
I understood them and Claire interpreted
that I think and I don't know this to be
true as well you know you're seeing me
getting mauled right and I thought you
would be there you know or something
like that and so in part just backing up
everything slowing it down trying to
listen you know Ben and I have gotten
sideways a few few times to his credit
every time I take something to Ben
Shapiro he'll think better of himself
and he'll yeah yeah no I mean that
that's my experience as well even though
he and the accounting part of his
business yeah ya know that counts for a
lot so so the the place where we've
we've reached some kind of bad faith
singularity right is where I think okay
there's like we just have to cut our
losses there's no conversation like
that's why I would never talk to Sam
cedar in a public forum he's he's proven
himself so committed to the singularity
I mean he's like there's a bunch of the
I can there's maybe 20 people who are
just on this part of the landscape where
there's no coming back from it I mean
made it that's coming obviously there's
an appropriate any conversation that
would have to happen would have to begin
with an actual apology like it's just so
bad there's no alternate movie version
that's exculpatory but right these
people know their line they're there
avidly lying it's all malicious it's all
it's all it's all Saul Alinsky it's all
just smears well it is it is Saul rescue
but the look the best that can be said
for it again I don't get along with it
right is I believe that they think that
they're in desperate times and they
believe that desperate times call for
desperate measures and that's sort of
the mindset which is the ridicule is
necessary to stop a greater evil and
that entitlement as soon as you start
experiment but Rico Rico is not the
problem it's the line that's the problem
you can I can honestly be honest but
it's expired it's probably watched 45
minutes of Sam cedar total you know
that's more than I've watched but I've
watched enough to know that these are
people who
when they're trafficking in audio of my
podcast that's been dropping yet just
show the opposite of what I was saying
and they get a thousand blistering
comments telling them brothers they keep
the audio up or they they don't whether
it be a member correct in here I agree
but that's what it's coming at that's
psychopathic behavior you know it's like
well whether or not they're Psychopaths
they're acting all right but that we've
got a giant chunk of our world and then
part a lot a lot of the sense making
apparatus that is explicitly amongst
itself psychopathic it believes that it
is under threat and desperate times and
desperate times call for desperate
measures this is its opportunity and
it's going to do things it's gonna be
the thing that I didn't understand about
it because I came from the left is is
that it just explicitly thinks in that's
too bad
right oh I'll get you a Kleenex next
it's just this dead cold-heartedness
that her progress requires that good
people get hurt
boohoo and and that ass fitting is so
hardcore that's gonna make that that
makes the trumpian backlash
understandable and that's and that's
what really in part what I'm trying to
get at which is is that when I went to
Washington in like 1996 on the
immigration issues I went into some
staffers like um warren of cubicles and
i saw the sign on one of the cubicles
that said if it's worth fighting for
it's worth fighting dirty for and i came
to understand that if you wanted to
survive and thrive and get stuff done in
washington that that had been absorbed
almost universally right and then once i
realized that i had to make a decision
did i really want to get good things
done or did i want to stay a person i
could live with and that's very painful
to actually have to think about yeah but
i think that is an easy choice or should
should be we want to make a we want to
create a world where that's an easy
choice we want to create a world in
which that's an easy choice what we've
created is a system of selective
pressures which may actually end up
selecting for that over and over again
and you don't realize and this is the
this is the issue the reason that so
many of these things make me angry like
the the Great Moderation
or the abuse of the immigration system
to decrease wages and then you clerk cry
xenophobia when somebody points it out
or NAFTA and a lot large areas of the
country get really hurt and you're
saying everybody's gonna be made better
off is is that all of these things I can
see in real time like right now what I
can see like those things of the past is
I can see this weird and this is getting
back to the Jeff Epstein thing there is
a deliberate attempt not to talk about
the intelligence community and it's
links to Jeffrey Epstein and it is clear
and it's a very short proof because
assume that he had no links to the
Intelligence Committee but none
whatsoever map somehow a member of the
Trilateral Commission affiliated with
Rockefeller University Harvard no links
to any intelligence community anywhere
in the world you could sell papers
debunking the claims that people want to
know which is how is this guy tied in
with the intelligence community right so
you're saying it's fishy that no one's
doing that well I mean it's beyond fishy
in other words you have something that
everybody is demanding and wants if it
weren't true hmm
you could get paid by showing that it's
not true or making the best argument
possible or making fun of how thin the
the claims are well that may yet happen
I mean I get again I don't know that
somebody isn't right in the 5,000 word
Atlantic article on Epstein it's gonna
answer it how long has it been this guy
supposedly commits suicide we don't know
whether you know what branch of the
decision tree that's on and you can
search go to the New York Times and
search on intelligence the thing I and
Epstein
like it's not being explored it's not
being shut down
it's like anechoic tile in your at
echolocating it's not what you're
hearing go to the search bar and search
for things that people are discussing
that don't come up and that's what's
telling you that there's something very
I mean this guy was a apparently a
serious sexual predator we're in the era
of me too right but there are anomalies
like that I mean the clear anomaly for
me was and it's one for which I
don't have any sinister explanation I
just think it's a anomaly of the news
cycle we're in right it's sort of what
Trump has done to our our information
diet when the Las Vegas shooting you
know perpetrated by a man whose name I
don't even know right and I'm a kind of
a student of these things but I never
even took the time to learn the guy's
name I think we you know many press
reports that has decided not use his
name no but this was the biggest
shooting in American history right right
and 48 hours later nobody was talking
about it well now that's not true
very yeah that's like it was it had
fallen out of the new cyber evil never
again it vanished very quickly but there
you I don't think there's any reason why
it vanished apart from the fact that we
just don't have the bandwidth for it
anymore it's like there was no there was
no link that made it clearly ideological
I mean that nothing surfaced he wasn't
that clear white supremacist or he
wasn't a jihadist I mean it was November
the word bump stuck yeah yeah so the
bumbles not a so why weren't we talking
about bumps though yeah so we banned
bump stocks as a result of that thing
and that's the that's the legacy of that
that atrocity but the if you had told me
at any point beforehand that you know on
you know whatever day of the week it was
you're gonna have a the biggest mass
shooting in American history by far and
it was going to be a fairly cinematic
one right I'm it's like you're talking
about shooting up from the windows of a
did you see Dan Bilzerian was that this
thing oh no no I think I dan Bilzerian
is that running out of the right thing
no say like we're under fire I'm gonna
go get my gun and you know he's like
he's doing it in real time if you told
me we're not gonna be talking about this
a week later right that just wouldn't
compute but that's that is that the
situation we're in I mean somehow it
just didn't survive the Darwinian
contest with whatever else was on social
media I really think that that's what
happens well so listen why aren't we
talking about it well that's that's see
looking you're starting to smile no this
is the thing that conspiracy theorists
get dead wrong which is you are allowed
to notice some very weird anon
and not have to say what it is you're
noticing right right so my claim like
wait but you don't buy my explanation
which is because there was not an
immediate purchase on a larger story of
motive and this guy you know it was just
not a lot of information came out about
this guy that was salient it just
we're so deluge by other stuff yeah most
of it would trump indirect you're not
you're not correct in my opinion so let
me get interesting so well the way I
would say it but whoever's right or
wrong I'm just saying that this belief
that I had now have that we have we have
a different relationship to information
now in really agree that we're cycling
through the ends very quickly but yeah
that was a spectacular there's a reason
we're talking it was amazing yeah
because it's anomalously weird how fast
that story disappeared oh yeah
now one of the things that you we have
to we have to talk about in that in that
realm is Dana Boyd and her discussion of
strategic silence so that's your search
string people playing along at home
strategic silence is a doctrine of some
kind that says that news media should
not report the news because of its
potential impact and where was this
articulated you should check out data
and society which is a particularly
interesting organization which fingered
our friends as the alternative
influencer network all right right and
we have Dana Boyd who I believe is sort
of in our circles in the tech circles
starts talking about the need for
strategic society girl Dana or a boy
Dana a female okay somebody I perceive
to be female yeah I don't want to touch
okay a human named Dana Boyd right and
strategic silence she also talks about
data gaps if I'm not mistaken I have my
terminology right and so then you have
to look at things like style guides like
the AP style guide or the New York Times
style guide which is the DES way in
which people are directed to report news
stories is there a danger of copycat
killings so there may be a body of
thought
what does one do around mass shootings
so that we don't have future mass
shootings or if this is particularly
exciting to certain people should we
publish the manifesto
so as you start to understand what the
meta rules around these things are some
of those could be innocent well I think
I think that some are better than
innocent I think some are benign and
we've been slow to adopt them I think I
think I think the fact that I don't know
this guy's name is probably a good thing
for the world and that was that was part
of the style new style guide you just
don't you read the New Zealand shooters
manifesto no but I a part of it but yeah
I haven't I haven't read the whole thing
no so but like what I don't want is I
don't want somebody saying we should not
read this we should criminalize reading
the New Zealand shooters manifesto but
by the way let me tell you he told he
told us all that Candice Owens was his
inspiration right because that's not
what the shooter did so now we well no
one wants to criminalize I'm just saying
that you know it's a simple or disturb
it's appropriate for the for journalists
to worry that merely shining a light
push up pointing a camera at this new
atrocity is the the should be that the
default setting right like name the guy
let's get into his story let's find out
why he did it and do all this we're in
such a much more dangerous place in my
opinion and I but know about maybe we're
talking past each other here it's just
that it is we've been very slow to
realize that the part of the the mimetic
contagion here is the copycat effect the
fact that people in in their own
perverse way these people are being
martyred and lionized just by the just
the mere sharing of this in place in
memory that in a better world we would
have a situation by which we would not
want to communicate these people famous
we don't there's the famous part of the
motive right posthumous fame even is
part of the motive so as part if it even
if it's not part
the motive it's part of what is
attractive to the living aspiring gunmen
first of all let me steal me in your
position to make sure I'm getting it and
then I can take issue with you and
you'll see whether I'm smoking adding or
subtracting right I think what you're
saying is is that because of the
information quality and the fame quality
and the inspirational quality to copycat
killers that communicating the
information that somebody wish to
communicate provided they're willing to
make a down payment in in terms of dead
bodies taken you know lives taken out of
this world
I'm not even focused on the manifesto
I'm focused on just just naming the
person okay you know you're sympathetic
at some level with the concept of
strategic silence yeah I would be
sympathetic with the concept of
strategic silence if I trusted the
people who are supposed to manage it but
that's I'm trying to get to the next
layer I understand that concern I am
very concerned that the people who are
enthusiastic about strategic silence are
interested in telling us partial
information about all of these things so
that we cannot actually tell what the
hell just happened well yet so you just
change the topic to jihadism and we're
perfectly in agreement because yes they
will allied the religious identity of
perpetrators in various contexts and
actually hide information from us right
so those are you'll see so you'll see
something happen it'll that the media
will pretend is inexplicable right like
the end of the Orlando shooting it's
like maybe this guy was just it was his
repressed homosexuality that was that
was the problem right and yet those who
have a little bit of information
recognize that this is a clear-cut case
of jihadism and indoctrination and a
spread and the consequences of certain
ideas and the analogous situation on the
other side would be what if we were
going to systematically conceal evidence
of you know you know white supremacy
being the motive for a certain what I'm
going to say is that in all of these
killings like you just pointed out that
the Unabomber you read reread the
Unabomber manifesto right now the
Unabomber
a story called ship of fools which I
thought was relatively interesting about
people losing their heads in social
justice and at the society system in
that in the manifesto - yep he's he's
very critical of he's not allowed it
done man yeah I don't that Kaczynski guy
however the point was is that you were
able to mine that for information and
then you were able to reach some pretty
interesting conclusions about where
Kaczynski was relative to society in
general you trusted yourself right okay
my guess is that when it comes to
jihadis you are more interested in
communicating the information about what
the motivational structure is because it
is prescriptive that something might be
done however well so actually there's
another reason is it's it's not just
that it's prescriptive it may not be
it's just that is it they're more
there's more contact between there more
levers to play with you try to control
it and it's a much larger problem no
kidding right but on the other hand if I
look at the New Zealand shooters and the
Squirrel Hill shooters manifestos right
it's disgusting and it has content yeah
and you know the way in which I can
explain to people how all of the open
border type stuff is going to cause
future problems is just to say you may
not think of a country the way I I do or
somebody else but imagine that somebody
comes to your home as a guest and you
give them the key and they say I hope
you don't mind but I noticed that there
were a lot of people on Skid Row today
who didn't have anything to eat no place
to sleep so I ran off 2,000 copies of
your key and I hope we can adopt all
those people when they come over later
tonight because I gave them the address
and the security code now if that starts
to rattle around in your brain you don't
feel good about it you may not conceive
of your country as a house with a with a
front door and a security code and rules
as to who gets in and out but they do
and some of those people are gonna go
crazy and they're going to kill people
and
know that to be the case and it's not
that I'm sympathetic with a synagogue
shooter or a mosque killer fuck those
guys the point is is that we are not
trying to get the information because we
have this class of people this
intermediating class that I don't trust
as far as I can throw them and that you
still have more residual trust in in
other words my feeling about data in
society is is that I understand all
sorts of things that they're trying to
do but they're super dangerous they are
incredibly dangerous in part because
they're gonna be backed by people like
Bill and Melinda Gates yeah or the
footnote foundation or whatever it is
this is the Southern Poverty Law Center
problems that another guys yeah so it's
you know I think you and I have been
talking past each other a little bit
here all right I I totally agree that in
this case we can't really trust the
gatekeepers what the only thing that I
was expressing open open mindedness
about our agreement about with respect
to strategic silence is there is this
you know what is strategic silence sale
well in some ways there's it's
impossible it's like you take it out of
the know I know that yeah but like but
there's the atrocity side of it which is
its own thing but just take a take the
the the case of famous suicides right
we know that suicide is contagious and
the the you know this has a name the
birth of fact you know based on goods as
novel The Sorrows of Young Bertha so
there there's the fact that a
significantly Pro a sufficiently
prominent person who's got any kind of
especially and this is true I think for
any suicide but especially if there's
some sort of Byronic you know romantic
gloss that can put on it you know
suicides go up and suicides go up in
ways that are you know hurry about you
but plane crashes go up right and we
believe you know I don't know if the
data has changed on this but as of you
know 20 years ago or whenever this was
done I think this was in might have been
in call Tina's book influence
the plane crashes go up and the
interpretation of that is that some
number of airline pilots commit suicide
with everyone on board right you know
that we know that's happened before
there's this one famous case is that but
yeah but you know just out of the
statistics that seems to be suggested
but so what do you do when Anthony
Bourdain commits suicide
how do you cover that story there's good
there has to be some style guide around
how you cover it and it's not and at one
point it could look like an
unwillingness to actually get at the
truth but what's your what what's
actually motivating you is not an
unwillingness to get to the truth it's
just you you're aware of the potential
contagion effect here depending on what
the what the actual story is so I can't
figure out where our energy differs I
agree with you that in theory strategic
silence like don't publicize things
where the benefit is very slight right
and the cost is enormous I get it but
right now we're in some different place
which is that a lot of us I mean just
don't trust any of the gatekeepers like
there's not one gatekeeper that I want
making that decision for me at the
moment and you know in particular it's
very weird that I like I get the concept
Dana but I don't trust you because you
came out with this alternative
influencer Network thing a zero
methodology on it so you're volunteering
it's all guilt by association and it's a
and you know Noam Chomsky talks to
stefan molyneux and he's not included
right yeah it's total nonsense and it
the person who wrote it has been
revealing herself as a complete activist
rather than a researcher right so
there's there's total breakdown on that
thing what I'm confused by is the more
of this kind of shielding that we have
the more likely we're going to have four
more years of Donald Trump and I can
only imagine what's going to happen
after an eight year Trump presidency are
we gonna move to the next level of
really unexpected candidate yeah we've
got to realize
we're making out for the most shocking
rose ceremony ever we've got to realize
that what we're doing is we're making
people crazy because they can see that
it's the Truman Show yeah so if we had a
discussion where we like have you heard
strategic silence before I think I'd
vote for me I know yeah I think I'd
heard the phrase but but the national
discussion and coming to a national
consensus about this or we're gonna use
strategic silence when it's jihadi
violence right and we're not going to
use it when it's white supremacist
violence yeah in a different way we're
gonna leak particular information
provided it goes this way not that way
that's what's going to cause an infinite
series Trump yeah well yeah and more
importantly for this topic I think it's
it's imperative that we understand what
what is actually going on and what why
people are doing what they're doing and
what the what the the the scale of the
the relative risks are and just how big
a problem is I mean my last podcast
which I haven't released yet is on this
topic just talking to someone who's
written a history of white supremacy and
white power in the US and I'm just
trying to get a handle on how big a
problem it is and I and I came away from
that podcast convinced more or less that
nobody knows how big a problem it is
right so but there's there's a there's a
in this particular space there's the
possibility of conflating the the new
mimetics
of 4chan and hn where you have insell
teenagers trafficking in in holocaust
imagery and you know and lynching photos
exactly right just to get a rise out of
the normies right where it's not
actually the the ideological software
program that we're worried about when
we're worried about the KKK and
neo-nazis and their sincere attempt to
well there's that and there's also kula
in the u.s. right I agree with that then
we also have this very different
situation in which we have a problem on
the Left where I don't think that the
left is as yet it has the same
propensity for violence that the KKK
style white supremacist had right
it's been totally normalized this
far-left woke destruction of the basic
ability to think inside of the sense
making organs whereas there's no
normalization of Stormfront right and
people are gonna try to say that the
president you know is the normalization
of that and I created a lot of problems
with the presidency but I don't think
that that storm front you know and so in
that picture I think what I'm
increasingly coming to the conclusion of
surrounds the idea that we're trying to
have very low resolution conversations
which is what the baby boomers and the
traditional media taught us to do we
have these very small sound bites and
they do you think the left is worse than
the right are you kidding me
well there's no way to square that
because it's multivariate and it depends
which way you compressed worse or better
to say which thing actually you know
you're talking about potential energy or
you're talking about realized energy
yeah yeah and also there's just the
fringe is not the same it's not the same
thickness on the far left and the far
right like that the far the far left
fringe has much more of effect much more
than effect on the mainstream then the
far-right fringe does I mean the far
left fringe has affected how the New
York Times does its thing and how Texas
looking how it and you know you don't
have if we had members of the KKK
determining what gets published on the
opinion page of the New York Times right
that would be the analogous problem
right and and that's we don't see it we
don't see it no and we can't discuss it
in my opinion because of the key thing
that we were supposed to do with
long-form stuff is to raise the level of
resolution possible in the discussion we
didn't push out enough terminology
enough sort of new patterns of thinking
and that's the work left to be done so
this is like sort of a personal question
and it has to do with the fact that I
know you've reviewed some of the
episodes of this show that you've been
partially responsible for helping birth
you have any feedback for me as to
what's worked what hasn't I
can sort of talk to you a little bit
about where I'm thinking about taking
the show and are you happy with it or
what would you like to see from the
portal I've not know this from anybody
else yeah no I'm just I'm incredibly
happy you're doing it I think it's
you're the right man for the job so you
should be on to the it said you should
be I'm just you know it's about time
right like I've been waiting you you
have been nudging but like it's a little
bit intimidating to you know for some
reason I broke into this sort of top
echelon of people with enormous
audiences and really professional
content so it's you know but what I what
I think you're doing is novel in that
why so you know you only have so much
control over what you get because you
know the other person has to show up and
you're not quite sure in many cases what
they're gonna bring but like in your
case you had a conversation with David
Wolpe right who I've debated several
times both in public and in private and
you had a great conversation with him
right so like you had a very good a much
better conversation with him than I've
ever had with a tough fair wait well
he's fair no it's no you know it's not
her because no because the conversation
wouldn't have happened if I hadn't
observed your conversations okay them
and I sort of watched but I've observed
my conversations with him and I
guarantee you the next conversation I
have with him yeah we'll still be worse
than the conversation you had with them
right because I'm gonna feel like I need
to fight certain battles right yeah like
I I'm not gonna let him get away with
certain things which you are right to
let him get away with one because you
honestly feel like you know you're not
you don't occupy precisely my position
with respect to those points so you're
not being dishonest you just see it
differently but to you also are trying
to have a different conversation you're
not trying to pressure test all of his
ideas you know about God whenever they
surface you although you did go in that
direction a little bit you were actually
trying to have a conversation about the
richness of Judaism
without coming in with my agenda which
is clearly we have to get past this
this parochial you know balkanization of
our humanity based on these and you know
Iron Age philosophies right we have to
find some new modern non-sectarian
equivalent to everything we think we
care about in religion that's not your
game and because it's not your game you
had a much better experience of David
Wolpe than I get so that's a and was a
conjecture that there was more there
yeah you know in part borne out well it
was born from watching you guys interact
and figuring that in fact I don't think
David was particularly attached to the
rigid interpretation of the text in a
literal sense nor even to the concept of
an anthropomorphic like deity oh yeah I
know he's not and I mean the first time
I debated him maybe it was the second
time with hitch you know in one of the
middle one of those debates I was sort
of blindsided by his lack of commitment
to a personal deity because I thought I
said something that presupposed that he
believed in a god that could hear our
prayers and he said I wouldn't believe
it what makes you think I believe in a
God who can hear prayers right and you
know he's a conservative rabbi so this
is you know this is a this was a
surprise to me but anyway I've I've
changed my view of what what to expect
there as a result of that but still
there are things he would say that would
get me bogged down in the way that I got
bogged down with Jordan Peterson in our
first podcast with you know a bit debate
a two-hour conversation about the nature
of truth right now so with Jordan I had
to decide okay because we've just put a
bunch of live events on the calendar and
we need to find a way to have a an
enjoyable conversation in addition to
disagreeing where we're going to
disagree I have to there has to be a
different geometry to it here it just
can't always just you know dive straight
to the you know the into the the true
basin of Attraction which is you know
what let's figure
exactly what you mean because I smell
something fishy right so but so I
thought it was great your conversation
with David and I really enjoyed I
learned a lot you know it's like I
learned stuff from him that I wouldn't
learn had I been having the conversation
because I wouldn't can't tell you how
much that means to me thank you yeah so
so I know I think what you're doing here
is bound to be super unique because
you're I mean not in a Europe you are a
real polymath doing this and they're not
a lot of people who are doing podcasts
with the same kind of wealth of
information you have on so many fronts
so I I'm flattered and I really
appreciate what you're saying the odd
thing is is that it's not really
supposed to be an interview show mm-hm
and we've done a bunch of interviews in
part you know Joe said something Joe
Rogan said something to me early on and
he said look at my earliest podcast he's
like stop worrying about whether it's
perfect
I was just clowning around with my
friends with a webcam and I went back to
the original Joe Rogan experiences and
you're not kidding I haven't done that
you'll enjoy the problem is is that
people are really angry about everything
that happens as I'm beginning it's like
you know what why why is the glass on
the edge of the table and you know the
the plosives are too loud and you know
that there's like a lot of stuff that is
there there is no introductory period
because weirdly this thing was discussed
on the Rogen program and so we reviewed
on Apple because of their ridiculous
algorithm a number one eight hundred
thousand podcast and you were number one
exactly which I've never been remotely
close to since and even though the
podcast has grown in listenership so
partially what's happening is that we're
just trying to find a format and to get
comfortable with the idea but a lot of
what it's supposed to do is to go into
intellectual territory that isn't based
on an interview with a guest to see
whether or not we can bring an enormous
number of people closer to the most
transcendent solid intellectual
achievement that is on offer because in
general it feels to me like there's this
Monastery where all the good stuff is
kept and almost nobody ever visits or
reads any of it right and so you're
saying you're speaking specifically of
your wheelhouse of physics no or just
anything that interests you that by all
of us music okay yep its language but
it's just to make sure what I understand
what you're saying you're saying that
you're envisioning many podcasts being
just you and a whiteboard or something
where you're some kind of graphics so I
think graphics are gonna be important
right I think they're going to be some
difficult topics that are gonna be
pretty heavy going intellectually that
I'm gonna try to make as easy as I can
hmm
but to partially leverage the fact that
and this is kind of a theme running
below the surface which occasionally
like magma comes up through through the
crust because it was so difficult for me
to understand anything that was going on
in my junior high school in high school
years because of symbolic issues and
learning learning style differences a
lot of what happened was that I was able
to put things together out of sheer
necessity without going through the
symbolic channel and it's my belief that
even if people don't see themselves like
let's say learning-disabled mm-hmm
that the symbolic channel is where we
get stuck that most people if you show
them a page of equations they turn out
right and it's very difficult to figure
out well what can you communicate that
isn't an analogy but that actually gets
people to an understanding of sort of
that just the majesty of human
intellectual achievement and so the hope
is going to be that if we can get some
some decent production values and get
the add models to work that we can start
experimenting with some sort of hybrid
graphical and discussion and solo can be
great yeah yeah and and I think you
should explore it'd be fascinating for
you to explore the the alternative learn
learning paradigm learning disability a
question I mean people would find that
incredibly useful and inspire
if you if you if you if there was
something there to explore that would be
especially if it would be actionable on
the basis of well the things are or so
many of us you know like I can't tell
you how much hopelessness I produced my
parents because no matter what I tried
to do nothing worked and I know that
that experience of a bright interested
kid who just can't buy a base hit in
school is duplicated and probably 15-20
percent of the households in America
it's like an enormous unknown population
what my hope is is to show people why
the sort of learning disabled or
dyslexic mind might have superpowers
these do you actually have a diagnosis
of dyslexia
I've got dyslexia dysgraphia is
something called kinesthetic
reinforcement you know people haven't
did did you get these as a teenager or
something things were in their infancy
back then there were batteries of tests
that are different like you know there
was this Kurdish word test when they
assumed nobody knew Kurdish huh I didn't
know Kurdish for sure and they tested to
see whether you could remember a bunch
of words you've probably never seen and
in one list you wrote them out and in
one list you didn't to aid in the memory
and so when I got back a test this was a
at Harvard I was like very high 90s in
lots of different areas than one area my
score plummeted to like third percentile
right I said what is that and we said
well that's kinesthetic reinforcement I
said well what does that mean they said
well were you to take notes you would
erase everything that you're learning
right right and I said what did you just
say and I realized that my note-taking
had wiped out my entire education up to
that point well now why would you have
taken a test like this at Harvard I was
struggling I was I was in the most
symbolically dependent subject I mean at
some point I'll get into my history in
mathematics but there was no one
remotely like me in my situation as a
PhD student at Harvard and it was the
worst pas
a bowl a sensible miss you know
mismatched you could imagine because
math lives in symbols it isn't symbols
yeah
but the symbols are really crucial for
understanding what's going on and that's
exactly where I'm blocked and the hope
that I have is if I can get around
symbols in large measure for myself
mmm can I do it for people who aren't
even necessarily blocked and learned yes
I would love that because like I have
you know I consider myself more or less
you know by comparison in numerous
because I got you know I took math you
know in height in high school it's not
that I would I mean I was sort of
equivalently good on both sucking both
humanities in math I mean it was it was
not obvious I shouldn't be pursuing math
but I never you know like after once I
did calculus in high school I just never
got math like I never I never got what
it was it was just work and I never
really got it and then you know you know
if you know I've just taken you know
mathematical logic and statistics you
know at the college level but like my
math education stopped at a point
because I hit a wall of one just you
know a lack of exposure to the beauty of
it I mean I'm like a fan of math now you
know like I in terms of his broad
concepts but I hid the burden of having
to grapple learn the language of the
symbolism was high enough that it just
dissing crippling it was there was no
there's not enough reason to struggle
with it and I just you know I just my
disabilities if you can overcome them
end up in part as this incredible
superpower because and I talk about this
in terms of color blindness so both my
brother and I are color blind in a
standard way but we make the point about
contrast blindness because there's a
trade-off between whether you see color
better than others are worse or you know
there you see contrast better so to the
extent that what you see is learning
disabilities is mysterious to you like
why would this be retained in such a
large portion of the population it's
because I think it has the
characteristic of being the cost that is
paying for another superpower relative
to somebody who's not blocked on those
channels and like for example I don't
know whether you noticed the objects
that are around here the klein bottles I
said I I saw that yeah oh yeah I haven't
been so example that's Beth Sheba
Grossman's art huh that's a 24 cell
which is the unique new analog of a
platonic solid that is not found it it
sorry the convex polytopes are the
analogs of the platonic solids in
dimension 4 this is pushed back into
dimension 3 and that's the unique convex
polytope that has no analog directly in
dimension 3 so then the other one that
you have there is the analog of the
don't want to me that this is a a 3
dimensional projection of a 4
dimensional object so like you know if
you've seen the tesseract that is the
hypercube which is the 3-dimensional
model that represents a four dimensional
structure right this right here is
pretty directly the analog of the
dodecahedron in four dimensions
projected back into three dimensions now
when you and again this is my topology
is a layman's topology but the are some
projections back into three dimensions
far more evocative of of the four
dimensional object yeah then I want to
see a lot of them so that you could see
so that you could understand right so
how do you have an internal sense of how
much you understand or don't understand
the higher dimensionality of an object
based on the it's three-dimensional
well for example if we took a regular
Klein bottle here right and for those of
you at home I guess we should be talking
about what we're doing on video yeah
right so I have a glass bottle where the
neck has been passed through to what
would be called the punt and in three
dimensions that appears to intersect the
side of the bottle
but if you had an extra dimension
represented by the amount of blueness in
the bottle and we colored this blue in
the bell layer here you could see
literally in four dimensions this
doesn't intersect itself because this
part of the glass would be clear and
that part of the glass would be blue
hence they're separated by some
dimension that we can't represent
spatially right so by mixing spatial
dimensions with colored dimensions I
claim you can actually see in four
dimensions that this thing doesn't run
into itself the Klein bottle appears to
intersect mathematically there's head
that the same logic as a mobius strip is
it to mobius bands sewn together okay
right now the point that I was making is
that that is an example of an object
where you don't realize you can see four
dimensions by just adding a color
dimension to spatial dimensions right so
I can give you lots of intuition pumps
to this is what I did on the rogen
program with the hopf fibration i called
it the most important object in the
universe not because the hopf fibration
is but it's the only example of a
principal fiber bundle which is the
underpinning of really the most
fundamental physics we have hmm and my
intention is to read one paragraph of Ed
Witten with my audience so you know
Oprah has a book club or had a book club
right so I'm gonna just try to get
through one paragraph which i think is
the most important paragraph ever
written in the English language not
because it Witten's prose is so
beautiful not because it's free of error
but because it actually makes an attempt
to say what our most deep notions of
reality are in a single paragraph with
relatively few symbols and unknown words
so maybe to do a paragraph club where
other people do a book club or the
awesome the hope is to really start off
with conversations but if people are
following along at home and they say
where's the portal we're just getting
started this is the open these are the
opening shots yeah but I would encourage
you as a even as a side gig to the
portal maybe this is not podcast
material this maybe this is a online
course or something but to find a route
in two higher mathematics for the symbol
blocked yeah but I want to do that want
to music I want to do the unity of
knowledge all the stuff that people
don't even know is out there to be found
because I believe that you know I call
this transcendence hacking that the
feeling of transcendence that often
induces religious feelings is really
better purposed as a guide to what is it
what is worth paying special notice
towards in a world drowning in
distraction hmm and that feeling of oh
my god like this thing here I don't know
if you've seen this no I'm pointing at a
crystal cube that is a three dimensional
projection of an eight dimensional root
system of the 248 dimensional
exceptionally Group e8 so this is sort
of the most complicated exceptional
object known this theory nemesises have
known it in fact I was on it before he
was I abandoned the name guy Garrett
Lisi yeah yeah
but everyone should know that it's there
and worry about it
whether they're a professional
mathematician or not so the idea I
wasn't planning to talk about the
objects is to leave Easter eggs and
clues all over the place so that people
start to have bitchu ate themselves to
the idea that you don't need angels or
magic texts in order to commune with
something that gives you the feeling
that maybe we're not totally alone and
that doesn't have to be an animal thing
that one
you know worships it can be just the
wonder of my god there's so much more
mystery than anyone knew was was he or
even a short time ago yeah yeah well
keep going
I'm enjoying the right all right well
Sam thanks very much for coming by
you're welcome to come back anytime and
thanks for helping launches all those
years ago with the first podcast we did
over over a year studio nice nice so
you've been through the portal with Sam
Harris please subscribe to us on Apple
iTunes or Spotify stitcher wherever you
get your podcasts and please check us
out on YouTube make sure to subscribe
and click the bell if you want to be
notified for future episodes thanks for
hanging in there you will
[Music]
[Music]